the copy of a petition present to the king of spain by captain peter ferdinand de quir, touch the discovery of the five part of the world call and of the great riches and fertility of the same sir. i be call captain ferdinand de quir, a most humble servant and subject of your majesty, who in all submission do show unto you that this be the eight petition which by i have be present to your majesty view to persuade the conduction of some colony unto the land which your majesty have command to be discover in the country of. and yet, to this hour, no resolution be take in this affair. neither have i receive any answer or hope whereby i may rest assure to obtain. discover in the country of, and yet, to this hour, no resolution be take in this affair. neither have i receive any answer or hope whereby i may rest assure to obtain my dispatch, although i have attend fourteen month in your court and have employ fourteen year in this discovery, unto the which i have be induce by the mere goodness of the cause and, in the assuredness of the same, have obdurate myself against all difficulty and contradiction whatsoever. i have desperate expose myself to a thousand peril, both by sea and land. i have diminish and sink my estate. i have be travail with many affliction in my person and suffer such strange and extraordinary cross tha^ they seem almost incredible to myself (@) and have diminish and sink my estate. i have be travail with many affliction in my person and suffer such strange and extraordinary cross tha^ they seem almost incredible to myself (@). and all that, so religious a undertake shall not unworthy be abandon, in regards whereof i do most humble beseech your majesty, in the bowel of the divine charity, that you will be please to take order that i be not deprive of the fruit of this design which, with such instance, i do desire and which, with so much justice, be due unto my continual pain and travail, nor that i be debar from the effect of so considerable and well-grounded a request. who principal scope be the glory of god and of ^^our majesty and continual pain and travail, nor that i be debar from the effect of so considerable and well-grounded a request, who principal scope be the glory of god and of ^^our majesty and from whence infinite benefit be likely to issue forth, which will live ^^long as the fabric of the world shall subsist and, after the dissolution thereof, will re^^aine to all eternity. touch the extent of these region ^^wly discover ground my judgement (@) that which i have see with my own ^^es and upon that which captain lewes torres, admiral of my fleet, have represent unto your majesty, the length ^^er of be as great as all europe and asia, the less ^^to the sea of bachu, persia and all the isle ^^ell of the ocean. represent unto your majesty the length ^^er of be as great as all europe and asia, the less ^^to the sea of bachu, persia and all the isle ^^ell of the ocean as of the mediterranean (@). take england and island into this account. (@) this unknown country be the five part (@) the terrestrial globe and extend it ^^fe to such length that in probability, it be twice great in kingdom and seignory ^^en all that which at this day do acknowledge subjection and obedience unto your ^^^aiestie. these region know no neighbourhood either of turk or moor or of any other nation which attempt war upon co^^^ning country, the land which we h^^^ discover be all seat within the to^^^ zone and a great tract thereof. turk or moor or of any other nation which attempt war upon co^^^ning country. the land which we h^^^ discover be all seat within the to^^^ zone and a great tract thereof reach unto the equinoctial circle, which be elevate (@) they to 90. degree above the horizon, and in some place a little less. and if (@) success prove answerable unto the hop^^, there will be find antipode unto the better part of africa, unto all europe and to the great portion of asia. but you must observe that as the country which we have discover in 15. degree of latitude be better than spain, so the other, which be oppose to their elevation, must, by proportion and analogy, prove some terrestrial paradise. all those quarter swarm. discover in 15. degree of latitude, be better than spain, so the other, which be oppose to their elevation, must, by proportion and analogy, prove some terrestrial paradise. all those quarter swarm with a incredible multitude of inhabitant, whereof some be white, other black and in colour like unto those which the spaniard call mu^^^^ or half moor, and other of a mingle complexion. some wear their hair long, black and scatter, other have their hair crisp and thick, and other very yellow and bright. which diversity be a apparent argument that there be commerce and communication among they. and this consideration, together with the bounty which nature have bestow on the soil, their inexperience of artillery and gun and their unskilfulness in labour, in mine with other. communication among they. and this consideration, together with the bounty which nature have bestow on the soil, their inexperience of artillery and gun and their unskilfulness in labour in mine with other semblable circumstance, do induce, i, to infer that all the country be rich and well-peopled. it seem they know little what belong to artificial trade, for they have neither fortification nor wall and live without the awe of king or law. they be a simple people, canton into several sext and faction and exercise much disagreement among themselves. the arm which they use be bow and arrow, which be not poison or steep in the juice of venomous herb, as the custom be of many other country. they do also carry club truncheon, pike dart to. bow and arrow which be not poison or steep in the juice of venomous herb, as the custom be of many other country. they do also carry club truncheon, pike dart to hurl with the arm all which be frame only of wood. they do cover themselves from the waste or girdling-place down to the half of their thigh. they be very studious of cleanliness, tractable, gleeful and wondrous addict to be grateful unto those that do they a courtesy, as i have experience many time. the which do build in i a belief that, with the assistance of god, if they may be gentle and amiable entreat they will be find very docible and easy of manage and that we shall, without much work, accommodate ourselves unto. the assistance of god, if they may be gentle and amiable entreat they will be find very docible and easy of manage and that we shall, without much work, accommodate ourselves unto they. and it be most necessary to observe this way of sweetness, especial in the beginning, that the inhabitant may be draw along to this so holy and save a end, whereof we ought to take a particular care and zeal, aswell in small thing as in matter of more importance. their house be build of wood cover and tile with palm-tree leave. they have pitcher and vessel make of earth. they be not without the mystery of weave and other curiosity of that kind. they work on marble. they have flute drum and wooden spoon. have pitcher and vessel, make of earth. they be not without the mystery of weave and other curiosity of that kind. they work on marble. they have flute, drum and wooden spoon. they set apart certain place for oratory and prayer and for churchyard. their garden be artificial, sever into bed border and fashion with distinct limit, mother of pearl and the shell which contain pearl. they have in much use and estimation, of which they make wedge, razor, saw, coulter and such like instrument. they also do make thereof pearl and great bead to wear about their neck. they that do dwell in the land have boat, very artificial, make and exceed commodious for sail, which be a certain argument that they confine upon other nation that. about their neck. they that do dwell in the land have boat very artificial, make and exceed commodious for sail, which be a certain argument that they confine upon other nation that be of a more polish and elegant behaviour, and this also they have of our husbandry, that they cut cock and geld boar. their bread be usual make of three sort of root which grow there in great abundance. neither do they employ much labour in make this bread, for they do only roast the root until they be soft and tender. they be very pleasant to the taste, wholesome and nourish. they be of a good length. there be of they of a ell long and the half of that in bigness. there be great. very pleasant to the taste, wholesome and nourish. they be of a good length. there be of they of a ell long and the half of that in bigness. there be great store of excellent fruit in these country. there be six kind of maple tree, almond tree of four sort and other tree call obi, resemble almost in fruit and greatness our quince tree, innumerable wallnut tree be find there, and of citron tree the barbarian have no dearth, nor of other great and excellent fruit which we have see and taste. they have, moreover, sugarcane, large in size and in great plenty. they have knowledge of our ordinary apple. they have palm-tree without number, out of which there may easy be draw a juice which will sugarcane, large in size and in great plenty. they have knowledge of our ordinary apple. they have palm-tree without number, out of which there may easy be draw a juice which will make a liquor allude much to wine, as also whey, vinegar and honey. the kernel thereof be exceed sweet. and they have fruit which the indian call, which be green, do make a kind of twine and the pith be almost like in taste unto the cream of milk. when they be ripe they serve for meat and drink, both by land and sea and when they wither and fall from the tree there sweat out a oil from they which be very good to burn in lamp and be medicinable for wound and not unpleasant. and when they wither and fall from the tree there sweat out a oil from they which be very good to burn in lamp and be medicinable for wound and not unpleasant to be eat. of their rind or bark there be make bottle and other like vessel and the inner skin do serve for tow or moss to stop and close up the leak in ship. man do make cable and other cordage of they which be of sufficient strength to draw a canon and be fit for other domestic use but that which be more special, they do there use the leaf of palm tree which they amass together to make sail of they for vessel of small bulk and burden they make likewise fine, thin. more special. they do there use the leaf of palm tree which they amass together to make sail of they, for vessel of small bulk and burden. they make likewise fine, thin mat of they, and they do serve for tile to cover the house without and for hang to clothe the house within, and these house be build of the branch of tree that be straight and long, of which they do likewise make pike and other sort of weapon, as also oar to row with and utensil for the house. you be to note that these palm-tree resemble vine, from whence they gather their material for wine all the year long, which they make without much cost or labour among their herbage and garden fruit. we that these palm-tree resemble vine, from whence they gather their material for wine all the year long, which they make without much cost or labour. among their herbage and garden fruit, we have see melon, pear, great and little, and sundry sort of potherb, and they have also bean for flesh. they be store with a great number of hog which be like unto we. they have hen, capon, partridge, duck, turtle, pigeon, stocke-dove and goat, as one of my captain do relate, and the indian themselves have assure we that there be cow and oxen. there be also sundry sort of fish: harghi, persereye, lize, sole, trout, shad, macabises, casanes, pilchard, thornback or skate-fish, conger, porpoise, rochet, muskle, lobster and many other, the name whereof i can there be also sundry sort of fish: harghi, persereye, lize, sole, trout, shad, macabises, casanes, pilchard, thornback or skate-fish, conger, porpoise, rochet, muskle, lobster and many other, the name whereof i can now remember. but it be probable that there be diverse other kind, since those which i have recount be take hard by our ship and upon ripe and serious consideration of that which i have represent unto you, a man may easy collect that such plentiful and different variety of all thing may yield large mean to inhabit there with great and singular delight. there be stuff for marchpane and sweet confection of all sort, without borrow any spice, for the composition of they elsewhere, and for my mate, the mariner, beside those particular which i there be stuff for marchpane and sweet confection of all sort, without borrow any spice for the composition of they elsewhere. and for my mate the mariner, beside those particular which i have before set down, there will be no want of gammon sausage and other salt meat which hog do yield, neither of vinegar, spicery and other sauce that serve for delicacy and to awake the appetite. and you must observe that many of these thing be the same with those which we have in our part, and possible they be there in great abundance. by all which it be easy to be conjecture that this country be fit for the production of all that which grow in europe, the riches which i have see in those. by all, which it be easy to be conjecture that this country be fit for the production of all that which grow in europe. the riches which i have see in those part be silver and pearl. another captain in his relation do report that he have see gold, which be the three most precious darling that lie and be cherish in the bosom of nature. we have also both of. we see many nutmeg, much mastic, ginger and pepper. there be also cinnamon, and it be likely that clove may be find in those part, since so many other sort of spicery and aromatical drug do prosper there. and that the rather because these country lie very near the parallel of the isle of terr^natte, bachian and since so many other sort of spicery and aromatical drug do prosper there, and that the rather because these country lie very near the parallel of the isle of terr^natte bachian and the molucco there an^. likewise material for all sort of silk, and we^ have see anise-seed and excellent good ebony, as also other kind of wood proper for the build of as many ship as one will desire, and stuff to make sailesf, or the same three sort of material there be, wherewithal to make cordage and one o^^ they be very like unto our hemp. more over, out of the oil of whereof i have already make mention, there be a kind of bi^tuminous stuff extract, call galagald, which may be well use for pitch. our hemp more over. out of the oil of whereof i have already make mention, there be a kind of bi^tuminous stuff extract, call galagald, which may be well use for pitch. they make also a kind of rosin with which the indian pitch their boat, which they call piraques, and since there be goat and cow in those part, without question we^ shall have goatskin leather, tallow and flesh in full abundance. the bee which we have see there do make proof that there will be no scarcity of honey and wax and there be good appearance to discover many other thing which be not yet know, to say nothing. touch therefore i and site of the country unto all which, if that be, adjoin which the good appearance to discover many other thing which be not yet know, to say nothing. touch, therefore, i and site of the country unto all which, if that be, adjoin, which the industry of man may contribute to those part. since there be such abundance of commodity which the country itself do yield, and such hope to transport thither those thing which grow with we, the best and choice whereof that peru and new spain bring forth, i have resolve to transfer thither. it be to be hope that this will so enrich that country that it will be able to nourish and furnish not only the inhabitant of the same and those of america, but give a accession unto spain itself both of riches and extent of it will be able to nourish and furnish not only the inhabitant of the same and those of america, but give a accession unto spain itself both of riches and extent of command. and this may be accomplish after the manner which i have project and will unfold unto those which shall lend a assist hand for the guide and consummation of this work now, by that land which we have already discover outward and along the shore, without entrance into the inward part. we do conceive a certain argument that as much riches, commodity and greatness may be hope for from thence as we have already in these country. and you may be please to understand that my principal aim be to take a view only of greatness may be hope for from thence, as we have already in these country, and you may be please to understand that my principal aim be to take a view only of these ample region which we have discover for by reason of many sickness which have weaken i and some other chance whereof i will at this time make no mention. i be not able to survey all which i desire, neither can i, in a full month, have see all that which i be of myself inclinable to view. you be not to make your judgement of the indian that inhabit these country according to the honour of the people here, or conceive they to be affect with the same desire, pleasure, necessity or estimation of. your judgement of the indian that inhabit these country according to the honour of the people here, or conceive they to be, affect with the same desire, pleasure, necessity or estimation of thing that we be, but you be to make account that they be a people who care, be studious, place upon this that they may live easy in this world and pass their day with the least pain and perturbation they can, and this be indeed their practice, for they do not bestow themselves on those thing which, with such vexation and torment we here labour to obtain. there be find in this country as many commodity, both for the support and delectation of the life of man, as may be expect from a soil that here labour to obtain. there be find in this country as many commodity, both for the support and delectation of the life of man, as may be expect from a soil that be manureable, pleasant and very temperate. it be a fat and a fertile land wherein many place clay be find which will prove of excellent use to build house and to make tile and brick and will serve for whatsoever be usual make of earth. there be no dearth of marble and other good stone wherewith, if there be occasion, there may be build structure of great state and magnificence. the country abound in wood fit for all work and use, whereunto the same be common put there, be spacious and goodly plain, and field that structure of great state and magnificence. the country abound in wood, fit for all work and use, whereunto the same be common put there, be spacious and goodly plain, and field that be divide and interlace with brook, trench and river. there be great and high rock, sundry torrent river, great and little, on which water-mill for corn may, with much commodiousness, be build and place as also engine to make sugar tucking-mille forge and all other instrument which, in their use do require water. we have find salt-pit there and which be a note of the fertility of the soil. there be in many place cane, whereof some be five or six handful thick, with fruit answerable to that proportion. the top of that fruit be very. the fertility of the soil. there be in many place cane, whereof some be five or six handful thick, with fruit answerable to that proportion. the top of that fruit be very small and hard and the skin thereof be exceed sweet. there be also flint for fire, equal in goodness with those of madrid, the bay of saint james and saint philip have twenty league of bank and be without mud, into which there be a sure and safe entrance, both by day and night. it be shelter and cover, with many house which in the day time we have see a far off to send forth smoke and in the night to show forth fire. the haven call the true cross be of that spacious capacity. the day time we have see a far off to send forth smoke and in the night to show forth fire. the haven, call the true cross, be of that spacious capacity that it be able to contain a thousand ship. the bottom, as i have say, be without mud and have a blackish colour sand. wherewithal it be cover, there be no gulf or deep pit, but a assure and easy anchorage in what part soever you will, from forty to half a fathom, and it be between the mouth of two river, the one whereof be as great as that of quadalguiver and have mud of a fathom deep over which our shaloppe and boat do pass for the other river when our skiff go to. whereof be as great as that of quadalguiver and have mud of a fathom deep, over which our shaloppe and boat do pass for the other river when our skiff go to water. there they find the entrance safe and easy and a man may, from the very mouth of the river, take in as much fresh water as he will. the place where ship may be unload have three league of gravel mingle with little flint, blackish and very heavy, which will serve for balaste for ship. the bank be straight and unite, on which much green grass do grow and prosper and that make i to conceive that the sea do not beat or rage. thereupon i observe that the tree be straight and the branch much green grass do grow and prosper, and that make i to conceive that the sea do not beat or rage. thereupon, i observe that the tree be straight and the branch not dismember, which be a token that there be no tempest there touch the port beside the commodity which i have already discourse of, there be one of marvelous pleasure and contentation, and that be that at the dawn of the day, you shall hear, from a wood which be near at hand, a sweet and various harmony of a thousand bird of all sort, among which we can distinguish the nightingale, blackbird, quail, goldfinch, swallow, almost without number, parrochito, and one parrot, we mark there, and creature of sundry other kind, even down to grasshopper. sort, among which we can distinguish the nightingale, blackbird, quail, goldfinch, swallow, almost without number- parrochito and one parrot we mark there, and creature of sundry other kind, even down to grasshopper and field-cricket. every morning and evening we receive a most odoriferous, sweet smell send unto our nostril from the infinite diversity of flower and herb which grow there, among which we observe the blossom of orange and basil, all which, with a number of other variety, do make we think that the air be clear and healthy and that the nature of the place be of a good temperature, the haven and the bay be therefore of the great estimation because they have the neighbourhood of so many goodly land that be there and especial of. be of a good temperature. the haven and the bay be therefore of the great estimation because they have the neighbourhood of so many goodly land that be there, and especial of those seven which be say to have two hundred league of extent, and sure one of they, which be some twelve league distant from the haven, be fifty league in circuit. in brief, sir, i do affirm unto your majesty that you may give command to have a goodly and great city build in this port and bay, which be in fifteen degree and forty minute of the southern elevation, and those that shall inhabit there shall have plenty of riches and all other conveniency which they can desire. time will show and discover all these. forty minute of the southern elevation, and those that shall inhabit there shall have plenty of riches and all other conveniency which they can desire. time will show and discover all these commodity, and in this place there may be make the discharge and unload of all the ware and merchandise of the country of chilly, peru, panania, macaraqua, guttimala, new-spaine, terre-natte and the philippines, all which country be under the command of your majesty, and if you shall acquire unto yourself the dominion of these signory which i do now present, i do make so great a esteem of they that, beside their be the key of all the rest, they will, in my opinion, prove another china or japan and equalize the other rich land which, great a esteem of they that beside their be the key of all the rest. they will, in my opinion, prove another china or japan and equalize the other rich land which be on this side of asia in traffic of curious and precious merchandise, to speak nothing of the augmentation and extent of your power and the establishment which you may make unto yourself of your dominion by the accession of so great a country. that which i have give unto your view in my discourse be of much slenderness in regard of that which i do probable conceive of this land, the which i be ready to make appear in the presence of mathematician. neither will i vex this paper to demonstrate unto you that these i do probable conceive of this land, the which i be ready to make appear in the presence of mathematician. neither will i vex this paper to demonstrate unto you that these country will be able, at the first aboard, to nourish twenty thousand spaniard in sum. this be, sir, the world whereof spain be the centre, and that which i have relate be the nail by which you may judge of the whole body which i pray you to take into your observation. you may judge, by that which i have already represent, what the goodness and temperature of the air be. whereunto this may be add, for a further testimony, that although all our company be stranger, yet never a one of they be sick, albeit. goodness and temperature of the air be whereunto this may be add for a further testimony, that although all our company be stranger, yet never a one of they be sick, albeit they be in continual travel and labour and do sometime sweat and sometime take wet. they drink water fast and feed many time on that which the earth do there bring forth. neither have they any regard to keep themselves from the serenes, nor from the moon or sun, which indeed in those part be not over-vehement. only about midnight they cover themselves with wool and do lie and repose themselves thereupon, and for the inhabitant they be common, healthy, and many of they very age, although they have nothing but the bare earth for their wool and do lie and repose themselves thereupon, and for the inhabitant they be common, healthy and many of they very age, although they have nothing but the bare earth for their pallet, which be a argument of the wholesomeness and pureness of the soil, for if it be a wet and weep ground or have any viciousness in the mould, they will raise their lodging high from the earth as they do. that live in the philippines and other country, which i have view and this be further confirm by their flesh and fish which, although it be unsalted yet, will it keep sweet and without corruption two day and the fruit which be bring from thence be exceed good, as we have proof by two that although it be unsalted yet, will it keep sweet and without corruption, two day and the fruit which be bring from thence be exceed good as we have, proof by two that i take care to bring along with i, although they have not their full maturity and growth when i gather they from the tree. we have not see any barren and sandy ground, nor any thistle or tree that be thorny or who root do show themselves. no marsh or fen, no snow upon the mountain, no snake or serpent, no crocodile in the river, no worm that use with we to hurt and consume our grain and to work we so much displeasure in our house. no flea, caterpillar or gnat. this be a prerogative. river. no worm that use with we to hurt and consume our grain and to work we so much displeasure in our house. no flea, caterpillar or gnat. this be a prerogative that have the advantage of all the privilege that nature have bestow on other place and be worthy to be compare, or rather prefer before any delicacy of the country of india, some of which be abandon and habit mere by reason of these incommodity and of sundry other that be distasteful unto the inhabitant, as myself have oftentimes be witness. these, sir, be the virtue and excellency of the country which i have discover, of which i have already take the possession, in the name of your majesty and under your royall-banner, as appear by the virtue and excellency of the country which i have discover, of which i have already take the possession in the name of your majesty and under your royall-banner, as appear by the act which i keep safe in my power, whereunto i proceed after this ensue manner. first, sir, we erect a cross and build a church in honour of our lady of loretto, then we cause twenty mass to be celebrate there and our troop make haste thither to gain some indulgence. we also make a solemn procession and observe the feast of the bless sacrament, the which be carry in procession your banner be ever display and march before it through a great circuit of country which be honour with the presence of the same. bless sacrament the which be, carry in procession your banner be ever display and march before it through a great circuit of country which be honour with the presence of the same. in three, several place, we set up your title, in every one of which we prepare and erect two column with the arm of your majesty, trick and garnish thereupon so that i may, with good right, affirm that, since this will challenge to be one of the part of the world, the impress of be accomplish, and because it stretch unto the continent, whether it be forward or behind it, skill not the bound of your dominion, be with much spaciousness. enlarge now all this which i have perform. receive its root from this, the whether it be forward or behind it. skill not the bound of your dominion be with much spaciousness. enlarge now all this which i have perform. receive its root from this, the faithful zeal which i bear unto your majesty, that to all the title which you already do possess, you may adjoin this which i represent, and that the name of may be blazon and spread over the face of the whole world to the glory of god, who have reveal this country and have give i the grace to guide my course thither and to return to the presence of your majesty, before who i do present and prostrate myself with the same affection and zeal unto this work which i have before and which have to return to the presence of your majesty, before who i do present and prostrate myself with the same affection and zeal unto this work which i have before and which have grow up with i as it be from my cradle, and for the nobleness and worth thereof. i do still tender and cherish the same with the great love that can be. i do confident believe that your majesty do use so much prudence in your counsel and be so magnanimous and full of christian piety that you will, with your best care, embrace all the conducement which may further the habitation of these new-discovered country, and the principal reason to put a tie and obligation upon we not to leave they abandon be in regard. all the conducement which may further the habitation of these new-discovered country, and the principal reason to put a tie and obligation upon we not to leave they abandon, be in regard that this be the sole ordinary way to establish the knowledge of god and faith among they and to bring to pass that his name may be, adore and call upon where the devil usurp so much reverence and invocation. and this aught to be embrace with the more readiness because it be the channel to convey and disperse all abundance of commodity among your subject, and hereby you shall be ease of many disturbance and vexation which will assure be put upon you in case the heretic shall enter and nestle there and shall vent. your subject, and hereby you shall be ease of many disturbance and vexation which will assure be put upon you in case the heretic shall enter and nestle there and shall vent their erroneous doctrine among they, whereby they will convert all the blessing which i have hitherto recount unto you into assure incommodity and mischief, and will arrogate unto themselves the name of the lord of the india, to the utter ruin and desolation of those country. i make no question, but your majesty well weigh, of what importance this danger of which i speak may prove and what evil consequence some other hazard may carry with they, which be either at this time imminent or may succeed hereafter, and if this shall happen it will cost. may prove and what evil consequence some other hazard may carry with they, which be either, at this time, imminent or may succeed hereafter. and if this shall happen, it will cost you innumerable thousand of gold and man before you shall be able to give a remedy unto the same. acquire, therefore, sir, while that occasion be offer you that one day you may purchase heaven unto yourself. acquire, i say, with a little money which you mis-place upon peru, a never-dying reputation and this new-world with all the benefit which it reach out unto you. and since there be none that crave a reward for this good tiding, that be bring you concern so great and singular, a blessing which god have be please to lock. you, and since there be none that crave a reward for this good tiding that be bring you concern so great and singular a blessing which god have be please to lock up until your happy time. i be he sir that do demand it, and my humble request unto you be only this: that you will be of that graciousness unto i as to dispatch and give i my answer, for the galleon be ready to hoist sail, and i have much way to go, and many thing must be fit and dispose for the voyage. there be no hour pass which carry not with it a assure loss, both in regard of spiritual and temporal blessing, the damage whereof can never be make up or repair. voyage there be no hour pass which carry not with it a assure loss, both in regard of spiritual and temporal blessing, the damage whereof can never be make up or repair. if, upon a bare suspicion, columbus do pursue his design with so much obstinacy, you be not to account. it strange in i if the thing which i have behold with my eye and touch with my hand do put some kind of constraint upon i to be importunate. let it therefore please your majesty, among so many expedient which you have at hand, to sever and put apart some one for the accomplishment of this work, that, after all these languishment, i may at length meet with the success of my desire, i do assure. to sever and put apart some one for the accomplishment of this work, that, after all these languishment, i may at length meet with the success of my desire. i do assure you that you will find my proposition most just and that i shall be of sufficiency to give you satisfaction in all thing. this, sir be a great work, against which the devil do bandy himself with all the puissance he may, and it be not consonant to reason to abandon these country to his tyranny and power, which do know your majesty for their patron and defender. their patron and defender.