the synopsis or epitome of survey methodize. section i of the material of possession: the several kind of earth, water, stone, mineral, the crust and increase of ground, the peculiar order, master, manure and employ of several soil, the due bestow of grain, herb, plant, with the diversity of ground-plot and edifice. chap i: survey in general be a art whereby the view and trutinate intimation of a subject from centre to circumference be rectify. the survey of possession, the subject of this treatise, be the art by which their graphical description be particularize. this survey be symbolize and distinguish into active and passive active. the active may be refer to the feudigrapher and consist in operation and estimation. the operation be mathematical and mechanical. mathematical mathematical operation. be a part of survey by which the dimension of the plot propound. be perform mechanical, mechanical operation. be the manual act and project of the work. the estimation of possession be material and legal. material: the material part: be conversant in estimate the valuation incident to the subject by relation to the material and elementary part of the plot. legal: the legal part. prescribe methodical and juridiciall confine to the whole course of survey and comprehend the symboliographie or clarkeship and pen of the survey, with the rectify of evidence and record. the several function of these part be diffuse through the whole process ensue. and so much for the active part. chap 2: passive. the passive part of survey have reference to possession as they consist. of part, essential and accidental. essential: the essential part comprehend the matter and form coincident to possession matter. the matter comprise the elementary composition and constitution of possession and in discussure thereof, the material part be most conversant. the matter be either natural, who state have admit of no substantial alteration other than the hand of nature have impress therein, or artificial: transform and change from the native and original habit by human industry. natural matter may be divide into appropriate and communicate natural. appropriate be that which be peculiar and proper to some certain person, place or other particular limitation and have reference here to earth and water. in the earth, the quality and composure thereof be to be consider earth. in the first, the species and habitude require to be judicious. observe the species of the earth be either vulgar or precious. the vulgar be either simple as clay, moulde, vulgar moor, gravel, sande or commix as creachie, claulkie, clayey, sandie earth. precious earth be that which consist of a middle nature, betwixt, stone and metal. precious and all sort thereof. be friable and convertible to powder, and these be either liquable or not-meltable. liquable, the first be juice, concrete as salt, alum, bitumen, vitriol, salt natural be find either in the earth or water. of the first kind be salt armoniake, salgem salt, sal-niter and indian salt. the other sort be dig up in fountain, river washes, salt-meeres, sea-shore alum be either white or black alum. the first and best. be either liquid or compact. liquid alum: be the soft, fat and limpid roch or red alum. the compact be either sugar like or shiver. the black be a kind of alum wherewith gold be purge and purify. bitumen. be either hard as asphaltus, pissasphaltus, bitumen, rosin, or liquid as naphta, petroleum, amber, vitriol, coppras, not-meltable, the precious earth which be not meltable nor indurate into stone nor metal. be azure or arsenic, sandaracha, plaster, chalk, coal, canole, marle, ochre, terra-sigillata or lemnia, armenia, germanica, etc. tucker or fuller earth or clay for pot, gallie and thank, tile, brick, water and tobacco, pipe purslane. and thus much for the species. chap 3: habitude. the habitude of the earth depend upon the inherent disposition and temperature of the same in heat, cold, moisture and dryness. for although in regard of the cold and dry substance and nature whereof the earth general consist, it may be say to be of one temperature, yet upon occasion of the diversity of situation, affinity, intercourse and participation it have with thing of repugnant quality, it purchase and acquire contrary quality and therefore it will be also pervestigate, whether it be light, loose, soft, fat, oily, slippery, moulder cleave, tough, stiff moorie, lean, barren, fertile, water-swallowed sole, bind, constipate or what other due or undue poise. proportion of temper: predominate composure: the composure of the earth comprise the base and upper crust of the same base. pregnance, the base of the earth. offer due observation to pervestigate the pregnance wherewith the earth be embowel, whether it be prime, as in the precedent, species, or concrete, as in quarry and mine. in the first, discover what rag, freestone, quarry, millstone, grindstone, syth-stone, emeril-stone, sanguinin-stone, hones, touch, jet, slate. what marble as alablaster, ophites, porphyris, etc. also, what gem as hard, adamant viz, the cenchros, macedonicke, cypricke, siderite, the flammid, carbuncle, purple, amethyst, green, emerald and opal padera with their trineuned lustre, the violet, hyacinth, sky-coloured sapphire, lustrie, diamond, shine topaz, starry, calchedonie, sparkle, ruby, golden chrysolite, splendid asterite, various achate, horny, corneol, green jasper, pellucid, onyx, candid crystal, hard bloodstone, attract loadstone, white, yellow and falerne agate. for the second note, what metal or mineral? mine be therein generate, whether pure as gold, silver or impure as lead, tin, brass, iron, steele, latin copper, quicksilver, antimony, chrysocolla or boras, minium or vermilon, natural sandaracha, verdigreece, salt, allome, brimstone, also coal, canole, colour among the mineral oar of gold and silver as silius azure, the upper crust be the soil or seal of the earth through which the irradiation of the sun penetrate, crust, corroborate and cheer up the native heat with temperate calefaction which, together with the infusion of moderate shower and moisture soak from soil, enlifen the radical humour and do so foment and ferment the whole mass of mould that dame vesta be invite and extimulate to invest herself in her rich robe of paint, bravery, and to produce and power. forth her cornucopia of select plenty. the crassitude, the crassitude of the sole, be diversify in several plot and particular modulet, as from 3. foot to @ foot, more or less, and be distinguishable from the base by compacture, by quality, by colour, by extension of the root and fiber of grass, herb plant. and upon this crassitude of the crust, together with the quality and habitude of the same, do the production principal depend. although the estate of the base, by reason of the imparture of the innate faculty, be not utter, exclude all importance of fertility and offer due observation what tree plant, shrub, grain, grass, herb, weed, moss and other vegetables be in each plot, voluntary or plentiful, produce, investure, and hence dimaine the investure. of the earth which give consideration of the growth and repletion of production, both and animal growth. in growth, the thrivage, verdure, fruitage, prematurance, etc. of particular vegetable, be regardable as the boal, spread, arm, timbr and taper of tree, branch and bear, of plant, bush of shrub, prolation and seedage of root and herb, depth and colour of grass, etc. for thereby, sans further search, the species and habitude of the ground wherein they grow, be ingenious, intimate soil know by their production. for if they prosper and thrive in burgeon sappines, flower, fruit and the like, according to their several kind, in extraordinary good proportion, it imply that either the ground be very fertile in general or that they be implant in plot sympathize with their nature. as the high timbr oak dilate mighty arm in large extent denotate a rich and battle soil where, on the contrary, the knurly crooked and crabbed hard spare starveling bewray his barren and hungry bed. the large and loose grain timber of the red oak and frusshie ash show a light, moist, rich and deep soil. the like do the largeness and waterishness of root and fruit. but the firm and solid grain of the white oak and tough ash signify a more fast and close ground @ high ground produce wood of a more beautifull-featherd and better grain than the low, except in apple tree and pear tree. rest-harrowe grow rank and root far abroad intimate a fat, fruitful and long last soil. the low stub heath argue a barren, grave, cold ground. the rank and high show it to be a more warm and tillable and common. the white flower heath have better layer than the purple divels-bit, eyebright and yarrow by plenty in repletion and mean in proportion. point forth a sandy earth of moderate heat and moisture and a sweet, shallow and wel-swoorded crust. and thus be these herb frequent in the irish soil, grounswell, thistle, nettle and other weed by their rankness show a rich tilth. blackish, mislike and unkind. herb show a lean, hungry and bitter or sour ground. burn and scorch herb and harsh, reddish, bluish, spirie and prie-grasse bewray a cold, unkind, rough, starve and bake or soak soil base. herb and rough, sandy stone denotate a lean, greety, sandy or grave ground. according to the poet scaber, etc. juniper demonstrate a chalky, dry and mean seat, the knagged moss mat and clothes, the barren mountain with horn shoot, but promise that the mineral of iron, lead, tin and coal shall countervail the infertiltie of soil with the rich ballaste enwomb the entrails of his spacious base. and thus much for the observation to be collect from the growth of vegetable. chap 4: the quality of the soil be also not obscure, intimate by consideration of the breedage of the animal therein produce, for it be common see that cattle, fowl, fish and other live creature do differ and vary in colour, bone proportion and other peculiar attribute according to their place of breed. the large limb neat horse and sheep. betoken that they have their breed. in fat and rich soil. but the small and sound sheep, clean limb, horse and beast of mean bigness bewray a hard country and shallow crust in ireland where the soil be not deep rank but moderate, fertile both in tillage and forage. their cattle and all other live creature, man and greyhound- only except be of a mean and middle stature and proportion suitable to the soilage. yet the sheep of cotswolde be of great bone, large neck and square bulk, but according to the nature of the country, diverse animal. be famous for peculiar part. so virgil say pontus continuo have, etc. so we have the ripon colt. northern bilder, scotch and welsh nag, irish hobby, spanish jennet, the english and frizeland steed barbarian-courser, cappadocian hunter. the sicilian horse be praise for swiftness, as be also the breed of libya and siculia. the morian for valour and courage. the dutch mare be in request for the caroche and thessalonian mare for battle. the parthian horse be fame for nimbleness and dexterity in run. the median be exceed fair and great. the sardinian fair and nimble. the misseean be goodly shapie, easy and submissive. the marsh and holland ox be prefer for draught. the lancashire and darbyshire for tallow, hide and horn, and these be short legged, of square bulk and black hair. the other be tall and for the most part particoloured. the methol rabbit be fame for fatness and fleshiness. the cotswould weather for large body, deep, fine white and soft fleece. norfolk. mutton for sweetness, but lemster over merit the pre-eminence, though it be short for a purely-fine, soft and crisp staple. the goat of angori be hang with shag ground-deepe, but those of morroco have their hair of ordinary length and refine smallness. english a a for bigness, strength and fierceness. mastiff gaze hound or lurcher and tumbler be in special request. so westphalian bacon, russia breed white bear and black fox and island white partridge, pheasant, falcon and hare pegu carry the palm for parrot and musk-cat and ceiland nigh calicut for elephant. the vandal trout be hold in high esteem. and we approve wytham and ancam, this for eel and that for pike. english pike and oyster. so the barbary and pembrokeshire falcon and tercell-gentles, island jerfalcon. and jerkin, irish merline goose-hawlke and cock of the wood, english hobby and sparrow-hawlkes. and in regard of such diversity, coincident to many creature by reason of their country of breed, it be remarkable to observe the several particular peculiar unto they, as in horse, their stature, courage, cleanness of limb, soundness and serviceableness. in sheep, their bulk, depth and purity of staple, in neat, their bone, hide and hair. in rabbit their fur and fatness and the like of other thing, according to their kind and thus much of earth. appropriate. chap 5: water. appropriate be either commorant, viz confine within the plot water, or current, not terminate within the limit thereof. comorant, stagnant. the first be either stagnant as stand pool, pond, lake, loughes, meere or viz spring or burst forth of the bowel of the earth as well fountain, bath, etc. fluent current. the second be either fluent as ril, brook, rivers spring and appear with their first source within the bound of the plot, influent or influent viz dimayn from elsewhere and flow or pass by or through the precinct and confine of the plot. and to this place may also be refer all sweep or float water which flit and fleet to and fro with wind-catches, float such as be the water fall and descend from uplandish country by land-flood surround fen and other flat, and both these sort of current water though they pass through and beyond. both the plot and privilege of the same. yet so far forth as they may be, prescribe and entitle to the bound or liberty thereof, they be thereunto appropriate. so much for matter appropriate communicate. follow chap 5. communicate matter be that which be participable to the plot together with other place matter communicate and may be refer to water transient and to the climate. water transient be rivers, brook water transient, flood, whence, so ever dimayn which pass beyond the extension and privilege of the plot be communicable, impart to it and to some other. the climate may also not improper be admit as communicate climate in regard it may be say to be the same and in some sort not immaterial by reason of the inseperabilitie. thereof sans manifest change, in a great circuit than the limit of one lordship or a ordinary plot do usual extend unto. yet in the survey of whole continent and vast country, the climate be not exclude from appropriates latitude. but howsoever you distinguish, it be not impertinent, particular to be pen down, viz in what degree of longitude and latitude the plot be situate, and also in what air, as pellucid, mild, subtle, clear, sweet, perceant, soon hot and cold, healthful or gross, close, foggy, sharp air, fenny, vaporous, unwholesome. in what proportion of heat, cold, moisture, dryness, what wind, storm, gust be most remarkable, what ordinary effect and accident be usual observe to ensue and succeed upon immoderate fall of wet or long continuance of drought. and what disease as catarrh, fevers-flux etc. be most frequent and common, and the like for cattle. and beside these and the former observation and distinction nature of water, there be a peculiar intimation to be make of the nature and goodness of water. clay-water be sweet, thick, fat and potable, require the least proportion of malt for brew water which have a stony and grittie current do, by strain through the same, become cool, pure, sweet, wholesome and light of disgesture. spring dimayn from thick sand and slender gravel quick gather mud and they be not durable. pebble and gross gravel afford good and pleasant water, be they of continuance. the marl gravel, stony sand and red stone produce best water. the red stone with pliny carry. chief pre-eminence for everlasting spring and water: cool and simple. the best but the particular notify of the nature of ordinary water may be, with facility effect, by the exact knowledge of the peculiar attribute and property of good water: cognisance of good water. the best water be those that derive their source and original, from rock or stony fountain, irradiate with the orient-sunne, slide in channel of hard and compact gravel or sand, replete with red stone or black and burn carbuncle stone of limpid clearness, light in poise and digestion, quick in conversion of heat and coldness, cool in summer, then in winter, sans taste, smell and colour, yet ready, take tincture and quality, infuse, leave no discolour, spot by stand, simple, in a clean vessel. nor excrement by decoction, by impart neat and pure complexion, sound breast and clear voice to the native inhabitant, calidae. beside these ordinary water, there be aquae calidae, other water endue with medicinable quality, acquire by virtue of some mineral, from whence they dimaine as bath well, fountain spring, from mine, of nitre, sulphur, allome, bitumen, etc. there be also water both upon the coast and within the land, as at the namptwich, etc. of so brackish a brynage that they will be convert to salt by boil brynage. other water, though they be not convertable in approve measure and goodness to salt, yet they have virtue to augment and refine salt which be boil in. they so, the zeelander, boil spanish salt in sea-water to the increase. of 45. in the hundred, that of portugal, 35 and that of brovage 25.. some fountain cream with a liquid bitumen, like to the lake asphaltus, as at pitchford in the county of salop. now for repletion. repletion, it intimate how and wherewith the plot be fraught. store and replenish both with vegetant and animal viz for wood, how perviable, how penetrable, how interlace as timber with tinsel, coppice or underwood. what tree, plant, shrub, what fruitage, mastage, gummage, what hawlkes, fowl, venery, etc. be therein. find and produce for pasture and meadow, how and with what herbage, the crust or sword be mat, mantle and swarth. what decrement by moss, weed, water, stone, etc. so in water, the kind goodness and store of fish and fowl, both. peculiar and common will be record and thus much may suffice for the natural matter. it follow to entreat of the artificial. cap 7, the matter may also be say to be artificial matter. artificial in respect of labour and industry, confer upon or about the subject and adjunct of the plot. these incident to the subject be comprehend under tillage and ground plot tillage, tillage, general take, may comprehend all manner of husbanding of ground, but it be here limit to vertilage and fertilage vertilage. vertilage consist in deluage and fictilage deluage. deluage be apply about prepare and putrefy of the earth by stir, toss and turn of the same, according to the poet, and this deluage be distinguishable into caruage and scaphage. caruage. caruage comprehend all sort of plough of ground as well, ordinary viz for grain, hemp line, etc. as extraordinary viz for wood, woade, dyers-weede, rape, cole, saffron mill, millet, panic scaphiage, amilcorne, spelt-corn, garence, dewgrasse, jobs-teare, comin-seede, aniseed, wormeseede, cotton-seede, canarie-seede, etc. scaphage be the dig, delve and prepare of the soil with spade or other handie-toole for the sow, set, plant and propagate of seed, herb, plant, tree etc. and be most conversant in garden, hort-yard, hop-yard, vineyard. and here it be expedient to animaduert what choice: select and endenize herb, plant, fruit and physical simple be, implant and bestow with their growth, repletion, fruitage, fecundity, with contrivage both of plot and plant fictilage. fictilage be the form and transform of the matter in form or substance, as in make of tile for thack, roof, crest, gutter, pave, brick, pot, tabaccopipe, tonnel or conduit-pipe, glass, purslane and other plasmature. if, therefore, the plot do afford any earth or clay which may be accommodate to such purpose, it behoove to record the same. chap 8, fertilage consist in the enrich of the soil, fertilage and the rectify of the production. and in pursuit of this practice, diligent consideration must be have of the variation of the plot, from the due habitude of a rich and battle ground to the like and equal condition whereof it must be endeavour by appropriate mean to reduce the same or at least to correct and qualify the undue habitude in the eminent exorbitance. and it shall not be amiss to particularize the nature and quality both of good and bad soil. to the end, their distinction may be facilize. the nature and goodness of ground be diverse, way be-tout and manifest, as by the mixture, temperature, the nature of ground. how know colour, compacture, touch. weight, taste, smell, etc. together with the voluntary production and repletion of the plot, such a diffuse mixture of clay and sande mixture, moisture and dry, heat and cold, as confound their distinction of derive appellation from the eminent predominance of any particular quality inherent in the soil, carry a general approovement of goodness. virgil infer the best layer for tillage to be a earth which be blackish and dark, not too compact, black of a deep crust, viz fat under the share though it go a deep pitch, well, putrefy and resolve etc. fere and etc. and mancinellus say it must be neither moist nor dry, wax black after the plough, easy to be till and where rook run flutter after the share at the very heel. of the holder and that not of rank but moderate fruitfulness, with which the deprecation of the poet do not unfit, concur where he show that moist layer be know by rank and abundant grass. ah, neu see praevalidam, but notwithstanding the pre-eminence give to the black and dark colour, red some be induce to prefer the red layer, and so much the rather for that adam who be immediate create of earth, import earth of a red or ruddy colour, and experience also give instance of diverse such soil, though not so frequent, to confirm every man in the same opinion of wondrous worth and fertility, among which the territory of the town of armagh in ireland be famous for last and perpetual battlenes. as have time. out of mind, as appear partly by their vast dunghill pester. both yard and street, without any kind of manure, yield plentiful increase of grass and grain howsoever. the native attribute this continue richness of the soil to the special benediction of their saint, patron saint patrick. compacture find by the stowage, some let not to conclude in commendation of the soil, upon the bare experiment lay down by virgil for distinguish between open and rare soil and such as be condense and close where he will, to sink a pit in some solid place and to take out and break the earth and after to tread it in again and if it swell above the former height. they judge it rich according to the proportion of the. supereminence if it prove even and flat. they esteem it mean if it settle under infertile. but the poet commend that which be rare and not condense for produce of grass and plant, fit for broovage and browsage of sheep and for vine, and that which, by fill the fosse, appear to be compact and dense. he intimate to yield large and tough furrow and destinate it to tillage a lyaeo in and sin in and and iwencis. and the fat soil, he say, dissolve not mould, be labour in the hand but become clammy and cleave to the finger. and that earth that by mould in the hand do cleft and cleave and resolve into powder or mould, argue a barren and lean layer. the poise and colour, say the poet, be evident weight, but the scorch and noisome chillness of the soil be bewray by the voluntary growth of pitch-tree, ewe and black. ivy at taste for deprehend and find out the taste of the earth, virgil prescribe a general in his conclusion for trial of salt and bitter soil, viz to fill close wicker basket with the earth and water and then to run and strain through the water by tread or press, and so by the taste of the water to judge of the earth, by the quality impart and at and pontic wormwood. bewray a bitter and barren soil according to ovid smell. if, somewhat before sunset in the first rain-fall, ensue a drought, or in ear, the earth shall breathe forth a aromatical odour and sweet savour. it be hold a infallible sign of a temperate fertility. and that ground which exhaile and breathes-forth exile and fumie vapour, quick vanish, which attract humour and selfe, expel they which invest and clothes itself with a close sword of fresh-greene grass. be gentle and pliant for the plough, good for grain, elm vineyard and olivet, volucreis and scabie and etc. cato in two significant epithet comprehend the several attribute pulla and cariosa, both of a good and bad soil, viz, pulla and cariosa pliny disentraverse the meaning of pulla to imply a. blackish gentle, mellow and tender soil, and such a one, say he be, determine to be best both for tillage and work, because by be intend a soft and pliable earth production. and among other sign of a good soil he enumerate: wallwort, skeg-tree, bramble, the little wild bulbous crowtoe- call our lady cow-slip- claver-gras, trefoil, melilot, oakes, wild peare-tree and wilding to betoken a temper appropriate for wheat and white-corne, and this be the more probable if they be plentiful in number and rank in growth. and both he and virgil commend the soil to be singular good for corn where wood have be late stock up. the quality of a bad soil be. employ in the epithet cariosa, barren layer, which pliny explain to import a wood-like rottenness, viz dry, spungeous, full of hole, rugged, hoary, old and hollow, and virgil affirm that the barren ground wax pallid and whitish after the plow at. to these may be add salt, bitter chaun, burn, parch, soale-bound, choke, cold and wet, spew ground. to conclude, character of rich soil. out of the premise it may be collect that the best soil in general consist in a wel-seasoned mixture of a blackish mould which be light, deepe-fat, sweet in taste and odour, murl, pliable, mellow of moderate warmth, not stowable in the primer continent, shine black after the share and rich in radical humour. so much for the knowledge of ground, chap 9. the nature and quality of ground thus lay down, enrich, and the present state and habitude due consider the mean befit for the enrich of the soil will be more evident. the enrich of ground do consist in clear and cheer. the clear of the ground. be conversant in disburden the soil from encumbrance and annoyance. as water, stone, weed etc. surroundings surround ground may be win by sew they with competent drain tunnel, goat sluice and such like, if the water-fall be sufficient. otherwise some enginarie aid must be assistant to mount the water by screwes, pulley, poise, by cause vacuum or reinforcing of spirit, into narrow straits and cylinder and to retrieve the difference betwixt the line. of level and the circular or water-level to the earth. semi-diameter, viz. 3436, 4/11 italian mile square. add the square of the distance propound from the square root of their total, take 3436, 4/11. the remainder be the difference. bog, spongy and boggy ground must be. intertrace correspond to the current or descent, with trench of some eighteen inch breadth, both at top and bottom, and where the toughness of the swarth or turf will permit, some spare space may be under mine. but to preserve all the sword you may couch good coggle al-alongst the trench, a competent height and the sod upon they. so the water will soak and drain through, and this practice be most approovable and peculiar in mildr clay which otherwise by shoot. and melt down into open trench will choke up the water-passage. stone for coggle, flint, pebble shingles and other stone hinder the ear and oppress the grain or grass. the conceit in ajax of set able vagrant to earn their alm be not unworthy imitation, whether to the lime-kiln house, highway, pond, ford or other use for vegetable impediment as bush shrub, bush broome, brier fur, whynne broome, etc. they be. once root up by dog or grub, the plot must be well, ply with the blow and sewen some crop successive after, to which ear, if well-soyling with good marle and stall-dung be add, they will be utter extinguish. though they be root in a barren, hot and dry soil, their proper element, but the cause be remove, the effect of produce. these bad burden must needs surcease by consequence. the infusion of lupine flower in hemlock juice, cast upon shrub root be say to kill they. but this be too curious. heath or hather in salt, sandy heath, dry and barren soil will die and decay if the distemper inherent be reform by manure with fat, marvel rich and rot mould etc. if they grow. in grave, cold earth they require stable dung. but in grave, cold clay drench with black water, lime and chalk work best effect by soak up the superfluous water. kill the heath and comfort the earth, brake brakin or fern. ferne though it can be. cure with avulsion by reason of the rank power of regerminate or increase retain in every particle of their root which be so recurve as they be not possible to be pluck up without some remainder, yet be cut down in their infancy and cast upon their own root. they will suffocate and destroy themselves, especial if they be therewithal, sheepe-folded and ground-fedde with ruminant cattle. flag sedge, rush flag and other weed abound in boggy and spongy ground, do wither and waste. away by the superfluous moisture which breed and feed they be draw forth by draynage. but if the plot be pester with alder, you labour in vain to evacuate the wet. before the tree or bush be eradicate for their root do natural attract so much moisture for their nutriment that all the ground adjacent will be eftsoons choke with a continual cold, wet thistle. but the former weed with thistle, hemlock and all sappy weed cut down in wood-seare and often mow again whilst they be tender, their root will putrefy and rot. overburden with affluent juice want due and wont passage for growth. and the thistle stalk must not be permit to rest green near to the earth, for by the evaporation thereof it will adderlike. revive and root again. burr rich ground, pester with burr, hemlock, nettle and rank weed be commodious, disburden by sow, they with hemp, line, mustard-seede etc. rush, rush, rank sour grass, pry and quitch-grasse, moss weed etc. in watery cold clay be destroy with marle, lime, chalk, vraic, soot, coaldust soap and other ash, shave of horn, burn of beat moss, moss, general be destroy with dove and hens-dung and it putrefy be turned-in with the blow. but bush and shrub must be also remove for by their oft-dropping of wet retain after shower, mist and dew, the swarth or turf be so infrigidated and chill that be continue for or convert to meadow or graze it eftsoons reassume his mossy habit, though the plot be not natural. prone and incline thereto. but a scurffie, hungry moss and small lung-wort disperse over a hot, dry and heartless ground be best destroy with a slimy and oily marle ant-hil. where moss, ant-hil and molehill do abound, it be excellent husbandry to ear it and sow certain crop of oat, for they prepare all lay-ground, especial if they be sour and soak with wet and for ant-hil i have observe a rich increase of oat in a indifferent soil. sow in the very mould of the hill, be many and great castabroad and well harrow without plowing-up the plain turf. the summer season prove not too dry. the quarter of the sword of ant-hil cast their ballase and plain their plot for pasture. be so frequent and approve. as there need no demonstration. wild oat, pester and pill of tilthe be best destroy by summer fallowing oat. and so much for clear of ground, chap x. the cheer of ground consist in the cure of their infirmity, cheer inherent, natural or by acquisition, and in the refection and refresh their weak and languish. virtue clayes and all ground distemper with cold and moisture. be cure and cherish with stable-dung, cold and moist. doves-dung fold burn lime soot, iron, cinder of the furnace beat small and sow thin, and with coal, fern and soape-ash. barren, hot, sandy-soyle and hot dry earth produce parch grass and dwarffie moss. hot and dry do crave stal-dung, street-soyle, pond-mudde, rich mould, fat marvel, mawme or river-slubbe, scour of hedge-rowd, ditch slimy. or moorish earth or murgeon, to help all defect and virgil say. nor be the sheepe-folding and fodder and the compost of putrefy, henbane, hemlock, leave of appletree, willow, etc. of less efficacy. brittle and fickle mould of mean temperature betwixt hot and cold. brittle mould be best soil with well rot, horse-dung spew, spew ground over-soaked with sour moisture be well, relieve by. be sow with oat, for by their arify and dry quality they suck out and consume that noisome humour. boggy, boggy and spongy ground be not a little settle, fasten and firm by frequent overflow. they, with ford or land-floud- a paradox- afford a fat and slimy substance or slubbe, stiffe-clay, the stiff, cold clay, crave ash, especial of root, stock up chalk sea-sand. malt dust sow thin on the tilth lime incorporate with stable-dung salt, soal-bound, crust-clung and soale-bound soil, crave caruage for press and peculiar gaol delivery. this lighten and lose the soil and enlarge and prepare way to the operation of the radical humour and consequent serve in lieu of compost. chap, chap ground chink or chaum with cranny, be cure and stiffe-cold spue ground be admirable relieve and fertilize by burn the stubble fig or turf. whether that by close up the chink it avert the extremity of wet wind, frost and sun whereby the seed may be suffocate, blast, starve or parch, or the soil distemper, or that it exhale and purge forth and evaporate all hurtful and pernicious humour, or that it pinguify the soil and impart to the seed some secret nutrimentive power. or that by stir up the native heat of the earth it revive the radical and humour. and by open and enlarge the obstruct passage and vein, give entrance to the airy spirit and juice that quicken the grain and humour. and but general all ground, be they never so barren, be much better. by burn the dry heap of the turf or swarth delve, how pare. or plough up and dry and after spread all over the excoriate tilth, whether it work as aforesaid or that, according to pliny, it burn up and destroy the seminary of grass and weed which will rob and deprive the soil of the rich juice and virtue which shall feed the grain and the excellent effect derive from this beat-burning. denshire have bring the same into such approoveable request in devonshire, that of the frequent use and fruitful practice thereof in those part. the name of denshire deduce the original meadow sommer-cating. do great enhearten weak meadow and restore their decay, heat and vigour. impeach by yearly mow in the north of ireland kreating. they do with much convenience by kreat and shift their boolies from seed-fur till harvest be in both depasture and soil their ground and preserve their grain from destruction by their cattle and they from the wolf and wood-kerne. and the sow of the seed of trefoyle or claver, sow of seed melilot, prunel, milfoyle, ribwort, septfoile, cinquefoyle, etc. mix with murl mould, do much enrich meadow and pasture both in forage and fenage. sea-sand diffuse among infertile tilthe. sea-sand infuse animal power of such efficacy that it produce crop equivalent to burden of very battle. glebe and rest to a mean layer serve no less in lieu of compost. also ash and all emacerate soil be much amend with fat ash, neve, effeto, and there be so. much attribute to rest and ash for enrich of soil that they be number among the three thing. serve to increase production of crop of diverse ash. we have before and shall hereafter, upon special occasion, make mention for their approve efficacy in several distemper and pliny report that ash be in such request for soil near unto po that they burn their horse-dung to make they. but we be too wise, hold it ridiculous to innovate, nay to imitate any thing, not approve by continual practice howsoever. we have authentic record from antiquity to animate we thereunto rich soil. we willing wish the fruition of soil parallel to the territory of bi^acium in africa, which be so pliable to the blow that after a good ground shower. a sorry ass and a silly old trot may round trot away with the teeme and so plentiful in production that it yield increase one hundred and fifty fold. but we will grudge at the stubborness of the ground in a dry season when we find it scarce tillable with a strong teeme of oxen. or we can plausible approve the light and easy tilage and rich graynage by winterton in norfolk. the austrian soil till with a single horse the fruitful plain of podolia where they sow, but every other year the shake corn serve like rape for the second seedage. the hungarian treble harvest the fertile meadow of komora ile with danubius, which produce grass man-high yet far short of the mead under a bourne near. to salisbury, where the production extend to sixteen foot, the mead of interamna, yield yearly four mathes of hay, etc. but we will not with like alacrity imitate the industrious pain of the ingenious chemist who by their diligent and intentive husband, their fertile field, support their strange populous territory in far. great wealth, and plenty then can be derive from their treble fruitage and afluent vintage. without their own extraordinary industry and diligence in rich soil we be slack and supine, never practise any new or invulgar invention, how probable soever to help nature and fertilize our field, but we plod-on in the common road of habituate husbandry and so oftentimes come short of that proportion which good husband reap in a far mean layer in barren. and hard country. 1. lime we be force perforce urge to some industry more than ordinary, as in the country of salop, denbigh, flint etc. they fetch lime stone four or five mile to burn for battle and sea-sand six mile to scatter on their tilthe in cornwall, devon, somerset etc. and in some part of hartfordshire. not to defraud the industrious of any praise due to diligent devoire, they fetch mault-dust further and shave of horn above twenty mile mault-dust horne-shaving to strew upon their arable, though it be a good soil of itself, to kill the weed and cheer the soil and thereby do much increase their crop in denbighshire and else, where they plough up the crust of barren soil in thin turf with a broad wing share, then dry it in round heap and about september burn of beat, burn in and disperse the ash all over the bare and excoriate ground and thereby refresh their faint and hungry sterility. to a incredible production of oat in flintshire they soil their sandy layer, both black and red be seckie 2. lime. tough and wet with lime, make of a dunny gray stone, hew forth of the rock and break with iron, mall though the smooth, hard beach on the sea-shore. burn to a pure white and after burn lay it thick upon the layer, leave it to be sleck with the next shower, by which be dissolve and then intermeddle by the plough with the soil it puffie-light and party colour the same and produce diverse rich crop. the use thereof be also well approve for their clay in thin quantity, but they teasil their perring wild sand with stall dung, slecked lime. about workensope in nottinghamshire their best compost be sleck lime. six quarter to a acre sow upon the tilth for two crop for winter corn in. summer the other contrary, and this give good increase, not so much through the imparture of any fasten faculty as by fasten the wild, loose sand of their light, hot and red layer. and though the small show of winter verdure give win hope. yet his fair may-florish revive the droop spirit of the doubtful and waver experimenter. with full assurance of a rich vesture for harvest, the quantity of compost and general for the quantity of dung, it be hold best to manure oft and little, for over dung burn away the heart of the soil. the better the soil be, the less compost they crave but ground not dung grow cold and weak howsoever. some be so battle in fertility that their ranckenes can with continue. tillage be sufficient, abate as the territory of tacape- mention by pliny. but to speak somewhat of the quality of compost, there be diverse kind of dung. the quality and sundry opinion touch their goodness and efficacy. marcus varro attribute the chief esteem to the dung find in the barton of mew, blacke-birde bird both for tillage and forage. pullen and landfowle be commend for their dung, but all water foul reject poultry. columella commend pidgen dung dove and with we it carry chief pre-eminence for due prizal of worth. many give the first place to man excrement, the ballast of ajax, but the excessive heat thereof will be qualify and abate with the sweeping pare ajax and filth of house floare. some prefer man urine when hide-haire. have be soak therein with lime in a tan-fat. other commend the urine mix with water. diverse affirm the ass dung to be best. most prepare ass and present fit for the earth, whereas other dung require time to putrefy but pliny be contradictory. but for general approovement the treddle of sheep and goat may pass for current sheep. next follow the dung of neat, neat and horse, then of horse and mule. the ordure of swine be current, with some for good compost, but it seem by columella swine that it best fit the asse-pasture who forage be burr and worse baggage, but doubtless the immoderate heat thereof burn up the radical humour of the soil. lime for lime. i have speak sufficient before of the modern use thereof, nor be it in less request among the heduan and pictones for fertilize their field. cato prescribe a artificial compost of litter compost. artificial lupine, chaff bean, stalk, leave and branch of mast-holme and oakes lay to putrefy but as so daily experience approve to be vegetable. dane-wort, hemlock, dead-leave, ranck-weede, fern mow in august, sea-weede etc. wither cast on tilthe and fold with sheep do very much profit and no less be cast into the cratch-yard all winter and bestow on the fallows next september and october. vraic and vraic or orewood alga marina be diverse, apply for soil. in ireland they rot it in great heap from summer to summer and then cast it on their tilthe for two or three crop. in anglesey they plough it in without putrefy for two crop in any soil. in the i will of gersey they dry the weed for fuel and with ash fertilize their fallows no less than with marle. in cornewal they use both orewood, sea-sand and sea-flubbe for soil, the very fruit of the earth. be sow do serve well for batle as buck-wheat or brancke pease. vetch bean, fasells, mad and columella say lupine the sow of lupine. be no less approve for better the tilth, but especial if they be turn in with the plough and so leave to putrefy about their flower. and because white corn be common, a soaker of the soil, the poet counsel to sow it after pulse and fatten grain legumen saffron. nor be saffron inferior to fatten grain, insomuch as their bulbous root do so enrich the ground that after three year continue the same with saffron, as master camden affirm, at the rate of eighty or one hundred pound new, but twenty dry upon a acre. the soil about saffron walden, produce great store of barley for some eighteen year without compost and then again refuse not his former fruit pillar of the soil, but wheat, barley, woade, vetch, fenigreeke and all pulse pluck up by the root, be great impairer and soaker of the soil and line poppy and oat do burn and pill the tilth, the one with his salt and the other with his hot quality. the poet vrit and theophrastus say that oat, by their dryness and multiplicity of root, do arifie and extenuate all soil. and in this place it shall not be impertinent marle. to make some mention of marle sith the good approoument both of the ancient and modern use thereof be such as may just challenge to be have in no mean esteem for manure. pliny affirm that there be but two kind of marl in nature, viz either hard and churlish, two sort of marle, or gentle and fat, and these be try by the hand, and both for grain and grass though we say marle kill both weed and grass in arable hold in good request, and the various sort of marles find out by inventive wit. do all of they fall under the two former kind, whether they be white, red, columbine, stony, sandie, clay-soyle, etc. or what other leucargilla, the white clay or marle, be fat, sharp and mordant and yet the best it be. use for moist, cold ground in magara, as our chalk with we, and the white chaulkie clay tripela use by goldsmith lie deep in britain and last for soil eighty year. the fuller chalky clay mix with a viscous and fattish earth. gliscomargon be another white marl and be better for grain then for grass. yet howsoever, it suppress weed and grass in corn, as all marle do. the tilth after harvest be in grow so growthsome that it yield a after-math for crowen hay. this marl continue the soil in good plight thirty year, but if it be lay on over thick it choke the ground. capnumargos. the light red marle intermingle with some stony gritte full of sand, fertilize both tillage and forage. for fifty year in anglesey they approve red marl and in some place white, to refresh and give life to the spend and tire. glebe. columbine or pigeon marle lie in lump and clod pelias but with sun and frost it resolve and cleave into thin slake or flake and serve both for corn and hay. in some part of cheshire they bestow forty load of dove-discoloured marle upon a acre. the quantity and this be frost-mellowed and spread abroad, dissolve and incorporate with the glebe and so fatten the sandy and hungry soil that it repair the charge of three or four pound with rich increase for twelve or sixteen. year insomuch as to farm this wellnigh worthless ground. they will marle, till and seed it for half the increase and they let and set such marled ground under twenty year at a incredible rate of money in hand. stony marls, stony and gravel white marle find among spring and fountain, cause infinite fruitfulness though it be rough. but if it be lay on too thick it parch the very ground and sandy marle serve for want of other chief in cold, moist and weely ground. sandie marle, the dry marl, sort with moist soil, and fatty marle, hit the dry and lean for soil of middle temperature. it skill, not whether you use the white goldsmith chalk or the columbine marle, but general most marles say pliny. crave to follow the blow that their medicinable virtue and substance may the soon and more greedy be attract and receive. and a medley of dung be not amiss to correct the over-rough hardness of main marles, the vbian, every most fertile ground with any earth, dig from three foot depth and lay it foote-thick for ten year at chatmosse in lancashire their uliginous and soak mosses do recompense their mean air with unctuous turf, wood for work fuel and candle and fat marl to manure their soil. and be we as judicious in invention or industrious in imitation of the diligent as we be superstitious in plod, in habituate and accustom course of husbandry, we will endeavour all idle pretence abandon to make several soil serve interchangeable. intersoiling each to other in true validity of compost, by inter-soyling or season the one with the other as gravel and chalk day and sand, so light and sad, tough and friable, hot and cold, battle and barren, etc. yet pliny say it be a mere folly and waste expense to lay fat earth upon lean and hungry or dry, light and thirsty upon over moist and fat. but land-flood, water, fat river and gust of water participate of a slimy and muddy substance, induce and bring into meadow and pasture in the spring by drain dam, inversion from town, ditch, sewer way, street tilthe, do very much comfort and revive. they, so virgil, also murmur the river nilus, so the egyptian soil, though it be a black. and battle layer, derive the abundant fruitfulness from the river nile who inundation, supply the want of rain and feed and fat the earth with the slime and mud leave behind it. but i shall be tax for this tedious pen of those petty experciment, and therefore i will omit to speak of the particular bestow of salt, soot, ash and powder of horn, oistershel, etc. the infusion of lupine, flower, wine, lees and the like, and so much the rather, because their cost or scarcity derogate from their goodness in efficacy. this may therefore serve for cheer of ground and, consequent, for enrich of the soil. cap 11: rectify. the rectify of production be accomplish by bestow the ground to purpose, suit their appropriate nature, with due regard to the sympathy and antipathy between seed and soil. plant and plot. sande the great, fast yellow sand be not unfit for grain. the close sand with some earthy mixture be good for graze. the white and dry for wood and wild fruit. but a loose and light saint sword, slow and thin, yet with rest and leck summer it yield good corn. more particular wheat crave a fat clay and dry to make it hard and compact and dirty seedage graine barley love a mellow clay and a dusty march barley rye suit with a sandy soil and drown in the hopper rye bean, look for a strong. moist clay bean if you expect stiff ware and great burden. pease press for a putrefy, clayey mould of mean strength. vetch be fruitful in creachie country. lentil like well of a lean and untilde sandy soil and a dry season. lupine love dry sand and gravel and need no blow. oat do well in a lean, dry clay though. they peel a better and prepare a moist. but for rough, dry and barren soil buckwheate be best to fill the measure and manure the field. spelt-corne in a fat, moist layer degenerat from bad to better viz in three year space to wheat, tear chich and mill love moisture. this with looseness, that with fatness, the first with leanness. panic, be please with a lean, grave or stony earth so it be light and moist. rice require to be sow in a fenny and waterish layer, saffron joy in a free chaulkie or red sandy soil, indifferent husband, but manure with neat and dove. dung, woad and blanch will have a strong ground and this brook well the roughness yea in the cold clime, but the other must have it in good plight. commin covet a layer that be fat, hot and putrefy. holly, wormwood or wormeseede love both labour and a hot clime. caraway crave a good, clean and manure ground. aniseed must have a black, rich, mellow-mould or a battle and well-dunged earth and those and other early sow seed do need a thin strew. of horse dung to rebate the force of frosty cold mustard. multiply well in a plot replete with grave rubbish. but it will be moist and battle and well till. also for the whitish seed rape. require a broken-up lay and a rich layer hemp, look for a fat, moist labour land plough plain and deep line. love a mean depth but a very fine, light, gentle and fat mould, yet a lean layer. refine it and pliny commend gravel root root require fat, clean, loose and light ground as potato, earth-nut, turnip and this in sandy layer grow more sound, firm and delicious. but clay produce sound, dry, delicate and large-parseneps and enlarge the parslies. root onion, chiball and chive thrive well in a red, short, murly. and moistish earth. garlic delight in a dry, undunge but labour ground showbread. like both labour and compost, so do teasel with flat two foot and a half deep but large and long-roote, must also have their layer deep and well dung in the bottom if you will enlarge their growth. as for these meateable root- parsnep, carret, skirrot, radish, goates-beard, caraway, mirrhis and the like for medicinable root as endive succory, scammony, aristolachia, but if you intent a plot for seedage, let their bed be incorporate in a medley of mould and dung liquerice run down with straight, smooth root in a light, loose battle and clean labour bed of 4. or 5. foot depth and breadth. well, manure, withstal-dung and columbine marle, mad respect, not so. much the strength of the ground. so it be light, moist, sandy, free, well-dunged and dig. 6. foot deep and broad eringo shoot forth long root to a large but shallow extent in a rough, dry, sandy and stony shore. but general, strong and long root never sympathize with firm, hard and solid soil, nor the fibrous and slender with light and loose layer. artichoke beet bean of egypt prove best in fat, moist and labour plot. the fat ground for phaselles or kidney bean, and with moderate warmth for coriander, mandrake and balm, with labour for spikenarde, with moistness and lightness for lettuce and purslane, with spunginess and cleanness for asparagus, with closeness for basill, the coley-florey, rape-cole, muske-melon, cucumber, gourd, pompion, thorne-apple, apple of love spinnage. arach, sun-flower etc. must have horsedung labour and a fat layer leek. look for a loose, plain and battle plot. the mean fat with dung and dig for colewort and cabbage sage be suit with cold, clayey earth. the lean layer for asarabacca time, camomile and dry for all. stony for two last with rubbish for caper and orobus. the stony gravel gratify fennell rubbish with fine, dry earth be a repast of best relish for the rose if rough brickie and hot for rue herb. the rough, dry and barren for ploughman spikenard. rough, lean layer suit both savoury the chalice or chincough moss. creep along the barren dry grave ditch bank. the dry earth for peionie with sand for pance sand and stone for ground-pine mullein. egrimony, and if grave yellow for nevewe, dry stony layer be destinate to white saxifrage, bugle, lavender, rosemary and jesamine, ramp up in a rot earth mix with rubbish or break tile and brick the moist layer for conuall-lillie, pervincle, bistort, orpon, pimpernel and mean fat for mint and calamint with compost for chiruill. and if old for marjoram, if battlef or dragon and liverwort, if stony for harts-tongue, if labour for peniroyall, if light for endive and succory, if cool for muncks, reubarb and betony, if stony and sandy for parsley, according to the etymology, the fenny waterish soil by lake and pool fit comfrey, tornesele, butter-burre, marsh-mallow, clown, wound-worke. the boggy, sandy and sunny plot suit with sun-dewe marsh whorts, spongy low ground be good for. hop. so be a crumble, fenny layer, untrencht and wet for the ozier-hope, which will parralel the profit of the best wheat in a rich soil of equal extension. the knot-berry and cloud-berry climb and clad the top of moutanous fell. marigold, clary, melilot, spoone-wort content, neither for place clime or layer tree and all soil be acceptable to borage bugloss violet. the apple ask a fat, moist, mould, black and ashcolored, pear, peach warden a good clay, plumb press for a loose layer. the apricot a hot sand, the cherry a cooel and moist with some mixture of clay. the moist plot fit the ash. agnus castus tamariske, quince service the gravel. if moist be best and sand not amiss for the elm, if stone for the almond, the chalk layer for juniper and yew though this brook a light, barren soil. knee-holme thrive in a rough, dry, barren earth. the stony, solid clay be for fig-tree, the black soft soil for chestnut. philberd love dankish place, but walnut hate they and wish a hot soil, though mean in fatness. the medlar and corneill contend for a sand and fat crust. the sandy nitrous soil serve best for date. sandy, light, lean and brittle for myrrh and myrtle. but these brook no cold region. pome-granates press for compost and hot country. the bay and mulberry beg a temperate air and this earn after fat manure. the other rest satisfy with. a lean layer so that it be solid. the mountainous hill delight the almond service, fir larch, the quince joy in the plain. so do beech though birche keep the hill, but the indian moly replenish the lowly vales. sun, diverse plant covet to bathe in sunny ray, as the fig, apricot, peach, plumb, quince, cherry, all which produce more delicate fruit, be spread upon a south wall to shield they from northern injury and reflect the sunbeam. nor do many herb with less pursuit of affection press for the sun enlifen comfort as the peiony, goates-bearde, sothernewood rue, fennel, lavender, isope, mint, saffron, carnation, pink, also rose, hop time, spikenerd, sage, the great sun flower and the osier, but turnesol with opposite eager eye all daylong gaze. in titan face, never daunt with his eye-dazing lustre, according to the poet, contrary to the pudifetan which droop by day, etc. in sole and indigent. but the shady reposure refresh the bay. tamariske, red, winter, cherry, liverworte, harts-tongue, betony shade, marjoram, smallage, asarabacca, showbread, avens, dragon, mandrake, pervincle, orpin, pimpernell, basill, strawberry, lovage, spread time, garden cress. yet vegetable sympathize with plot differ in temperature from their nature. sympathy, the hot and dry, subtle cedar crown, the top of the stony and snowie-cold mountain, and hot and dry herb be produce in cold, moist soil as pennie-royall, marjoram, betony, landcress, english saxifrage, marsh-mallow, hedge, hyssop. the dry, adders-tongue, cowslip, primrose and teasill joy in moist and dankish place. the hot and dry, smallage, bitter-sweet and clown wound-worte. delight in cold and moist ditch. nor can the grave cold of rill fountain extinguish the hot and dry temperature of the water cress. becabunga, agnus castus, butter-burre, gaul, the bog-berry retain his cold and dry astringence, and rosa-solis, his hot and dry caustic quality, maulg the loose moisture of their layer. hot and dry crave a moarish couch. the dry though cold and astringent queen of the meadow replenish the watery moist plain. the white poppy, cold and moist covet, a hot and dry place. the cold mandrake and sycomore covet hot region. the cucumber gourd, melon, cold by nature, covet hot stable-dung. so, apple of love of aethiopia, of peru and mad apple relinquish not their cold and moist temperature, notwithstanding their hot region and horse-dung. peculiar compost be also requisite for refresh of several vegetable compost. peculiar rue and sage do battle with buck or other ash. rosemary require sheepes-dung, horne-shaving, brickie, double tartaror, wine liquerice love stall-dung and saffron the same. and dove dung. fresh mould meddle with horne-shaving be the best bed for the vine. lime-stone fertilize both vine and olive and the droop vine revive with the own ash. in plant of tree it be good to mix sand-stone and old shell with the mould and dung. the reason be render by the poet vrgerent imbreis: nitre and oil do make bean great, tender and soon sod antipathy. but as there be affinity between plant and plot, so be there a kind of enmity and natural repugnance. the rose and colewort abhor gravel and sand. nor do the chestnut and fennel brook too sandy a layer, and dung itself be a enemy to pennyroyal rue. fern garlic, flower-de-luce, plumb, cherry vine, neither do isope or sage delight in dung or fat soil, and although diverse vegetable be indifferent bestow in soil, air and clime not so precise suit their proper exigence, and that with good success. yet can plot of peculiar temper be convenient contrive. no doubt their production will be much better, either in quantity or quality, chief production. and hence it come that we have in chief request the heston wheat, fulham, parsenep, hackeney, turnip, sandich, carret, walsingham, saffron, workensop, liquerice, birtport hemp, kirton, pippin, cambridgeshire, pearemane, english hop honey and juniper halliwel. moss, teukesbury, mustard, droitwich, salt. so foreign fruit, drug, simple, etc. be as far fame as fetch for pre-eminence in meliority. acquire by appropriate air and layer as candy oil, olive, zeilan, clove, palestine date, arabian myrrh, banda, nutmeg, malavar, cinnamon and pepper, stagonian frankincense, saunders, persian bezoar, canary sack and sugar, oruieto, muscatel, cracus, tobacco, china rice, be and china-roote quito, mechoacan, italian showbread, purcelain, prussian amber, venice, turpentine, spanish cordova, malta cottonwool, camba, turbith, syrian scammony, norway firre, apulian and tarentinian wool, apulian barley, oates, herb, melon, lemon, seville, orange, indian ebony and ivory. so mastic of chios, see of alexandria, potato of virginia, zarza, parilla of peru, lacer of siren, etc. experience also show that the change of soil for seed be not the least. point of fertilage, change of seed as to bestow clay corn in sandy soil and contrary. so the lean vine be best fit with a fertile soil and the fertile with a lean. the thick and rank branch vine must be restrain from immoderate spread with a solid and compact layer. the thin brauncher needs a battle soil to enlarge the dilation. and pliny say that in venafrano their vine be best fit with a glareous soil, viz dry, lean and creachy. but in betica the fat layer be fit. but the exact and full knowledge of several soil with their due and peculiar master, subdue, prepare, compass and employ with their several order and season for fallow, twifallow, trifallow and seed-furre as breaking-up, stir, crush, setting-up, casting-downe. require more copious handle in some peculiar volume. it shall suffice in this compendium to have give only this superficial toutch or taste, relinquish, the pervestigation of the secret of agriculture to more capable and ingenious spirit. and hitherto of tillage, ground-plot succeed chap 12. ground-plot be projecture, elevation and all fundamental contrivance, ground plotts destinate and accommodate to some special and propose end, and they be either internal as vault, cellar, cave, sink, or external as grove, arbour, bower, cabinet, ally, ambulatory, mount, maze, snail, cocke-pitte, bowling-greenes, moat, pond, stew, drain, dam, sluice, jitty. to these may be add ramper, counter-scarpes, ravelin, fort, flanker, vammure, curtain, parapet, sconce, cavalire, palisado, bulwark, bastion and such like fortification. but i have be too prolix in the subject. i will be more compendious in the adjunct, chap 13, adjunct labour and art employ. about the adjunct comprehend, the levy and erect of edifice and engine in or upon the subject or plot edifice. edifice be either principal, as minister, monastery, church, chapel, palace, court, castle, manor and mansion house, message, watch-tower, lodge, cottage, or collateral as darie-howse, conduit-howse, stable, barn, granary, malting, mil-howse, dove-coate. also building of pleasure and prospect as tennis-courts, banquet-howse tower, theatre, amphitheatre. and building of monument as pyramid, laberinthe, obelisk statue, tomb, engine. be either military as battering-ram engine, sow horse, tortuse, trepane, briccol tower, etc. or civil as mill for siew of surround ground, saw of timber and board, beat of hemp, iron-mils, blomary or finary and hammer forge, grist-mille, gunpowder. mill, paper-mill, fulling-mil, shere-mil, turne-broach-mille, oyle-mill, barke-mill, madder-mill, whether they go with wind, water, hand or horse, likewise crane pump, aqueduct conduit, goat sluice, tunnel, and thus have- i pass through the matter- be the first essential part of possession. it follow to speak of the form, the synopsis or epitome of survey, methodize. section 2, discourse of the residence and lay of ground, their increase, boundage and neighbourage, and of the admeasure, calculate and project of line, surface, body, edifice, compose and trick of plot. chap i: the form consist in situation and proportion of the subject, form and adjunct, and in the practice thereof, the mathematical and mechanical part be most perspicuous. situation. situation may be, say, to be resident, and resident site depend upon the settle, primarie lay and lie of the ground and be either primary, viz the main form and projecture of the base and body of the soil, wherein it be remarkable to observe how it be project in plain elevate and liftedup into hill and mountain debase, into dale and valley, or wave, in moderate swell and fall, ascent and descent, etc. secondary or secondary bear reference to a further residence of the soil, especial, if it be arable, and then we be to consider whether it be lay in due and appropriate position suitable to the quality and exigence of the habitude ridge, flat arable ground, be ear in selion, and that either flat. or ridge. the first be necessary, require in light and lean land to the end it may, the better, retain any enforce virtue against the wash away by shower. the second be either lay in land or ridge, large and high or round, or in stitch. the land or ridge be fit in fat, strong and fertile ground that be tough, stiff, bind, cold and wet, lest the fatness shall suffocate the seed or the soak, cold obtunde and dull the native heat and confound the vigour thereof. and in such soil it be frugal providence to spare from the plough a grasse-balke of some competent breadth stitch. but small ridge or stitch be accommodate to cold and stiff ground, incline to barrenness, to prevent constipation and bind. together of the soil whereby the seed will soon burst with swell than get free passage for sprout. and these stitch be common in norfolk and suffolk, even in their light ground, and in hartfordshire, where the tilthe be rich and though the irish soil be neither immoderate, cold, stiff nor barren, yet their tillage be general ear in small stitch, peradventure for that the soil be so apt to fast-matting. and swoord pliny approve, the best situation for a rich plot to be a plain decline into the south from the foot of a hill. so the poet, the best site, cap 2 situation have dependence upon boundage and neighbourage boundage. boundage be the compass and describe of plot with their buttall meat bound and coastage boundage. be either contiguall or remote. contiguall boundage: prescribe and limits-forth the extension of land by immediate and selfe-continuance of the confine boundary, and be either simple or compound, both which may be either active- intimate that the sense or enclose of the plot appertain to the- or passive, infer that it be enclose or lay in severalty by the adjacent. simple boundage. be confrontage and collaterage both which, with all other boundage, be capable of diverse peculiar variation derivable from the diversity of the cause and occurrent observe in perambulation. confrontage active may enter the plot with these or the like epitheton: abut: head face, front confrontage, steigh etc. or passive: head face etc. collaterage active as side surrow balk. collaterage dyl, hay hedge or shaw immound, impayl. immure, skirt, gird, verge, maze, courue, recourue, border, confine. also lie bound, extend between or passive compound, contiguall boundage be more significant as side-haying, head-shawing, etc. compound, likewise bound, limit, prescribe, compass, include, terminate determinate collateral, triangular, quarterly, circular, irregular, or as the agent, or more particular, as with some angle, point, corner or stripe, point, shoot, run, extend upon, etc. and sometime this compound boundage imply a mutual property or duty participable to the conterminants, as banck, balk, dyke, drain, sew, sewage, rill, brook, rivage, foord, always confine the conterminant with the particle. and yet more special as head-diking, side-sewing, etc and the like. passive, and any of these may be admit into the rough-booke. remote, remote boundage be requisite for retrieve and manifest the local projection. of plot in supply of the defect of memory and meat and mark contingent and be accomplish either by object, remarkable, invisible, be improper though our hollander will needs, bind their coast-land upon normandy, mistake it for norman-deep, stumble upon in some obliterate deed where germany may better be admit as mountain, hill, tower, steeple or other edifice, tree of supereminence and mark, and sometime way, balk hedge, river pit and such like may effect as much be line range, rectify, open, disclose or cut by extension of common right-line from fix or note station. there be another species of this remote or mediate boundage where the plot extend not full to the meet or bound, describe, but be intercept by some small intermediall as balk mere bank. lane, path, rill or such like. but this manner of bound, though it be frequent, be improper and defective, want that perspicuity which shall give vive validity to all record degree or by degree of angular production observe by some dioptrall instrument, whether by take the angle it make with some permanent mark or the swerve of the line or needle from the meridian for coastage as east, southeast, south, etc. coastage, it be inseparable incident to all boundage, as the most material and essential part thereof, and in the record thereof a vigilant and circumspect care be require to prevent error. and thus much for boundage. chap 3: in neighbourage. it be not impertinent to particularize how the plot be accommodate for tillage meadow, neighbourage, pasture wood. water, fuel, fish, fowl, air, etc. as also the confinage with champion, woodland, other lord and manor, with the commodity and convenience derivable from the propinquity and competent distance of city, town, market, fair, port, haven, sea, forest, wood, waste, commons, mere moor, river, quarry, mine, etc. by opportunity for vent and intercourse, of passage for commerce and inter-parlee for converse, etc. with the way and venue to the same and their conveniency of conduct, as by land over smooth, facile and firm plain and by water, navigable river, loughe lake, etc. and this may suffice for situation. it follow to speak of proportion, chap 4. proportion proportion consist in the general model and partiticular modulet of the plot and procreate mensuration and content mensuration be conversant in. extund the lineal extension of longitude, amplitude, crassitude, altitude, profundity, arch, circumference, etc. lineal, fals lineal dimension be diversify according to the custom of the country as inch, palm, span, foot, cubit, etc. and their composure and graduation be from barley corn, as three beer-corn in length make a inch, three inch, a palm, three palm, a span, one span and @. or twelve inch make a foot, one foot, @ make a cubit, two cubit, or three foot make a yard. five foot make a pace geometrical. sixteen foot @ make a perch, pole or lugier. forty perch make a furlong, whereof eight make a mile, and these be by the standard measure of england, though some of they in name be, but confirm by custom but. the perch in diverse place be of different extent, perch diverse as eighteen foot in some country, in other twenty one in the country of stafford, twenty four and twenty five in the forest of sherewood, and these dimension be find or perform either, or the first with palm foot, pace, rod raipe, but usual the rule be most in request for board measure stone, timber etc. and the chain for land measure decimate and to accommodate these for exact and expedite operation, disme or divide each foot of the rule and perch of the chain into decimal or ten and each ten or prime of the rule into second. but it shall suffice to divide the prime of the chain into two link with three ring between. every link to keep it from cross. the second be retrieve with plaine-table, theodelite, sector, circumferentor, geodeticall-staffe etc. or without instrument, by the same geometrical ground. the first be accomplish by approach or contingence, need no amplification. but for precise keep in the wadd or right line, the wadd be delineate either to a mark in sight or out of sight wadding. if the first, let the chaine-leader wadd upon the mark by some intermedial eminence and at the set down of every prick let each man wave his mate into the right wadd. if out of sight and in champion, not much swell. to a place not in view, it be expedient to place two assistant, the one at the mark and the other at the eminent. and then yourself stand at or direct beyond or short the station give and the first assistant erect some visible object, waft the wadder into the wadd, the like by night, with lantern or torchlight, or from some eminent mount or transcendence, beyond the mark and in the same extension, surmount or survey the whole tract, pursue the wadd but if the place can be, bring within view, instrumentalize the tract at random the difference of intersection, find by protract the traverse or by angular comparison, show the point or degree to be pursue. now for remote line, the operation be produce by the doctrine of triangle, one side and two angle, or one angle and two side. be give as to instrumentalize a distance first, point-forth two. competent station and from the first quantulate the angle betwixt the mark and second station, and at the second station take the angle betwixt, the first station and mark. now the solution may be wrought either by calculation or projection. calculation: the first depend upon the knowledge of sine and tangent and be found upon this theorem. in all rightlined triangle the mutual proportion of one to another be such as the sin respect their angle be proportional. but for as much as this conclusion be more familiar, find out by protraction. i will defer the proposition until another time. by projection, protract or project first a line, the stationall distance. projection and from each extreme extend a line, include a angle equal to the peculiar angle, find. the intersection of these two line demonstrate the mark and the distance be manifest by the scale. the same reason serve for height and depth and by the continue progress of such operation. the plot and map of land, tenement, city, town and country be produce, etc. chap 5: plot. the plot of land and possession comprehend their topographical and mathematical description and consist in delineation and trick delineation. be conversant in portray the type, surface and scheme of the subject and adjunct delineation and for exact work of both these, the plaine-table be most accommodate for the use whereof and of other instrumm^ts. there be peculiar treatise extant and therefore i will only touch some few rule. in brief: plaine-table to plot, with plaine-table at each alternate. angle. produce diagonal for plant-line to the antegrade station and so compass the plot to plot a field at 2. or more station. extend line from each station to every mark. chain the stationall line only to rectify the plot. alternate angle table. grave the ruler to rectify the stationall line from some competent plain. instrumentalize the level distance to retrieve level or horizontal line and angle in unlevell and hypothenusal plot from 2. or more competent station upon a plain, either natural by position or rectify from remote in the plot or adjacent. delineate the whole plot horizontalls and by this plot to give the true content. note each line with the superficial dimension find by the chain to plot irregular arch-line from the mid of the. chorde-extend a perpendicular to the arch or project a triangle by produce. 2. irregular crure from the chord extreme. a judicious eye rectify with these mensuration may prick down the delineation. the best way to expedite the exact plot of mix, irregular and consequent of any field plant, not the table at every angle general, but to prevent puff and to assure a just close extend from some few main angle or competent station in the plot, base line, secant, contingent, parallel, etc. for boundary or deleble plant-line and from convenient distance in the same distantiate every by disperse in the plot and so prick forth the angle, curue and deviation for delineate of adjunct as edifice and other erection, the prospective glass be facile and compendious. but for want thereof, take this general rule, project all plumbe-line in parallelizme perpendicular to a parallel, or suppose common, base of conspicuous eminence plot (@) archi^^ture, so the base of the building project in due site, the modulet right angle by peculiar erection, retain like quality in, but they do alternate, appear acute and obtuse. other delineation, dependent succeed by consequence and the eye by serious observation of stationall aspect, may with facility give the umbrage, but the transposition and fore-shortening of some line require more particular rule which with diverse other matter i be here constrain to cutoff lest this work intend for a shall grow unto too great a volume and therefore for this time this shall suffice for delineation. chap 5: trick the trick. of plot consist in compliment and compartment. compliment comprehend the fly or fly, scale and compass, calendar, character, colour, etc. the flie, the fly be a card, divide into eight, thirty two, equal part in the limb with competent extension to show the meridian and coastage of the plot. meridian, meridian be diver way, found-out, but most speedy and exact by help of a dial or by. strike a line upon your table or erect pole upon your plot in a right line, direct to the cynosure or polestar, when it be perpendicular to alliot, the thil-horse of charles-wain. otherwise, at the sun first cut of the horizon, strike a line towards the same upon your table and erect a mark in the field-line at the sun go. down the same day. plant your table as before by help of the mark, erect and strike another line to the sun from the first point. now describe a circle upon this stationall point to cut the two. extend line at equal length. the diameter that mediate the arch of each sector be the meridian, etc. the scale and compass be no less requisite scale and may be flourish with fruitage or imagery. the calendar or index serve for a directory to expedite the intimation of particular with signance of due character. calendar. the colour will be appropriate and suit to the several modulet of the plot to distinguish their nature, tenor, owner, colour or such like arable as arable for corn may be dash with a pale. straw-colour compound of yellow, ochre and white lead or of pink and verdigreece. meadow may be wash with a light green by. take more verdigreece and less pink. meadow. pasture will be put into a deep green make of the mixture of azure and smalt with pink pasture. heath and fen may be distinguish with dead green derive from yellow and indigo. heathe. tree may have a sad green compose of white lead and verdigreece. tree bark block timber, stone, etc. bark may be fit with umber and white way and mudwal may have white-leade with rust of iron or with ochre and brown of spain way water, silver, glass, crystal water, etc. may be represent with indigo and azure or black lead. sea may have their greenish. skie-colour express with indigo smalt or azure, white lead and verdigreece sea, and thus both these and diverse other colour with their due proportion, may, with small practice, be easy produce and multiply, and it will suffice to tract the verges only of land-modulets, whatsoever you please to signify thereby. but howsoever you bestow these colour of distemper, they must be ground and bind with gum-water very thin and bodiless, and it shall not be amiss to pounce the ground with a stainsh grain of burn allome and a double quantity of pound rossin, both fine fearce and light pummice, thereby to preserve the paper or parchment from thorowe-piercing. with the colour, compartment be blank or figure border with antic boscage or crotesko-woorke compartment wherein evidence or other. memorables may be abbreviate and these may be contrive in parallellogram, square, circle, oval, lunaries or other mix or voluntary proportion. compass and trick under this title may also be range. the lordes-coate with crest and mantel and these compartment with the scale card and calendar must be bestow in cowenient spare and void place. chap 7, content hitherto of mensuration, content in general, be couchant and crescent. the couchant be either superficial or solid. the first be of land, water, board, glass and all surface and figure. but before we come to entreat of the areas of figure, it be not immaterial to enumerate how this superficial content, be diverse, distinguish for land, as into perch, daies-woorkes, rood acre, oxegang, yard-land, plowland, hide. there be also other. quantity of land. take their denomination from our usual coin as fardingdeale, obolate, denariates, solidates, librates. four square perch make a day work, 10. daie-worke a rood or sting. 4. rood a acre, the fardingdeale or farundell signify a rood or @ of a acre, so that if obolata d^nariata and do arise in proportionable graduation from quadrantata, as the money do increase in valuable estimate, then must the obalat be @ acre, the a acre, the 12. acre and the 240.. crompton, lurisd and regist origin .1, but we read .87 and regist orig 49. and 248.. import, it seem so much land as yield 20. s so you shall read further 249.. but for rood and acre they differ in content according to the power of the extent or lineal fall of the perch. yet the surveyor, whether he be employ in woodland or champion in the forest of sheere-wood, where the acre contain above 2 @ of statute acre, in cornewal where it amount almost to 140.. acre or elsewhere, howsoever custom have accrue, must make his computation by the standard, notwithstanding that the lord demesne, as appear by ancient survey, have be measure by the 20. maior and minor foot pole call and the customary land by a pole call minor, viz 16. @, though some claim 18. foot. so the french arpent or acre contain 100 arpent square pole be laid-out in the admeasurement of wood by the 22 foot pole and this be call the king arpent. their other land be computate by the pole of 20. 19 @ or 18. foot pole. the oxe-gang bovata or oxengate according to skene call bovata, contain after the original repute 13. acre but we find it more or less as the custom of the place, enure and bovata be proper use of land in gainour, viz usual plough. four oxegangs of land extend to a pound-land of old extent. the yard-land vary from 20, 24, 30 acre m lamberd and it be not repute in but in gainor as be also carucata, a plow-land or carve of. land, carucata that be be say to contain 4 yard-land at 30 acre to the yard-land hida. a hide of land, hida or hilda be say to be such a portion of land as may be till with one team according to the several tilthe and season in a year and a day. and so crompton and the author of the new term affirm it to be 100 acre by statute and thereby confound hida with carucata or make they little different. other say that every hide of land contain 4 plow-land at 120 acre and 4 hide a knight fee. a knight fee be so much inheritance as be sufficient yearly for the maintenance of a knight and his competent retinue, with convenient revenue, which in the time of h the 3. be 15 pound, but sir thomas smith repub rate it at 40 pound. but for the quantity of land, m camden record it to be 680 acre or 800 acre after some computation. it contain 5 hide of land, each hide 4 yard-land at 24 acre in the duchy of lancaster. a knight fee contain 4 hide of land, each hide 4 plow-land. each plow-land, 4 yard-land at 30 acre amount to 1920 acre cantre barony earldom two knight fee. make a cantre, 2 canter, @ and @. make a barony, one barony and @ make a earldom- viz 38400 acre. but though these proportion of land do not always hold with their title of honour, yet their denomination continue the original institution and howsoever they be, dismember dignity indivisible. yet the right and dignity be indivisible, insomuch as if a capital message, be it may not be parcel and the relief depend upon the dignity rather than the quantity. after the first allotment, relief of dignity: viz 100 s for a knight fee, 100 mark for a barony and a 100 pound for a earldom mag chart. but to return to the find out of the area of figure, cap 8 figure with their calculation for superficial content may be thus range: superficial to areate. figure: 1.. multiply the perpendicular in the demibase. 1. triangle, contra. 2. from the mediatie of the side unite. subduct each side several, eradicate the of the say mediatie and remainder ramus. multiply the length by the breadth. 2. parallelograms: 3. square: lib 11.6. square the l: 12.23 * *. 4. polygonons: 5. circle. multiply the semiperipherie by the perpendicular from the centre to the midst of one side: 19.1. 1. multiply the in the semiperipherie: 19.2.1. 2. multiply the quadrated diameter by 11. divide the product by 14. 19.22 by 22. divide the product by 7. 19.22. semiperiphery by 7. divide the product by 22: 19.22. multiply the in the demi-arch line: 19.4. sectors section. turn it to a sector by project a from each extreme of. the chord to the centre. then work: deduct the triangle, add the base to the other area. cones. multiply the side in the semiperipherie of the base. 22.10 cylinder. multiply the altitude in the periphery of the base: 21.12. in these: 2. add basall area. multiply the diameter in the circumference or the plain area by 4.. r 21.5 globe 1. multiply the basall area by 6.. 2. duplicate the square diameter of the contain sphere, cube or hexadhedron. 3. triple the square of the diagonal line. 4. multiply the side. double by the triple of the side. so much for figure or superficial content for addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, reduction, rule of three, etc. in line or figure. i will refer they till the next impression which i intend short to publish with much enlargement to the more complete invest of the art with due and appropriate ornament. chap 9: solid the content. solid be of timber, stone and other body or figurate, whereof a touch in brief: pyramid and cones. multiply the perpendicular in @ of the basall area r 27.71. prisma cylinder. multiply the perpendicular in the basall area, 27.6, 1 cube the crassitude, or multiply it in the basal area, cube 3.. or the axis in the square diagonal line or the superficies in @ of the altitude 1. multiply the diameter cube by 11.. divide the product by 21.. ramus, 26.5. gloabe 2.. multiply the superficies in @ of the diameter less. than @. subtract the altitude from the semidiameter, multiply the remainder by the area of the circular base. deduct the product from the semidiameter and convexe spherical superficies, multiply together and divide the remainder by 3.. globie section: more than @. subtract the semidiameter from the altitude, multiply the remainder by the area of the circular base, add the product to the semidiameter and convex spherical superficies, multiply together and divide the total by 3.. to retrieve the mutual proportion of cube or gloabs, cube the several cube side or gloabe diameter, multiply the content give by the cube of the figurate seek. divide the product by the cube of the know figurate. and so much for content couchant of content crescent, in a word, chap x. the crescent content be of increase, renew at several season content crescent, and thence the denomination of aestivall and brumal be, derive. the first be of corn, hay line, hemp, rape, woad, fruit, sommer-herbage etc. the second be of mastage, edge-grouth, winter-herbage etc. in these content and increase it be remarkable to record their production both in kind and proportion, as what and how much grass, graine and other growthe be usual reap upon a acre, how many cattle such a plot will winter and summer feed or keep, etc. and this shall suffice for proportion. the synopsis or epitome of survey methodize section 3: capitulate the nature and incident to possession tenor land. title, fee, descent, tenant, etc. chap i: hitherto of the essential part, accidental part. the accidental part- incident to possession- be comprehend under propriety and valuation the propriety of possession, intimate their particular state and condition propriety, and may be divide into vocal and evidential. vocal propriety denotate the property of particular by due appellation. vocal, which be either nominate or cognominate. the first be derive from the kind and species of the particular and that either general, nominate, as upland and maritime, woodland and champion, molland and fen-land, or special, as wealde will, plain, down vale, valley, mountain, fels, hill, bog, bath, spa, mosses, lough moor, fen, wood, copse, heath, marsh, meadow, pasture, arable. cognominate. the second deduce derivation from form, site, climate, object, season, person, action. or other circumstance, as harpe-close, montacute, gilden-vale, diffrin, cluyd, salisbury, plain west-woode, vale of belvoir, lammas pasture, bel-acre, beaumeade, nightingale lane, lough, erno. so much for the vocal propriety of possession, cahp 2, evidential propriety. evidential propriety decipher the quality and attribute coincident to the and possession and, in the process hereof, the legal part of survey. be most eminent in the or feudatary, his title and descent must be intimate. his title respect either dignity of birth or call or right of possession. dignity, title of dignity as king, prince, duke, archbishop, bishop, abbot, prior, marquis, earl, viscount, baron, knight, esquire, gentleman, yeoman, artificer, labourer. right right of possession may be divide into perpetual and terminall. perpetual be either or be a entire property and perpetual right. in possession without dependence and this be proper sole to the king in right of his crown and all the crown land within this realm in the day of the saxon king, edward the confessor, be call ancient kitch 98. book tit and these land in the general survey call doomsday book make according to geruasius, tilburensis and ingulfus in the time of william the conqueror, remain in the exchequer. be among other record under the title of fitzh infer 13. and 14. na br that no land be to be account ancient demain, ancient demain, but such as be hold in socage. all other land within the realm be call frank-fee, frank free, which be define to be a tenure in fee-simple of land pleadable at the common-law in opposition to the other who tenant can be implead out of the l court. feudum, be that which be hold of a superior by service, rent or both, or feudum or fee be a right consist in the person of the true heir or of some other that by just title have purchase or acquire the same bracton, and this be always dirive either immediate or mediate from the crown. the first be where the reside still in the first feoffee, the other be where the king feudatary do again enfeoffee other feifz and arrierfiefz, the french term, the first of. these feifz and the other feudum be either fee-simple or fee-taile. fee-simple be a absolute seizure to the feudatory and his heir for ever. and though many feudist do hold that have not a entire property in his fee, i may not conclude upon jacobutius his insinuate probability that these fee, or some of they, be, at their first creation temporary and not perpetual, and hereditary. fee-taile or fee expectant be a conditional seizure to the feudatary and his heir, with limitation, and be either general or special. general be where a man be seize of land to himself and the heir of his body for ever. special, where the man and his wife be seize of land to themselves and the heir of their two body. the. nature of this fee be employ by the signification of the word, which the norman make tailler, and in latin it be as much as so. this or ius do abscinde and cut-off the before-general succession, restrain they to the particular heir of family. yet the local possession be usual, trans-ferred from one family to another. but dignity, whether dative or native, be therewith, neither confer nor aufer. terminable right, terminall right be either a estate for life, as the dowager, grantee for life, etc, or for year, as by lease, mortgage etc. tenant, and in respect of these and other several right, the tenant be diverse, take and understand and imply aswell the feudatary or owner as the farmor or termer duty tenant in the first signification. sometime import duty of tenurage as tenant by knight-service socage, tenant in villeinage, burgage, frank-fee catapultam evidence. sometime it intimate his evidence as tenant by charter copy of court-roll verge limitation. sometime it imply the extent of his estate of right as tenant in fee-simple fee-taile at will of the lord according to the custom of the manor or by common law. sometime it bear relation to the l of the fee as tenant in chief, very tenant viz hold immediate of his l mesn tenant paravaile viz, the low tenant and most remote from the l paramount. there be also joint-tenant, sole-tenant tenant in common tenant signify the termer be diversify according to the exigence of the efficient cause of possession termer as tenant in dowry by. courtesy by will, lease, copy, extent, execution, statute, merchant or of the staple etc. and thus much for the title. chap 3: descent be the devolution of possession derive to the heir apparent from his ancestry, descent by unavoidable right and succession, and this descent be either of blood or of inheritance. descent of blood be either lineal or collateral. lineal descent be convey down in a right line from grandfather, father, son, nephew. lineal etc, and here be produce a heir general. collateral descent spring forth of the side of the whole blood or kin as grandfather, brother, collateral father, brother etc. and in this case the heir be say to be special. this descent of blood be retrieve by derivage of pedegree from ancestry, pedigree, by inherent birthright and lawful succession. descent of inheritance be deduce by derive sequence of deed, from the crown sequence or from he that have novel fee, and both these be very requisite to be intimate for the manifestation of the validity of estate, whether the right dimaine from heritage or foreign acquisition and hitherto of the it follow to entreat of the possession, chap 4: possession in the possession. the nature and tenure require to be judicious, discuss and record eminence. for the nature, it be expedient to notify the eminence thereof, whether grand as honour court castle, manor, seignory, forest, chase, park, demesne, or petty as grange farm tenement, message cottage, curtilage, loft. crofts commons incident. in both these kind, diligent and particular inquiry must be have of their incident by royalty, prerogative, jurisdiction, franchise, privilege, liberty, right etc. confer upon they by act of parliament, statute, charter, letter, patent, grant or acquire and confirm by custom or prescription lordship, hence come the lordship marcher or royal use 176.. court and forest have their court of attachment, swanimote, eyre or justice seat, so market fair, and court of pie-powder for fair court-leete, law-day or view of frank pledge, court, baron also wreck, swannage, warrenage, commonage, piseage, etc. immunity. immunity and exemption from theolonie, pontage, picage, murage, pannage, passage, tranage, lastage, chiminage, stallage, caiage, etc. of all which, so other honour have their privilege as ampthil, tickhil, follingham, etc. ancient demeisme, the. tenant of manor hold free by charter in ancient demeisne, can be implead nor empanel upon inquest out of the same manor and they be toll-free for all thing concern their sustenance and husbandry and exempt from contribution towards the expense of knight of the parliament or shire. vid fitzh na br 14. and 128.. infeoff with toll. toll imply freedom from custom etc with caruage, from taxation by carve, with bruckboote, from repair and re-edify of bridge with burghboote, from the like for castle. foote-geld imply a privilege to keep dog within the forest, not expeditated or law sans control. foote-geld, horne-geld, freedom from tax for horne-beast there. waives weife or waive good. waives import all good and chattel which be steal, be, leave or forsake by. the thief in his fugacie infangthef enable the l of the manor to judge of felon inhabit within the fee and vtfangthef to judge, or at least to execute judgement of felon apprehend within the fee. for accrewment to the l of the manor by felon felony, not only their good, both real and personal, be forfeit but also their land not entail escheat to the lord. except in gloucestershiere where the land revert to the right heir after the king year and day. also in the tenure of gavelkind in kent where the father to the bough, the son to the plough, barony enfeoff with theme, alias they theme, have power to dispose of villain, their child good and chattel abishersing alias misherse. abishersing imply both forfeiture. and amerciament of all transgression within the fee and also the immunity from like penalty, blood-wit. blood-wit confer all amerciament of court for effusion of blood, estover. estover, grant out of wood or forest include houseboote, hay-boote and plow-boote- cap 5. tenure of the nature of possession. i have speak somewhat. the tenure of land and tenement be the manner whereby they be hold of their lord cust- cap 28.. in every tenure, the confinage and condition thereof be remarkable. confinage: the confinage show to what lord honour, castle, manor, etc. the service and suitage whereunto the land and tenement be liable be due condition. the condition intimate the nature of the service or duty which the tenant, by reason of his fee, owe unto the lord service. this service be by hotoman define to be, and this must be of ancient commencement and continuance, sith it be not now erigible or to be create, but by the king prerogative, as parcel of a manor, though it may by contract be establish in a kind of seignory, in grosse manor for a manor be a seignory, or consist of demesne and service of long continuance, and these may be comprehend under part essential and accidental court extinct. here note, if the lord so dismember his manor as that he leave not freeholder, or if all the freeholder save one do escheat, then be he disable to keep a court baron for want of suitor. non-parcel, unite land may hold of a manor by certain service, which may be parcel of the manor and the land non-parcel, but by escheat the service be extinguish and the land come in place and become parcel in due consolidation. but foreign land can be unite to a manor, manor divisible. yet may a manor be divide into diverse by partition of coparcener. nor can two distinct manor by practice be make one in perfect union, not uniable howsoever. such a innovation continue without contradiction may in process of time become to be repute, one in name and use. there be no record extant to the contrary. yet one manor hold of a other may, by escheat, be annex to the same and so be consolidate and become one in use. but to return, demesne be all such land, demesne as have be time out of mind, hold in occupation and manurance, together with the site of the mansion or manor house. call, in some place, berry hall, manor place, court and court-house for maintenance of the lord house. these demesne be call of the saxon who have the substance, though not the name, of manor inlandt and by bracton, lib 4. bord-land and the service vtlandt, in opposition, out-landt. how restrain though it may in some sort be restrain to comprehend only land, tenement and hereditament, yield, rent of assize, viz. original and set. in certainty. as for free-hold, copie-hold, rent of assize or customary land, all which be parcel in service for the division of service service divide, they may be all comprehend under chivalry and soccage. chivalry or chivalry be a tenure or service oblige the feudatory personal to perform unto his lord some honourable or martial office and this confer to the lord- the heir be in nonage at the father death, the real service of wardship, marriage and relief in lieu of the personal service which the heir, in regard of minority, be not able to execute. chivalry or knight-service be divide into regal and common regal chivalry. regal chivalry be sole, confineable to the king and be proper call sergeanty and this hold either mere and immediate. of the king as of his crown, which be a corporation and seignory in grosse, and be then further call tenure in or chief or mediate of the king by reason of some honour, manor, castle, fitzh, kitch, sergeantie, sergeantie, sergeantia, or be either grandee or petit sergeantie, be where land be hold of the king by some noble service performeable by the tenant personal. petit sergeantie, be where land be hold of the king to yield he annual some small military furniture towards his war common chivalry. common chivalry, be that service which may indifferent be confine to the prince or to a common person, and be call escuage, viz shield-seruice, which be either uncertain or certain escuage uncertain. escuage uncertain be of two sort. first, where the tenant be tenure-bound at his own cost and charge to follow his lord in the king war or to send a sufficient man in his stead there to continue, according to the proportion of his fee, viz. after the rate of 40.. day for a knight fee: castel-ward. second, where he be bind by himself or his deputy to defend a castle so oft as it shall come to his course or turn and be call in this case castel-warde ma cha 20. certain escuage, certain be, where the tenant be set at a certain pecuniary charge, viz 20 shilling for a knight fee, in lieu of such uncertain service as aforesaid, and this lose the nature of knight-service and be in effect socage though. not mere because it smell not of the plough, though it still retain the name of escuage na br 84.. litl chap 5: soccage be a tenure of land oblige the feudatary to the performance of certain inferior and husbandly service unto the lord of the fee soccage wardship, marriage relief. soccage be also capable of the distinction of chief and common soccage in chief or chief be that which hold immediate of the king as of his crown, praerog 41.. common soccage be that which hold of the king or some other capital lord by mean of some manor. soccage be either frank or base. frank soccage be where, in lieu of service in kind, asumme of money be pay to the lord. franke base soccage be a servile kind of tenure base and be divide into: and the first be where a service be performable by reason of the tenement and not of the person of the tenant. the other be where the feudatory be liable to uncertain and service at the absolute and instant will and demand of the lord. villeinage, bracton and na br 94.. yet may a man, sans impeach of freedom in regard of his person, hold in pure villeinage the person, nor the freehold impeach, nor be impeach to he that hold it in villano, if it be to he and to his heir, bracton. there be other branch of soccage as burgage, frank-almoine copyhold and copyhold say kitchen 80, be a base tenure and be original call villeinage fitz 12.. mere copyhold, but to retain the modern appellation, some of this be mere copyhold and escheat forthwith to the lord by felony, kitch 81. and some be of more eminence and hold by verge in ancient demeisne according to the custom of the manor, be in effect a kind of free-hold though repute copy and yield to the king upon felony. some copyhold be finable at the lord will and some only be liable to a certain rate fines and this be a kind of inheritance call customary, not simple at the will of the lord. but there be a kind of customary land of the ancient duchy of cornwall and other place customary where the tenant have no transcript of the entry of their admittance folk-land and this be call folke-land and the tenant may be term tenant by court-roll according to the custom of the manor. but where the tenant be by reason of the transcript of admittance, call tenant by copy of court-roll, there the land be charter-land or bockland, bock-land. kitch 86.89 for the definition of a copyholder, read west in his symbol 1. part. 646.. and for the various custom of copyholder in several manor, it be as needless as endless to capitulate or enumerate they in this tractate. but both mere copyholde may be convert into fee, conversion of fe and likewise fee change from their first institution by feoffment, as out of chivalry for certain yearly rent, into fee-farm, sans further duty than be special comprise in the grant, except fealty alone, which by probability be still on foot because it be inseparable incident to all tenor. fealty for whosoever be invest in fee, though in the freest manner, hold that be by fealty, at least smith, rep 3.. and dwarenus say that fee-farm be a fee fee-farm and import a perpetuity to the investee and his heir for a annual rent of the three or four part of the value, fitzh 210.. but if the rend reserve be behind and unpaid for the space of two year, then may the feoffour or his heir by action recover the land as their demesne, britton 66.. and land thus hold come near to the nature of ager among the civillian and hitherto of the propriety of possession. it remain to entreat of their valuation. the synopsis or epitome of survey methodize section 4, how possession be to be value by reason of their several issue, rent, perquisite, privilege and other profit, with particular respect to their revenue and reprise chap i. the valuation of possession consist in the due estimate and prizal of all part and particular, essential and accidental thereunto belong valuation, and to the exact performance hereof, both the material and legal part, be very requisite. this valuation be either: or determinant valuation depend upon the exact knowledge both of the revenue and reprise revenue under revenue or esplee. after ingham i comprehend all and singular rent, service issue and profit accrue and renew to the feudist or by, through or by reason of fee and possession and these revenue. may be say to be conuentuall and incident. conuentuall revenue comprise all rent, both in and rent. rent in be receipt certain or covenant and payable at day and term limit and they be either proper or improper. proper rent, proper, whether rent-seruice, rent-charge or rent-secke, may be for land, tenement, pasture, engine mill, mine, quarry, warren, fish fowl, wood-sayle, heath, furse, turbarie, mastage of beech, oak holme etc. herbage, broovage etc. and rent-provision as beife, mutton, venison, fish fowl, graine and other voluntary reservation upon grant or estate for life or year. improper rent, improper be where of a uncertain and casual commodity, a certain rent or receipt be by contract. create and raise. as for licence, swan-marke profit of fair market, court, custom, tollage, pontage, caiage. cranage, ferriage, boonage, etc. conuentuall revenue in posse be all issue and advantage arise of possession, not demise, though rentable and therefore necessary. valuable by estimate as demaine-lande, timber, manuell waste, etc. chap 2, incident incident revenue be either profitable as perquisite or parallel to profit. perquisite may be divide into and dormant perquisite. perquisite be accrewment acquire by increase and casualty increase comprehend all profit derive from the pregnance and production of the earth: pregnance of the first sort, be stone, metalline, oar and mineral. of the second sort be wine, pirry, cider, honey production wax, bombace, raw-silke, hop, sumach, pitch tar, campheire, caranna, mastic and other gum. likewise drug as mechoacan, kermez, methium, alkanet, agaricke, ambergris, acacia, aloe, sassafras, spikenard, rhubarb, also musk, civet, ben benjamin. castoreum, cantaride, cocheneil, with other simple fruit, root and fur as ermin, sable, miniver, lewzerne, martin, beaver, etc. by casualty be intend all duty and service that be appertinent and appendent to a manor casualty, whether it be capital or non-capitall. under appertinent may be range, all royalty, prerogative, jurisdiction, franchise, privilege, appertinent, liberty, service, custom, etc. and all emolument and advantage deriveable from they. perquisite of court as plea fine, amerceament, heriot, service, custom covenant, releife, aid, farewell, waives, estray, deodand, good of felon and fugitive by special grant, commorant in the manor, forfeiture, escheat, ward in nonage, idiocy, lunacy, marriage, villain, treasure-trove, warren of bird, coney, hare, commons of pasture, turbary, piscary, etc. appendent be hospital, appendent patronage of church and benefice, valuable, not in contrive. commodity by church-chaffering, but equivalent in validity by reason of the privilege of elect or present a worthy clerk who must be to succeed and supply the vacancy of the church. also common of fish, of estover, of vicinage, dormant, dormant perquisite be such thing as be ever press and ready at the instant, command and pleasure of the lord, as villain and neife which be always say to be regardant to a manor regardant, and to this place may also be indifferent, refer salt, natural, sande, gravel, marle, earth and such other thing as be always disposeable by the for derive a immediate profit or revenewe. so much for perquisite. parallel ensue, cap 3 parallel. by parallel i intend all pursuit of wild game which, for moderate exercise of the body and delight, full refection of the mind, be hold in private esteem of pursuit or in valuable validity of the purchase of the pray equivalent to profitable accrewment, and they be either generous as hunt and hawlk, or plebeious as fish and fowl. it be therefore not impertinent to the purpose to intimate what several game be usual, find within the precinct and privilege of the plot or fee, and how the country be accommodate for chase, view flight, etc. hunt for hunt, record what beast of the forest there be and how frequent, as the hart, the hind, the hare, the boar, the wolf of the chase buck do fox martrone. roe in like manner. what beaver, badger, otter, wild-cat, hawlk, first for hawlk, fowl of warren as pheasant and partridge, then the elk, bustard, heron, mallard, duck, teal, heath-cocke, rail, rock-dove, pie, blackbird, thrush fish be either in fresh-water, as for salmon fish, trout, carp, pike, bream, barbell, tench, perch, chevin, dace, roach, ruffin, eel, lamprey, gudgeon, minnowe, crea-fish, or in sea and other salt-water, for the sturgeon, turbot, porpuis, seal, bret, tunie, mullet, rochet, gurnet, gilt-heade, base, dorce, macheril, whiteing, hear, haddock, thornbacke, codfish, keel, hake, dogfish, horn-fish, conger, lampson, bowman, sole, plaice, butt, the lobstar, crabbe, pearle-fish, prawne, sea and wood tortoise, oyster, conchyle, winkles, purple, cutle, callough, cockle, muskle, shrimp. also for the sea-pike, carp, troute, bream, tench fowl, may be for the bittour curlewe. mallard, fowl, pyntayl, stockard, duck, teal snipe, stork, cormorant, gaunt, sheldrake, cob, olive, puffin, pewet, yarwhelpe, redshank, ruff or reue, the godwit, gnat-snap, knot, grace, green and bastard, plover, quail, dottrill, may-chit, spa, churre, peeper, grindle, skirwingle, sea and land lark, the crane, stork, cock of the wood, woodcock, heath-cocke, heath-poote, grouse, turtle, with which the cuckoo and owl may, for their delicacy, be rank, then the ostrich, bird of paradise, canary bird, parrot, etc. likewise for hawlkes as the falcon, jerfalcon, tercel-gentle, lanar, lanaret, leto, jerkin, saker, sakret, marline, hobby and short wing hawlkes as the gosse-hawlke and spare-hawlke, and this may suffice for revenue. it rest now to entreat of reprise, chap 4. reprise, reprise be imposition and duty, whereunto the plot or fee be in. peculiar, liable and they be real and personal. real, real reprise be all charge and payment impose, whether by custom or by covenant, for maintenance or repair of bridge, sea-bancke, haven, sluice, jetty wharfe, goat, causeye way, etc. and in this rank may be marshal, all resolute dechash decrement. personal, personal reprise be service duty and payment by tenure to the lord or lord mesn or paramount as fealty, homage, escuage etc. court-suite, out-rent, boonage, fine, heriot, relief, respite of homage etc. or by grant or deed to covenant as rent-charge extent, pension portion, fee, corrodies, salary, stipend, dower, annuity, etc. to divine, artist, linguist, lawyer, patentee, servitor, officer, etc. valuation be. thus decipher, the determinant remain. chap 5: determinant valuation. determinant valuation: conclude and determine the right. and interest of the by alienation of the fee or possession and in this action, sith it be not reiterable, it be expedient to retrieve the utmost value and worth to which purpose that due prizall may be. produce, estimate all particular, both in revenue and also respective, as edifice, heire-loome, engine, timber, tinsel, wardship, aduowsion, villain, commons waste and other thing in gross, with all perquisite of like nature, now by oppose the estimation of reprise to the total valuation, the be rectify and the true value retrieve. and thus much for the first part of a complete survey. brief direction for orderly marshal of survey, for accommodate of field-entry in rough-booke for engrossement and their exemplification with frame of terrars, rental, custom and court-roll particular etc. for other instruction and precedent, requisite for methodical operation in survey of land and evidence with formal exemplification. incident thereunto, i must defer. they till the impression of the second part. in the mean time, not altogether to defraud the expectation of the diligent, i have intimate, these few induction ensue, which though they may seem too cursory and incompetent to give full satisfaction and information for the due disposure of the copious, remarkable occurrent in a complete survey, in fit symboliographie. yet i doubt not. but the ingenious practizer may pick-forth more ample precedent than may seem at first view to be comprizable, in the decurt passage as well of the former tractate as of this supplement to survey a manor out of the series and protasis. former dilate contrive. the article suit the exigence of the seignory to be give in charge to the jury and that in write, for more substantial and direct proceed. the tenant, both feudatary and termor, enter the charge end and their estate summary record. your assistant ready and all thing prepare, proceed to the survey, describe plot and note in a rough-booke, in folio, all occurrent as they fall, remarkable. and in this practice you be not confine to imitate or insist upon the precedent, protasis or other precedent, nor abridge of a voluntary proposition of any other judicious method. the alternate page may be delineate into certain general and collateral head for expedition as well of the entry instant as of engrossment to be select. note all. extravagant, orderly, in the appropriate parallel of the opposite page. so shall you avoid diffuse accumulation which will confound and puzzle the special head in marshal forth particular and due contrivance. nor shall it be impertinent to kalander or characterize each of the ploat with the rough entrance, thereby to facilize and expedite the ingrossement incident in contrive whereof a indigested chaos of observation will much intricate you in regard. the order pursue in perambulation must necessary be invert in the exemplification: page 1.. page 2. opposite. this pasture be project in large ridge, extend and decline south. the soil be a sandy clay of 18 inch crust, close sword and well replete with trefoil, cinquefoil, ribwort, yarrow and other graze herb of good growth with a dairy. house in the n? w corner of two good bay and a fair pond 7 pole direct east from the house spring from the west forth of a male gravel the base of the soil. the hedge-rowes be well grow and store with peare-tree and appletree of good fruit etc. 1. in these entry the tenant be both express and assign his with the character: 2. there be oppone residence, species, habitude, crassitude, investure, ground-plot, edifice, engine. tho last 3 must also be plot now to engross a complete survey, modulize alternate page and particulate the opposite with due observation and characterize the evidence to exemplify the engrossement. without delineation of the model, there be a method to be pursue in the particular entry according to their eminence. and kind of estate and evidence in free-holds record the title possession, freehold tenure, descent and reservation in copyhold the title possession, copie-hold fine, reservation in lease, commencement party demise, demise, covenant in spiritual live site, edifice, glebe, decimal, rectory, vicarage, reprise. valuation, estimate, patronage, incumbent, meadow, pasture, arable, require several content in the entry of all, save the first. the boundage and extent of cartelage must-be-recorded in edifice and engine. their dimension, matter, form and repair be remarkable out of the exemplification of the whole composition and body of the survey. these subsequent may be: select viz, terrars, rental, customary suit-roll and particular and thus frame terrars digest in orderly composure, edifice, homestead, curtelage, land, ground-plot etc. with their quality, site and proportion, rental compose in computable. digestment all the tenant with their tenement and rent in particular customary suit-roll. record in fit contrivance all and singular the custom and privilege of the manor. enrol all the feudatary and suitor to the court with their fee, tenurage, rent and service. particular. particularize quality content, rent instant and improveable, perquisite parallel and other revenewable and respectives with vendible and distinct estimate. reduce all reprise to a due method and record the sequence and for retrieve validity of estate. it be not impertinent to derive the sequence in deed from ancestry and thereby to contrive office for the tenure office, non-parcel for other the lord possession comprise in the survey and repute no part or member of the manor. they require to be record apart in the under the title of non-parcel vizt church, chapel, almshouse etc. also patronage, villain, commons, annuity and other particular hold in grosse memorandum register all omission under the title of memorandum.