good speed to virginia, josuah 17. 14. then the child of joseph speak unto joshua. say: why have thou give i but one lot and one portion to inherit? see i be a great people. joshua then answer: if thou be much people, get thou up to the wood and cut tree for thyself in the land of the perizzite and of the giant. if mount ephraim be too narrow for thou, then the child of joseph say: the mountain will not be enough, for we and all the canaanite that dwell in the low country have charct of iron, as well as they in bethshean and in the town of the same as they in the valley of israel. and joshua speak unto the house of joseph. have charct of iron as well as they in bethshean and in the town of the same, as they in the valley of israel. and joshua speak unto the house of joseph, to ephraim and manasses say: thou be a great people and have great power and shall not have one lot. therefore, the mountain shall be thou, for it be a wood, and thou shall cut it down, and the end of it shall be thou, and thou shall cast out the canaanite. though they have iron charets, and though they be strong, the heaven say david, even the heaven be the lord and so be the earth, but he have give it to the child of man, psa 113. 16.. yet, notwithstanding the fatherly providence and say david, even the heaven be the lord, and so be the earth, but he have give it to the child of man, psa 113. 16.. yet, notwithstanding the fatherly providence and large bounty of god towards man, so improvident and irrespective be man that he have, rather live like a drone and feed upon the fruit of other man, labour whereunto god have not entitle, he then look out and fly abroad like the be to gather the pleasure and riches of the earth which god have give he to enjoy. whece upon it come to pass that, although the lord have give the earth to the child of man, yet this earth, which be man fee-simple by deed of gift from god, be the great part. to pass that, although the lord have give the earth to the child of man, yet this earth, which be man, fee-simple by deed of gift from god, be the great part of it possess and wrongful usurp by wild beast and unreasonable creature, or by brutish savage which, by reason of their godless ignorance and blasphemous idolatry, be worse than those beast which be of most wild and savage nature, as ahab therefore sometime say to his servant: 1. king 22. 13. know you not that ramoth gilead be we, and we stay and take it not out of the hand of the king of aram. so may man say to himself: the earth be i, god, give it i and my posterity by the name of. it not out of the hand of the king of aram. so may man say to himself: the earth be i, god, give it i and my posterity by the name of the child of man. and yet i stay and take it not out of the hand of beast and brutish savage which have no interest in it because they participate rather of the nature of beast than man. the christian part of the world do plain bewray this improvident and irrespective neglect of god providence and bounty. when christopher columbus make proffer to the king of england, portugal and spain to invest they with the most precious and rich vein of the whole earth never know before. but this offer be not only reject but the. king of england, portugal and spain to invest they with the most precious and rich vein of the whole earth never know before. but this offer be not only reject but the man himself who deserve ever to be renown, be of we english especial scorn and account for a idle novellist- some think it be because of his poor apparel and simple look, but sure it be- rather to be impute to the improvidency and imprudency of our nation, which have always breed such diffidence in we that we conceit no new report, be it never so likely, nor believe any thing, be it never so probable, before we see the effect. this have always be report of the english by those that have observe the nature. never so likely, nor believe any thing, be it never so probable, before we see the effect. this have always be report of the english by those that have observe the nature of nation. bodin, lib 5. repub, cap 1. report that the english be always account more warlike, valorous and courageous than the french, but the french go always beyond they in prudence and policy, and to express the same he use the word of, and it may be that this may be report of we english. in those time when our country be not pestece with multitude nor overcharge with swarm of people, for peace and plenty breed security in man, neither be it necessary for any man to believe report, though probable, nor to follow. pestece with multitude, nor overcharge with swarm of people. for peace and plenty breed security in man. neither be it necessary for any man to believe report, though probable, nor to follow strange project, be they never so likely, so long as he have home inbred hope to rely upon and assure certainty to satisfy his future expectation. in those day this kingdom be not so populous as now, it be civil war at home and foreign war abroad do cut off the overspread branch of our people. our country then yield unto all that be in it a surplusage of all necessity. it yield preferment in due correspondency for all degree and sort of man. the commons of our country lie free and open for the poor. in it a surplusage of all necessity. it yield preferment in due correspondency for all degree and sort of man. the commons of our country lie free and open for the poor commons to enjoy. for there be room enough in the land for every man, so that no man need to encroach or enclose from another, whereby it be manifest that in those day we have no great need to follow strange report or to seek wild adventure. for see, we have not only sufficiency but a overflow measure, proportion to every man. religion and piety teach we that see our lot be fall unto we in a fair ground and that we have a goodly heritage, rather to be content with our own than either politikely. piety, teach we that see our lot be fall unto we in a fair ground and that we have a goodly heritage, rather to be content with our own than, either politikely or ambitious, to undertake uncouth enterprise unto which necessity do no way urge we. but now, god have, prosper we, with the blessing of the womb and with the blessing of the breast, the sword devour, not abroad. neither be there any fear in our street at home, so that we be now for multitude, as the thousand of manasses and as the ten thousad of ephraim, the prince of peace, have join the wood of israel and judah in one trow, and therefore we may just say, as the child of israel say here, to: thousad of ephraim, the prince of peace, have join the wood of israel and judah in one trow, and therefore we may just say, as the child of israel say here to joshua: we be a great people and the land be too narrow for we, so that whatsoever we have be now it behoove we to be both prudent and politic and not to deride and reject good proffer of profitable and gainful expectation, but rather to embrace every occasion which have any probability in it of future hope and see there be neither preferment nor employment for all within the list of our country. we may just be account, as in former time, both imprudent and improvident, if we will yet sit with our arm fold. nor employment for all within the list of our country. we may just be account, as in former time, both imprudent and improvident, if we will yet sit with our arm fold in our bosom and not rather seek after such adventure whereby the glory of god may be. advance the territory of our kingdom, enlarge our people both prefer and employ abroad our want, supply at home his majesty, custom, wonderful augment and the honour and renown of our nation spread and propagate to the end of the world. many example may be produce to move we hereunto, but because they be the practice of rude and barharous people, they be no exemplary precedent for christian, but forasmuch as every example approve in the scripture, be a. move we hereunto, but because they be the practice of rude and barharous people, they be no exemplary precedent for christian, but forasmuch as every example approve in the scripture be a precept. i think good to handle this conference between the tribe of joseph, a family in the israel of god, and joshua, a faithful and godly prince over the whole commonwealth of god, israel, which to my seem be much like that plot which we have now in hand for virginia, for here the people of ephraim and of the half tribe of manasses be a great people, and so be we, and by reason of the multitude of their people the land be too narrow for they, and so stand our case, whereupon they repair. be a great people, and so be we, and by reason of the multitude of their people, the land be too narrow for they, and so stand our case, whereupon they repair to (@) to have his warrant and direction to enlarge their wooer. and so have many of our noble man of honourable mind, worthy knight, rich, merchant and diverse other of the best disposition, solicit our joshua and mighty monarch, that most religious and renown king james, that by his majesty leave they may undertake the plantation of virginia last as joshua not only give leave but also a blessing to the child of joseph in their enterprise. so have our gracious sovereign grant his free charter to our people for the undertake of their intend. give leave but also a blessing to the child of joseph in their enterprise. so have our gracious sovereign grant his free charter to our people for the undertake of their intend, enterprise and adventure, so that from this example, there be both sufficient warrant for our king to grant his chacter for the plantation of virginia and sufficient warrant also for our people to undertake the same. and therefore, for the better satisfy of some and for the encourage of all fort of people concern this project for virginia, let we more full examine the particular of this discourse between the child of joseph and joshua. first, we gather from the text that the cause why the child of joseph desire to enlarge their border be the particular of this discourse between the child of joseph and joshua. first, we gather from the text that the cause why the child of joseph desire to enlarge their border be the multitude and greatness whereunto they be grow. god have bless they according to the prophecy of jacob, gen 48.. 19, so that the portion which be first think to be roomie and large enough for they be now too narrow and little for they. what shall they do in this case? shall they provide and establish law to hinder the increase of their people? as we read of hyppodamus, sometime a lawgiver among the miles^ans, who, example in government, aristotle in his 7. book of politic and 16. chapter and plato in his ^ book, have as we read of hyppodamus, sometime a lawgiver among the miles^ans, who, example in government, aristotle in his 7. book of politic and 16. chapter and plato in his ^ book have draw into precept and rule of policy. shall they decree against building and exect house lunit, a certain number and no more for every family in their tribe, as p^^do among the corinthian sometime do and (@) ^^ey of paris of late enact, take order that old an^ ancient house shall be repair but no new edifice erect. anno 1548, shall they have pester themselves with inmate and one household have receive into it two or three family. they put none of these in practice. but with one consent: they repair to the magistrate. they complain. themselves with inmate, and one household have receive into it two or three family. they put none of these in practice, but with one consent they repair to the magistrate. they complain that their lot be not large enough, and theyshew the reason because they be a great people. there be nothing more dangerous for the estate of commonwealth, then, when the people do increase to a great multitude and number than may just parallel with the largeness of the place and country. for hereupon come oppression and diverse kind of wrong, mutiny, sedition, commotion and rebellion, scarcity, dearth, poverty and sundry sort of calamity which either breed the conversion or eversion of city and commonwealth. for even as blood though it be, the best humour in the rebellion, scarcity, dearth, poverty and sundry sort of calamity which either breed the conversion or eversion of city and commonwealth. for even as blood though it be the best humour in the body, yet if it abound in great quantity than the state of the body will bear, do endanger the body and oftentimes destroy it. so, although the honour of the king be in the multitude of people, pro 14. 28. yet when this multitude of people increase to over great a number, the commonwealth stand subject to many perilous inconvenience. for which cause many nation perceive their people to increase above a due and proportionable number, they have send their overflow multitude abroad, into other country and province. to the end they may preserve their own. nation perceive their people to increase above a due and proportionable number, they have send their overflow multitude abroad into other country and province, to the end they may preserve their own in great peace and prosperity. so we see the husbandman deal with his ground. when they be overcharge with cattle, he remove they from one ground to another, and so he provide ^ell both for his cattle and for his ground. and so do the master of the bee-garden. when he soes a hive pestete with multitude of bee, he drive the hive and so reap ^ great gain by his ware and honey. and hereupon many statesman have think nothing more profitable for populous commonwealth then to have foreign and extern war to the end. so reap ^ great gain by his ware and honey. and hereupon many statesman have think nothing more profitable for populous commonwealth then to have foreign and extern war to the end that thereby the superfluous branch may be cut off. this be the cause why scipio, when he have conquer carthage, will not have it utter ruinate, lest say he, the roman have no war abroad, move civil war among themselves at home other see the multitude of their people increase, have plant colony with they other have, banish they into remote country and the child of joseph here be pester with multitude. come to joshua to be direct and relieve. this shall teach we of this kingdom and country prudence and providence. the lord have bless. child of joseph, here be pester with multitude. come to joshua to be direct and relieve. this shall teach we of this kingdom and country prudence and providence the lord have. bless we, and we be grow to be a great people so that one lot be not sufficient for we. our multitude, like too much blood in the body, infect our country with plague and poverty. our land have bring forth, but it have not milk sufficient in the breast thereof to nourish all those child which it have bring forth. it afford neither employment nor preferment for those that depend upon it. and hereupon it be that many serviceable man give themselves to lewd course as to rob by the high way, theft and cozen shark. nor preferment for those that depend upon it. and hereupon it be that many serviceable man give themselves to lewd course as to rob by the high way, theft and cozen shark upon the land, piracy upon the sea, and so be cut off by shameful and untimely death. other live profane, riotous and idle to the great dishonour of almighty god, the detriment of the commonwealth. now our case stand thus, it behoove every one to devise a remedy for this misery. when there be no bread in chanaan, jacob and his family seek into egypt for corn to relieve themselves. and jacob see his son destitute of counsel. in that extremity do sharp reprehend. they, for the dissolute manage of their present state, say: why gaze? egypt for corn to relieve themselves and jacob see his son, destitute of counsel, in that extremity do sharp reprehend they for the dissolute manage of their present state, say: why gaze you one upon another? behold, i have hear there be food in egypt. get you down thither and buy we food, thence that we may live. even so, may it be say to a company of people in this land which do nothing but gaze one upon another, destitute of counsel, advice and mean how to provide just and honest for their maintenance. they hear of honourable project abroad. they hear of employment and preferment. they hear of plenty and abundance of many good thing of which a fruitful country, large, make offer unto they. they. hear of honourable project abroad. they hear of employment and preferment. they hear of plenty and abundance of many good thing, of which a fruitful country, large, make offer unto they. they hear of gain and profit both to they and their posterity. they hear many honourable man, many worthy, wise man, many valiant and courageous man, many rich and wealthy man adventure their person, their money, their ship towards the accomplish of so godly and memorable a dsigne. and yet they sit still, follow their intemperancy, incontinency and other, their luxurious and riotous course to the high dishonour of almighty god, to the great hurt of the commonwealth and to their own everlasting shame and ignomy. if a honourable death be set before a virtuous mind, it the high dishonour of almighty god, to the great hurt of the commonwealth and to their own everlasting shame and ignomy. if a honourable death be set before a virtuous mind, it will choose rather to die heroical, then live opprobrious. what then shall we think of those person who have a honourable life set before they do, yet choose rather to live in idleness, dishonesty and obscenity? sure they be of degenerate and dunghill minder. neither be they worthy to be nourish in the bosom of a well govern commonwealth. it be for ever a blemish to the honour and credit of ulysses because he feign himself mad and sow salt in sreed of corn in his field, only that by such a shift he may keep. blemish to the honour and credit of ulysses, because he feign himself mad and sow salt in sreed of corn in his field, only that by such a shift he may keep himself at home and not go with the grecian to the siege of troy. so let perpetual shame and dishonour attend upon all those which dote upon their wealth or suffete upon their pleasure, find delay and devise shift, either to save their purse or their person from such honourable and profitable designment as offer probable likelihood of future good to this our country or commonwealth. thus we have hear the duty of the people which be prudent and provident to consult with the magistrate, concern the disburden and discharge of such unnecessary multitude as pester. or commonwealth. thus, we have hear the duty of the people which be prudent and provident, to consult with the magistrate, concern the disburden and discharge of such unnecessary multitude as pester a commonwealth, and also to further such enterprise, either with their purse or their person, as make to the same end, now that, in next place, we be to note the direction of josua, upon the aforesaid complaint of the child of joseph, which be to enlarge their territory and dilate their border by destroy god enemy, the perizzite and giant which inhabit the valley, border upon mount ephraim, which be most abominable idolater and have no knowledge of the true and only god, from whence we may learn how odious those people be in the valley border upon mount ephraim, which be most abominable idolater and have no knowledge of the true and only god. from whence we may learn how odious those people be in the sight of god, which have no knowledge of he and his worship? give that honour to the insensible and unreasonable creature, which be only due to the omnipotent and almighty creator. for this cause, have almighty god overthrow the mighty monarchy in the world. for this cause, do he disperse his own israel among the nation and never vouchsafe they to return again into their own land. david, by way of prophecy, do promise a blessing to those that shall take the child of the idolatrous babylonians and dash they against the stone, and they that their own land. david, by way of prophecy, do promise a blessing to those that shall take the child of the idolatrous babylonians and dash they against the stone. and they that have take arm against such people be, say to fight the lord. battle saul, have his kingdom rend from, he and his posterity because he spare agag, that idolatrous king of the amalechite, who god will not have. spare so acceptable a service, be it to destroy idolater who god hate, but forasmuch as god do not delight in blood, but rather that a sinner shall convert and live agreeable unto which, be that speech of our saviour christ in the gospel: there be joy in heaven over one sinner that repent. it be far more. sinner shall convert and live. agreeable unto which be that speech of our saviour christ in the gospel: there be joy in heaven over one sinner that repent. it be far more commendable and, out of doubt, more acceptable unto god to reclaim a idolater, unless we have a special commandment of god to the contrary, as saul have then to destroy he to win he to the faith, then to deprive he of life and to bring he to the knowledge of god and who he have. send christ, jesus, rather than to kill they in their ignorance and so to bring they into danger both of body and soul. for they that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the star for evermore. dan 12. 3.. in their ignorance and so to bring they into danger both of body and soul. for they that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the star for evermore. dan 12. 3. paul, call those who he have win to the faith of christ, his crown, his joy, his glory. 1. thessa, 2., 19, 20. as though they be the matter of his joy, of his crown and of his glory. happy therefore be he that have a hand in turn any unto god, and he that will find delay, whereby so gracious a work may be, hinder be not with god but against god, for asmuch as he hinder the build up of the kingdom of god. and sure, so desirous be man of civil society by be hinder, be not with god but against god, for asmuch as he hinder the build up of the kingdom of god. and sure, so desirous be man of civil society by nature that he easy yield to discipline and government if he see any reasonable motive to induce he to the same. for we read of certain people in africa inhabit the mountain magnan, which oftentimes do constrain stranger, which travel that way to take the government of they and to impose law unto they whereby they may be just and orderly, govern. and many nation willing submit themselves to the subjection of the roman. be allure thereunto by justice, equity, clemency and upright deal of the roman captain. for it be not the nature of man. nation willing submit themselves to the subjection of the roman. be allure thereunto by justice, equity, clemency and upright deal of the roman captain. for it be not the nature of man but the education of man which make they barbarous and uncivil, and therefore change the education of man and you shall see that their nature will be great, rectify and correct. see, therefore, man by nature, so easy yield to discipline and government upon any reasonable show of better their fortune. it be every man duty to travel, both by sea and land, and to venture, either with his person or with his purse, to bring the barbarous and savage people to a civil and christian kind of government under which they may learn how to to venture, either with his person or with his purse, to bring the barbarous and savage people to a civil and christian kind of government under which they may learn how to live holy, just and sober in this world and to apprehend the mean to save their soul in the world to come, rather than to destroy they or utter to root they out. for a wise man, but much more a chrtstian, aught to try all mean before they undertake war. di^astation and depopulation ought to be the last thing which christian shall put in practice. yet, forasmuch as every example in the scripture, as i say, be a precept, we be warrant by this direction of joshua to destroy wilful and convict idolater rather than. in practice. yet forasmuch as every example in the scripture, as i say, be a precept, we be warrant, by this direction of joshua, to destroy wilful and convict idolater rather than to let they live if by no other mean they can be. reclaim the report. go that in virginia the people be savage and incredible rude. they worship the devil, offer their young child in sacrifice unto he, wander up and down like beast and in manner and condition differ very little from beast, have no art, nor science, nor trade to employ themselves or give themselves unto. yet by nature love and gentle and desirous to embrace a better condition, oh, how happy be that man which can reduce this people from brutishness to civility. or give themselves unto, yet, by nature, love and gentle and desirous to embrace a better condition. oh, how happy be that man which can reduce this people from brutishness to civility, to religion, to christianity, to the save of their soul. happy be that man and bless of god who god have endue either with mean or will to attempt this business. but far be it from the nature of the english to exercise any bloody cruelty among these people. far be it from the heart of the english to give they occasion that the holy name of god shall be dishonour among the infidel, or that in the plantation of that continent they shall give any cause to the world to say that they seek the. holy name of god shall be dishonour among the infidel, or that in the plantation of that continent they shall give any cause to the world to say that they seek the wealth of that country above or before the glory of god and the propagation of his kingdom. i remember the practice of christopher collombus which he use among the west indian to persuade they to receive his spaniard to society and commerce which, be he observe that they be superstitious, give to worship the moon, and by the skill he have in astronomy he foresee that within three day the moon shall be eclipse, whereupon he call they together and tell they that he have often use his best mean to bring they to a civil. foresee that within three day the moon shall be eclipse, whereupon he call they together and tell they that he have often use his best mean to bring they to a civil and friendly converse with stranger. but they will not hearken unto he and therefore, in the presence of they all, he call upon the moon to revenge such a ^acha^ous people which deny stranger so converse and commerce with they. within three day after the moon be much darken by reason of the eclipse, which, when the indian see they think the moon to be angry with they and fear some plague will proceed from her displeasure. they be easy induce to do whatsoever. columbus will have they in like manner. shall all man use their. be angry with they and fear some plague will proceed from her displeasure. they be easy induce to do whatsoever. columbus will have they in like manner. shall all man use their wit in the first place and weapon shall always be the last mean in all our project. and therefore, although the child of joseph have a express commandment here in this place to destroy those idolater and possess their land, yet forasmuch as we have no precept, but by example, we must first try all mean before weapon, and when we take they into our hand, necessity of preserve our own life must rather move we to destroy the enemy of god than either ambition or greediness of gain or cruelty or any private respect whatsoever. our hand. necessity of preserve our own life must rather move we to destroy the enemy of god than either ambition or greediness of gain, or cruelty or any private respect whatsoever. now, the three thing which we be to observe in this intercourse of word between the child of joseph and josua, be the delay which the people use and the excuse which they feign, which seem to import a impossibility in the undertake of josua direction and their delay. be that the chanaanite be strong and well provide of warlike munition, both for their own defence and also for the defence of those which will undertake to supplant or invade they. they have iron charets and such like, muniment of war, so that it stand not. own defence and also for the defence of those which will undertake to supplant or invade they. they have iron charets and such like, muniment of war, so that it stand not with wisdom to make a invasion, with likelihood to make a conquest of they. this be the nature of muddy and earthly spirit: to find delay and forge excuse in matter of least difficulty. man say a lion, be without, i shall be slay in the street, prou 22.. 13. what slander do the ten spy bring upon the land of canaan? which slander the i sraelite make good ground for their retire back into egypt and think they lawful excuse for they to murmur against moses and aaron han^ba have much ado to bring his. the i sraelite make good ground for their retire back into egypt and think they lawful excuse for they to murmur against moses. and aaron han^ba have much ado to bring his carthagenian into italy. they allege the tediousness of the voyage and the inaccessible passage of the alps. we read of caligula, sometime, emperor of rome, that he on a time condemn a certain citizen, son of rome, to be execute, and he send for his father to see his son execution. the father, to excuse his absence, feign himself to be sick, whereupon the emperor send he his horselitter and by that mean take away from he all colour of excuse. this perplex father, have good cause to find delay to keep he at home. but emperor, send he his horselitter and by that mean take away from he all colour of excuse, this perplex father, have good cause to find delay to keep he at home. but they that forge cavil to withdraw themselves from such attempt whereby, god may be, honour the majesty and royalty of their king, advauce the common wealth, enrich and postrecitie provide for, will not be draw to these attempt in caligula horselitter, for that be too easy mean to draw on such backward spirit. neither will i have. they punish for their delay as tu^lus hostilius sometime punish metius sufferius for his delay, but i will. some diomedes will find out a mean to draw they on to this enterprise by discover their drift and excuse for. hostilius. sometime punish metius sufferius for his delay, but i will. some diomedes will find out a mean to draw they on to this enterprise by discover their drift and excuse for all that they can alleag for their backwardness, be most idle and frivolous. the first objection be by what right or warrant we can enter into the land of these savage, take away their rightful in hexitance from they and plant ourselves in their place. be unwronged or unprovoked by they, some affirm, and it be likely to be true, that these savage have no particular in any part or parcel of that country, but only a general there, as wild beast have in the forest, for they range and wander up and down the country. no particular in any part or parcel of that country, but only a general there, as wild beast have in the forest, for they range and wander up and down the country without any law or government, be lead only by their own lust and sensuality. there be not amongst they, so that if the whole land shall be take from they, there be not a man that can complain of any particular wrong do unto he. but the answer to the foresay objection be that there be no intendment to take away from they by force that rightful inheritance which they have in that country, for they be willing to entertain we and have offer to yield into our hand, on reasonable condition, more land than we. force that rightful inheritance which they have in that country for they be willing to entertain we and have offer to yield into our hand, on reasonable condition, more land than we shall be able this long time to plant and manure. and out of all question, upon easy composition with they, we may have as much of their country. yield unto we by lawful grant from they as we can or will desire, so that we go to live peaceable among they and not to supplant they. we desire not, neither do we intend to take any thing from they, but to compound with they, for that we shall have of they, and sure, except succession and election, there can be a more lawful entrance to a take any thing from they but to compound with they, for that we shall have of they, and sure, except succession and election, there can be a more lawful entrance to a kingdom then this of we. moreover, all politician do with one consent: hold and maintain that a christian king may lawful make war upon barbarous and savage people and such as live under no lawful or warrantable government and may make a conquest of they, so that the war be undertake to this end to reclaim and reduce those savage from their barbarous kind of life and from their brutish and ferine manner to huinanitie, piety and honesty. lip, lib 5. pol, ca 8. casman in pol, cap 8. ke^kerm, lib 7. pol, pag 124.. and of life and from their brutish and ferine manner to huinanitie, piety and honesty. lip, lib 5.. pol, ca 8.. casman in pol, cap 8.. ke^kerm, lib 7.. pol, pag 124.. and lipsius allege, saint augustine, for proof hereof. who word be these, those people be vanquish to their unspeakable profit and gain, which by conquest be abridge of the liberty of sin and impiety. and the same saint augustine have a other golden say to this purpose, amongst the true worshipper of god even, that war be lawful, which be undertake not for covetousness and cruelty but for peace and unity sake, so that lewd and wicked man may thereby be suppress and good man maintain and relieve. whereby we see that both in the opinion of cruelty, but for peace and unity sake, so that lewd and wicked man may thereby be suppress and good man maintain and relieve, whereby we see that, both in the opinion of politician and also by the judgement of augustine himself, we may lawful make war upon the savage of virginia. our project have the end aforesaid and therefore let every man that be or will be a adventurer in this plantation examine his whole heart and if he find that he be draw to partake in this business, to draw the savage from their barbarous kind of life to a morecivill, honest and christian kind of life, let he not doubt of the lawfulness of it, but let he, cheerful and liberal, put his help hand to. kind of life to a morecivill, honest and christian kind of life. let he not doubt of the lawfulness of it, but let he, cheerful and liberal, put his help hand to this business. second, they reason of the future event by those that be already past and see it be above twenty year ago since this attempt be begin, and yet no good have come of it, nor little hope of any. they hold it a unadvised course to set the same attempt on foot again. which objection of they be very sufficient answer in that book entitle, and indeed most childish be this objection, for neither be the end of the first attempt the same with the end of this, nor the mean nor the manage. that book entitle, and indeed most childish be this objection, for neither be the end of the first attempt the same with the end of this, nor the mean nor the manage of the mean of this attempt semblable with the former, and therefore, in all likelihood, the event of this can be judge by the event of the former. their second objection be that this age will see no profit of this plantation. which objection, admit it be true, yet it be too brutish and bewray their neglect and incurious respect of posterity. we be not bear like beast for our ielue and the time present only, but beside many other thing which may challenge a interest and right in we posterity and the age yet ensue. not bear like beast for our ielue and the time present only, but beside many other thing which may challenge a interest and right in we, posterity and the age yet ensue have not the least part in our life and labour. what benefit or comfort shall we have enjoy in the thing of this world if our forefather have not provide better for we and be more careful, respective of posterity then for themselves? we sow, we set, we plant, we build, not so much for ourselves as for posterity. we practise the work of godliness in this life. yet shall we not see the end of our hope before we enjoy it in the world to come, it be a bless thing to be bless of. godliness in this life. yet shall we not see the end of our hope before we enjoy it in the world to come. it be a bless thing to be bless of posterity. it be the rejoice of the virgin marie that from thenceforth all generation shall call she bless. they that do not provide for eternity can have no assure hope of eternity, and they which only be for themselves shall die in themselves and shall not have a name among posterity. their root shall be dry up, beneath and above shall their branch be cut down. their remembrance shall perish from the earth and they shall have no name in the street. job 18. 16. 17. but the remembrance which a good man leave behind. he cut down, their remembrance shall perish from the earth and they shall have no name in the street. job 18. 16. 17. but the remembrance which a good man leave behind, he be like the composition of the perfume that be make by the art of the apothecary. it be sweet as honey in all mouth and as music at a banquet of wine. let it not grieve. thou, therefore, to plant and build for posterity, for the memory of the just shall be bless, but the name of the wicked shall rot prou. 10. 7. other object: the continual charge which will prove, in their opinion, very heavy and burdensome to those that shall undertake the say plantation. these, like the dog in the manger, neither eat. other object, the continual charge which will prove, in their opinion, very heavy and burdensome to those that shall undertake the say plantation. these, like the dog in the manger, neither eat hay themselves, neither will they suffer the ox, that will. they never think any charge too much that may any way increase their own private estate. they have thousand to bestow about the engross of a commodity, or upon a mortgage, or to take their neighbour house over his head, or to lend upon usury, but if it come to a public good, they groan under the least burden of charge that can be require of they. these man will be use like sponge. they must be squeeze, see they drnuke up all and will yield. groan under the least burden of charge that can be require of they. these man will be use like sponge. they must be squeeze, see they drnuke up all and will yield to nothing, though it concern the common good, never so great. but it be demonstrative. prove in that the charge about this plantation will be nothing in comparison of the benefit that will grow thereof. and what notable thing i pray you can be: bring to pass without charge: the thing of this world be appoint unto man with such condition as there may no profit accrue unto he without pain, nor no gain without charge. hiel will build jericho, though the foundation of it cost he his elder son and the set up of the. no profit accrue unto he without pain, nor no gain without charge. hiel will build jericho, though the foundation of it cost he his elder son and the set up of the gate cost he his young son. haman will have his wicked desire upon the jew, though it cost he ten thousand talent. so little do the wicked respect charge about the effect of their malicious or vain glorious attempt. condemn those that profess piety and religion which, for save, charge neglect and often time suffer most honourable and profitable protect to fail and fall to the ground. without question that. save his money. where god glory be to be. advance christian religion, propagate and plant the good of the commonwealth, increase and the glorious renown of. to the ground, without question that. save his money where god glory be to be, advance christian religion, propagate and plant the good of the commonwealth, increase and the glorious renown of the king. enlarge s subject to the curse of simon magus. his money and he be in danger to perish together. let none therefore find delay or fain excuse to withhold they from this employment for virginia. see every opposition against it be a opposition against god, the king, the church and the commonwealth. now, in the last place, let we hear the answer of joshua to the excuse of the child of joseph. and his answer be a exhortation that, in stead of delay, they will use art and industry in this enterprise which they of joshua to the excuse of the child of joseph, and his answer be a exhortation that, in stead of delay, they will use art and industry in this enterprise which they be to undertake art in cut down the tree and make the country champion industry by take pain to conquer and cast out those idolatrous canaanite and to plant themselves in their place. from whence we be to gather that for this present business of plantation in virginia, there must be special choice and care have of such person as shall be send thither nature have empty herself in bestow her rich treasure upon that country, so that if art and industry be use as help to nature, it be likely to prove the happy attempt. nature have empty herself in, bestow her rich treasure upon that country, so that, if art and industry be use as help to nature, it be likely to prove the happy attempt that ever be undertake by the english, and forasmuch as of all human art. political government be the chief. there must be a special care in the magistrate how to carry himself in his place and order, for herein consist the very main matter of the success of this business. as, therefore, the magistrate have the eminency of dignity confer upon he by his prince, so must he furnish himself with eminency of virtue, for he shall the better contain other within the bound and limit of honesty and godliness, if he first be able to. prince. so must he furnish himself with eminency of virtue, for he shall the better contain other within the bound and limit of honesty and godliness, if he first be able to contain himself. a magistrate, therefore, must have a good conscience towards god, and he must also have a love affection towards those over who he have the government concern. the conscience that a magistrate must carry towards god, he must so watch over himself that at no time he burst forth into any notorious vice, nor suffer himself to be stain with the imputation of any enormous crime, for the vice of man be hold so much the great, by how much great the majesty be of the party delinquent, the blemish of prince be deformity. of any enormous crime for the vice of man be hold, so much the great, by how much great the majesty be of the party delinquent, the blemish of prince be deformity and diminutive sin in. they be sin of the high nature. again, he that be in place of government must know that his example prevalle much with those that be under his government, so that he shall rule his subject better by his good example of life, then by all the law and statute that he can make. last, a magistrate must know that the modern time do not only behold he, but that he be subject also to the view of succeed posterity. and therefore tacitus. do advise prince, lib 4. ann, to beware by the modern time. do not only behold he, but that he be subject also to the view of succeed posterity. and therefore tacitus, do advise prince lib 4. ann to beware by all mean that they give no occasion to chronicler to publish their lewd and wicked action. concern his loo affection towards his subject. his first care must be that he always seek the public good of his subject above his own private profit, to which purpose the emperor adrian be wont to say. the example of alexander the great be most memorable for this purpose, who lead his soldier through the dry and w^^ place of india, have almost lose his whole army for water. at the last, one of his soldier find out the river. purpose, who lead his soldier through the dry and w^^ place of india, have almost lose his whole army. for water at the last one of his soldier, find out the river oxus and bring the king water to quench his thirst. but the king pour the water upon the ground before all his soldier and will not drink it. speak these word, and and when he and his whole army come to the river, he will not drink before all his soldier have quench their thirst. give thereby all prince to understand that they shall provide for the good of their people before their own good. thus, in conscience towards god and in affection towards his subject, ought a prince to stand affect. and if he stand, provide for the good of their people before their own good. thus, in conscience towards god and in affection towards his subject, ought a prince to stand affect. and if he stand so affect. he will punish such as be vild and vicious, and he will advance such as be verivous and well dispose. he will encourage the painful and industrious and he will correct the idle and dissolute. he will establish true religion and he will repress heresy and schism. he will reiceve the weak and impotent and he will suppress the mutinous and insolent, so that god will give a blessing and all thing will prosper under his government. and for as much as no policy can stand long without religion, a chief care must be. so that god will give a blessing and all thing will prosper under his government. and for as much as no policy can stand long without religion, a chief care must be have of sufficient, honest and sober mind, minister, to teach and instruct the people both by their life and doctrine in their duty to god and obedience to their ruler. when the t^^be of dan go to plant themselves in la^sh, they take a levite with they to be a father and a priest unto they. micah think that the lord will be better unto he because he have a levite in his house. neither do i ever read of any that ever attain unto any government, of what religion soever they be, but their first. unto he because he have a levite in his house. neither do i ever read of any that ever attain unto any government, of what religion soever they be, but their first care be to provide fit person which may teach the people religion and divine worship. and therefore, if this plantation shall be undertake without this care, there be small hope of any good success to come thereof. and as the minister be a subject must yield his obedience to the magistrate, so (@) magistrate must be careful to yield he countenance to keep he from neglect and maintenance to encourage he in his ministry. and it must be special foresee of the minister that they resist popery, for as it do infect the mind with error. from neglect and maintenance to encourage he in his ministry, and it must be special foresee of the minister that they resist popery, for as it do infect the mind with error, so it do infect the manner of man with disloyalty and treachery. and last, they must labour to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, for if they ^nce far or dissent among themselves, they open a gap to schism and contempt of religion. policy thus establish religion and religion guide policy provision must be make of man furnish with art and trade most necessary for this business. artificer and tradesman must be nourish and cherish, for without artificer and tradesman a commonwealth can flourish nor endure. and therefore the magistrate must art and trade most necessary for this business. artificer and tradesman must be nourish and cherish, for without artificer and tradesman a commonwealth can flourish nor endure, and therefore the magistrate must special regard they and respect they, and they must so carry themselves. that they may be respect and cherish of the magistrate. it be require at their hand that they be faithful, painful and honest in their calling, for if they be thus qualify, the country itself will make they rich. every trade have his mystery, which be for the most part ground upon deceit and fraud. but see the beginning of a common wealth be now attempt. the foundation must not be lay upon fraud and deceit, for there can no good end be expect. deceit and fraud, but see the beginning of a common wealth be now attempt. the foundation must not be lay upon fraud and deceit, for there can no good end be expect of a evil beginning. it be require likewise that they be painful in their trade, or else the commonwealth can have little use or comfort of they. and here our english tradesman and artificer be to be advise that they be wary in. take the savage to be apprentice to teach they their trade. see there be mean of employment sufficient beside to set many thousand on work and therefore not necessary as yet to instruct they in our trade and mystery. beside all this industry must be also add to help art and nature. so many thousand on work and therefore not necessary as yet to instruct they in our trade and mystery. beside all this industry must be also add to help art and nature, so that such as have no process, art and trade must painful im^^^y themselves in some labour or other. to the further of this plantation, a drone will, in short space, devour more honey than the be can gather in a long time, and therefore the magistrate must correct with all sharpness of discipline those unthrifty and unprofitable drone which live idle. for there be a law: give to the son of adam to labour and to the daughter of eve with the sweat of their brow to get their live, and therefore it be a evangelical. a law give to the son of adam to labour, and to the daughter of eve with the sweat of their brow to get their live, and therefore it be a evangelical precept that they which will not labour must not eat in job time. there be a very strict order take for such as live, idle job 30. 5. they be chase forth from among man and every one shout at they as at a thief. and sure, such a order must be take with those that will not live painful in virginia, the rather, because meat and drink and such other necessary supply of liveliehoode will be very precious there a while, and therefore order have more need be take that such provision be not consume. because meat and drink and such other necessary supply of liveliehoode will be very precious there a while and therefore order have more need be take that such provision be not consume by unserviceable loiter companion. last all degree and sort of people which have prepare themselves for this plantation must be admonish to preserve unity, love and concord among themselves, for by concord small thing increase and grow to great thing, but by discord great thing soon come to nothing. agesilaus be demand why the city of sparta be not compass about with wall for the better defence and safety of the city. he show unto the demandant, the citizen and soldier of sparta, all of they live and agree together in firm concord and unity. these the better defence and safety of the city he show unto the demandant, the citizen and soldier of sparta, all of they live and agree together in firm concord and unity. these say: agesilaus be the wall of sparta and out of question so it be. concord and good agreement among coinhabitant be a more sure defence than wall or castle or any other warlike munition whatsoever. therefore, if any mutinous or seditious person dare adventure to move any matter which may tend to the breach of concord and unity, he be present to be suppress as a most d^^gerous enemy to the state and government there. establish now all these particular be already not only conclude upon but also provide for by the godly care of the. as a most d^^gerous enemy to the state and government there. establish now all these particular be already not only conclude upon but also provide for by the godly care of the counsel and aoventurer of virginia. i have presume only to advise be ^^t o^^oubt that they will be as careful, perform as they at already wise and religious determine and thus far have. i presume. in my love to the adventurer and like to the enterprise ^o deal in this business, pray as much good success to they and it as their own heart can desire. hope to see their expectation satisfy and the glory of england as much increase by this their honourable attempt as ever be the roman empire by the enterprise of her. can desire hope to see their expectation satisfy and the glory of england as much increase by this their honourable attempt as ever be the roman empire by the enterprise of her great emperor. sorrow with myself that i be not able, neither in person nor purse, to be a partaker in the business.