the first part of merchantable commodity: silk of grass or grass silk. there be a kind of grass in the country upon the blade where of there grow very good silk in form of a thin glitter skin to be strip of. it grow two foot and a half high, or better the blade be about two foot in length and half inch broad. the like grow in persia, which be in the self same climate as virginia, of which very many of the silk work that come from thence into europe be make here of, if it be plant and order as in persia. it can in reason be otherwise, but that there will rise in short time great profit to the dealer therein. see there be. so great use and vent thereof as well in our country as else where, and by the mean of sow and plant in good ground, it will be far great better and more plentiful than it be, although notwithstanding there be great store thereof in many place of the country. grow natural and wild which also by proof here in england in make a piece of silk grogran we find to be excellent good worm silk. in many of our journey we find silk worm fair and great, as big as our ordinary walnut, although it have not be our hap to have find such plenty as elsew here to be in the country wehave hear of, yet see that the country do natural, breed and nourish they. there be no doubt. but if be be add in of mulberry tree and other fit for they in commodious place for their feed and nourish, and some of they careful gather and husband in that sort as by man of skill be know to be necessary, there will rise as great profit in time to the virginian as there of do now to the persian, turk, italian and spaniard flax and hemp. the truth be that of hemp and flax there be no great store in any one place together. by reason it be not plant, but as the soil do yield it of itself, and howsoever the leaf and stem or stalk do differ from we the stuff by the judgement of man of skill be. altogether as good as we, and if not, as further proof shall find otherwise. we have that experience of the soil as that there cannobee show any reason to the contrary, but that it will grow there excellent well, and by plant will be yield plentiful. see there be so much ground whereof some may well be apply to such purpose. what benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linen. who can not easy understand alum? there be a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or fifty mile whereof, by the judgement of some that have make trial herein england, be make good alum of that kind which be call roche alum. the richness of such a commodity be so well know. that i need not to say any thing thereof. the same earth do also yield white copresse, and but nothing so plentiful as the common alum which be also of price and profitable. wapeih, wapeih, a kind of earth so call by the natural inhabitant, very like to and have be refine. it have be find by some of our physician and surgeon to be of the same kind of virtue and more effectual. the inhabitant use it very much for the cure of sore and wound. there be in diverse place great plenty and in some place of a blue sort, pitch tar, resin and turpentine. there be those kind of tree which yield they abundant and great store in the very same island where we be. seat be fifteen mile of length and five or six mile in breadth. there be few tree else but of the same kind the whole island be full sassafras. sassafras call by the inhabitant winauk, a kind of wood of most pleasand and sweet smell and of most rare virtue in physic for the cure of many disease. it be find by experience to be far better and of more use then the wood which be call guaiacum, or for the description, the manner of use and the manifold virtue thereof, i refer you to the book of monardus. translate and entitle in english the joyful news from the west indies: cedar cedar, a very sweet wood and fine timber whereof, if nest of chest be there, make or timber thereof fit for sweet and fine bedstead, table, desk, lute, virginal and many thing else of which there have be proof. make already to make up fraite with. other principal commodity will yield profit: wine. there be two kind of grape that the soil do yield, natural. the one be small and sour, of the ordinary bigness, as we in england. the other, far great and of himself, iushious, sweet when they be plant and husbandeg, as they ought, a principal commodity of wine by they may be raise oil. there be two sort of walnut, both. hold oil, but the one far more plentiful than the other. when there be mill and other device for the purpose, a commodity of they may be raise because there be infinite store. there be also three, several kind of berry in the form of oak acorn which also by the experience and use of the inhabitant we find to yield very good and sweet oil. furthermore, the bear of the country be common, very fat and in some place there be many their fatness, because it be so liquid, may well be term oil and have many special use fur. all along the sea coast there be great store of otter which be take by wear and other engine make for the purpose will yield good profit. we hope also of marten fur, and make no doubt by the relation of the people, but that in some place of the country there be store, although there be but two skin that come to our hand. luzarne also we have understanding of, although for the time we see none. dear skin, dear skin, dress after the manner of chamoes or undress, be to be have of the natural inhabitant, thousand yearly by way of traffic for trifle, and no more waist or spoil of dear then be and have be ordinary in time. before civet cat in our travail there be, find one to have be kill by a savage or inhabitant, and in a other place the smell where one or more have late be. before, whereby we gather beside, then by the relation of the people, that there be some in the country, good profit will rise by they iron in two place of the country, special one about fourscore and the other six score mile from the fort or place where we dwell. we find near the water side the ground to be rocky which by the trial of a mineral man be find to hold iron rich. it be find in many place of the country else. i know nothing to the contrary, but that it may be allow for a good merchantable commodity. consider there the small charge for the labour and feed of man, the infinite store of wood, the want of wood and dearness thereof in england. and the necessity of ballast of ship copper. a hundred and fifty mile into the main, in two town, we find with the inhabitant diverse small plate of copper that have be make, as we understand, by the inhabitant that dwell far into the country where, as they say, be mountain and river that yield also white grain of mettle which be to be deem silver. for confirmation whereof. at the time of our first arrival in the country i see with some other, with i, two small piece of silver gross beat about the weight of a testrone, hang in the ear of a wiroans or chief lord that dwell about fourscore mile from we, of who, through inquiry, by the number of day and the way, i learn that it have come to his hand from the same place or near where i, after understand the copper be make and the white grain of mettle find the aforesaid copper. we also find by trial to hold silver pearl sometime in feed on muscle we find some pearl, but it be our hap to meet with rag or of a pied colour, not have yet discover those place where we hear of better and more plenty. one of our company, a man of skill in such matter, have gather together, from among the savage people, about five thousand, of which number he choose, so many as make a fair chain which, for their likeness and uniformity in roundness, orientnesse and pidenesse of mamny excellent colour with equality in greatness, be very fair and rare and have therefore be present to her majesty. have we not, by casualty and through extremity of a storm, lose they with many thing. else in come away from the country, sweet gum, sweet gum of diverse kind and many other apothecary drug of which we will make special mention when we shall receive it from such man of skill in that kind that in take reasonable pain shall discover they more particular than we have do and than now i can makc relation of, for want of the example i have provit and gather and be now lose with other thing by causualtie. before mention die of diverse kind. there be shoemake well know and use in england for black, the seed of a herb call wasewowr, little small root call chappacor, and the bark of the tree call by the inhabitant tangomockonomindge, which die. be for diverse sort of red. their goodness for our english clothes remain yet to be prove. the inhabitant use they only for the die of hair and colour of their face and mantle make of dear skin and also for the die of rush to make artificial work withal in their mat and baskette have no other thing beside that. they account of apt to use they for. if they will not prove merchantable, there be no doubt but the planter there shall find apt use for they, as also for other colour which we know to be there woad a thing of so great vent and use among english dyer which can be yield sufficient in our own country for spare of ground may be plant in virginia. there be ground enough. the growth thereof need not to be doubt when, as in the island of the asores, it grow plentiful which be in thesame climate. so likewise of mad sugar cane, when carry thither sugar cane to plant which be not so well preserve as be requisite and, beside the time of the year, be pass for their set when we arrive, we can not make that proof of they as we desire, notwithstanding see that they grow in the same climate in the south part of spain and in barbary. our hope in reason may yet continue. so likewise for orange and lemon, there may be plant also quinses. wherbi may grow in reasonable time if the action be diligent. prosecute no small commodity in sugar sucket and marmalade. many other commodity by plant may there also be raise, which i leave to your discreet and gentle consideration, and many also may be there which yet we have not discover. two more commodity of great value, one of certainty and the other in hope, not to be plant but there to be raise and in short time to be provide and prepare. i may have specify so. likewise, of those commodity already set down, i may have say more as of the particular place where they be find and best to be plant and prepare, by what mean and in what reasonable space of time they may be raise to profit and in what proportion. but because other, then well-willer, may be therewithal acquaint, not to the good of the action i have witting omit. they know that to those that be well dispose i have utter, according to my promise and purpose, for this part, sufficient. the second part of such commodity as virginia be know to yield for victual and sustenance of man life, usual feed upon by the natural inhabitant as also by we, during the time of our abode, and first of such as be sow and husband pagatowr, a kind of grain so call by the inhabitant the same in the west indies be call mayze, english man call it guinney wheat or turkey wheat, according to the name of the country from whence the like have be. bring the grain be about the bigness of our ordinary english pease and not much different in form and shape but of diverse colour, some white, some red, some yellow and some blue. all of they yield a very white and sweet flower. be use according to his kind, it make a very good bread. we make of the same in the country some malt, whereof be brew as good ale as be to be desire. so likewise, by the help of hop, thereof may be make as good beer. it be a grain of marvelous great increase of a thousand fifteen hundred and some two thousand fold. there be three sort of which two be ripe in a eleven and twelve week at the most, sometime in ten after the time they be set, and be then of height in stalk about six or seven foot. the other sort be ripe in fourteen and be about ten foot high of the stalk. some bear four head, some three, some one and two every head contain five, six or seven hundred grain. within a few more or less of these grain, beside bread the inhabitant make victual, either by parch they or seethe they whole until they be break, or boil the flower with water into a pap okindgier call by we bean, because in greatness and partly in shape they be like to the bean. in england, save that they be flatter, of more diverse colour and some pied the leaf, also of the stem, be much different in taste. they be altogether as good as our english pease wickonzowr call by we pease in respect of the bean for distinction sake because they be much less, although in form they little differ, but in goodness of taste much and be far better than our english pease. both the bean and pease be ripe in ten week after they be set. they make they victual, either by boil they all to piece into a broth or boil they whole until they be soft and begin to break, as be use in england, either by themselves or mix together. sometime they mingle of the. wheat with they sometime also be whole soddeu. they bruise or pound they in a mortar and thereof make loaf or lump of dowishe bread which they use to eat for variety, macocqwer, according to their several form, call by we pompion, mellion and gourd, because they be of the like form as those kind in england. in virginia such of several form be of one taste and very good and do also spring from one seed. there be of two sort: one be ripe in the space of a month and the other in two month. there be a herb which in dutch be call melden. some of those that i describe it unto take it to be a kind of orage. it grow about four or five foot high. of the seed thereof they make a thick broth and pottage of a very good taste of the stalk. by burn into ash they make a kind of salt earth wherewithal many use sometime to season their broth other salt they know not. we ourselves use the leaf also for pothearbe. there be also another great hea@be in form of a marigold, about six foot in height, the head with the flower be a span in breadth. some take it to be planta. of the seed hereof they make both a kind of bread and broth. all the aforesaid commodity for victual be set or sow sometime in ground, a part and several by themselves, but for the most part. together in one ground, mix the manner thereof with the dress and prepare of the ground, because i will note unto you the fertility of the soil. i think good brief to describe the ground. they never fatten with muck, dung or any other thing, neither plough nor dig it, as we in england, but only prepare it in sort as follow a few day before they sow or set. the man with wooden instrument make almost in form of mattock or ho with long handle. the woman with short pecker or parer, because they use they sit of a foot long and about five inch in breadth, do only break the upper part of the ground to raise up the weed grass and old stub of corn. stalk with their root, the which, after a day or twoe dry in the sun, be scrape up into many small heap to save they labour for, carry they away, they burn into ash. and whereas some may think that they use the ash for to better the ground, i say that then they will either disperse the ash abroad, which we observe they do not, except the heap be too great, or else will take special care to set their corn where the ash lie, which also we find they be careless of, and this be all the husband of their ground that they use. then their set or sow be after this manner. first for their corn. begin in one corner of the plot with a pecker they make a hole wherein they put four grain. with that care they touch not one another about a inch asunder and cover they with the mould again, and so through out the whole plot, make such hole and use they after such manner, but with this regard that they be make in rank. every rank differ from other half a fathom or a yard and the hole also in every rank as much. by this mean there be a yard spare ground between every hole where, according to discretion, here and there, they set as many bean and pease in diverse place, also among the seed of macocqwer, melden and planta solis. the ground be thus set according to the rate by we experiment. a english acre contain forty perch in length and four in breadth. do there yield in crop or ofcome of corn, bean and pease at the least two hundred london bushel beside the macocqwer melden and planta solis, when, as in england, forty bushel of our wheat yield out of such a acre be think to be much. i think also good to note this unto you, if you which shall inhabit and plant there, may know how special that country corn be there to be, prefer before we, beside the manifold way in apply it to victual, the increase be so much that small labour and pain be needful in respect that must be use. for we. for this, i can assure you that, according to the rate we have make proof of, one man may prepare and husbane so much ground- have once bear corn before- with less than four and twenty hour labour, as shall yield he, victual in a large proportion for a twelve month, if he have nothing else but that which the same ground will yield, and of that kind only, which i have before. speak of the say ground be also, but of five and twenty yard square, and if need require but that there be ground enough, there may be raise out of one and the self-same ground two harvest or ofcomes, for they sow or set and may at any time when they think good. from the midst of march until the end of june, so that they also set when they have eat of their first crop in some place of the country. notwithstanding, they have two harvest, as we have hear out of one and the same ground for english corn. nevertheless, whether to use or not to use it, you that inhabit may do as you shall have far cause to think best of the growth you need not to doubt for barley oat and pease we have see proof of not be purposely sow but fall casual in the worst sort of ground and yet to be as fair as any we have ever see here in england. but of wheat, because it be musty and hat take salt. water we can make no trial, and of rye we have none. thus much have i digress and i hope not unnecessary. now will i return again to my course and entreat of that which yet remain appertain to this chapter. there be a herb which be sow a part by itself and be call by the inhabitant vppowoc in the west indies. it have diverse name according to the several place and country where it grow and be use. the spaniard general call it tobacco. the leave thereof be dry and bring into powder. they use to take the fume or smoke thereof by suck it through pipe, make of clay into their stomach and head, from whence it purge superfluous phlegm and other gross humour open. all the pore and passage of the body, by which mean the use thereof not only preserve the body from obstruction but also, if any, be so that they have not be of too long continuance. in short time break they, whereby their body be notable, preserve in health and know not many grievous disease, wherewithal we in england be oftentimes afflict this vppowoc be of so precious estimation amongst then that they think their god be marvelous delight therewith, whereupon, sometime they make hallow fire and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice. be in a storm upon the water, to pacify their god, they cast some up into the air and into the water. so a wear for fish be new set up they. cast some therein and into the air also, after a escape of danger they cast some into the air likewise, but all do with strange gesture, stamp sometime, dance, clap of hand, hold up of hand and stare up into the heaven, utter therewithal and chatter strange word and noise. we ourselves, during the time we be there, use to suck it after their manner, as also since our return, and have find main, rare and wonderful experiment. of the virtue thereof, of which the relation will require a volume by itself. the use of it by so many of late man and woman of great calling as else, and some learned physician also be sufficient witness. and these be all the commodity for sustenance of life that i know and can remember they use to husband all else that follow be find. grow natural or wild, of root openauk be a kind of root of round form, some of the bigness of walnut, some far great, which be find in moist and marish ground. grow many together. one by another in rope or as though they be fastnen with a string. be boil or sod, they be very good meat. okeepenauk be also of round shape, find in dry ground. some be of the bigness of a man head. they be to be eat as they be take out of the ground for by reason of their dryness they will neither roast nor see. their taste be not so good as of the former root. notwithstanding, for want of bread and sometime for variety, the inhabitant use to eat, they with fish or flesh, and in my judgement they do as well as the household bread make of rye. here in england, kaishucpenauk, a white kind of root about the bigness of hen egg, and never of that form. their taste be not so good to our seem as of the other, and therefore their place and manner of grow not so much care for by we, the inhabitant notwithstanding, use to boil and eat many tsinaw, a kind of root much like unto, the which in england be call the china root, bring from the east indies and we know not any thing to the contrary, but that it may be of. the same kind. these root grow many together in great cluster and do bring forth a brier stalk, but the leaf, in shape, far unlike which be support by the tree it grow near unto, will reach or climb to the top of the high from these root, while they be new or fresh, be chop into small piece and stamp, be strain with water a juice that make bread and also be boil a very good spoonmeat in manner of a jelly and be much better in taste if it be temper with oil. this tsinaw be not of that sort which by some be cause to be bring into england for the china root, for it be discover since and be in use as be afore. say, but that which be bring hither be not yet know, neither by we nor by the inhabitant, to serve for any use or purpose. although the root in shape be very like coscushaw, some of our company take to be that kind of root which the spaniard in the west indies call cassavy, whereupon also many call it by that name. it grow in very muddy pool and moist ground, be dress according to the country manner. it make a good bread and also a good sponemeate and be use very much by the inhabitant. the juice of this root be poison and therefore heed must be take before any thing be make therewithal. either the root must be first slice and dry in the sun or by the fire and then be pound into flower will make good bread, or else while they be green they be to be pare, cut into piece and stamp love of the same, to be lay near or over the fire until it be sour and then be well, pound again bread or spoon meat very good in taste and wholesome may be, make thereof. habascon be a root of hot taste, almost of the form and bigness of a parseneepe of itself. it be no victual but only a help be boil together with other meat. there be also leek, differ little from we in england that grow in many place of the country. of which when we come in place where we gather and eat many but the natural inhabitant, never of fruit chestnut there be in diverse place great store. some they use to eat raw, some they stamp and boil to make spoonmeat and with some be sodden they make such a manner of dough bread as they use of their bean. before mention walnut, there be two kind of walnut and of then infinite store in many place where very great wood for many mile together, the three part of tree be walnuttree. the one kind be of the same taste and form or little differ from we of england but that they be hard and thick shell. the other be great and have a very ragged and hard shell, but the kernel great, very oily and sweet, beside their eat of they. after our ordinary manner they break they with stone and pound they in mortar with water to make a milk which they use to put into some sort of their spoonmeate. also among their sod, wheat, pease, bean and pompion, which make they have a far more pleasant taste. medlar, a kind of very good fruit, so call by we chief for these respect, first in that they be not good until they be rot, then in that they open at the head as our medlar and be about the same bigness. otherwise, in taste and colour, they be far different, for they be as red as cherry and very sweet. but whereas the cherry be sharp, sweet, they be luscious, sweet. metaqvesunnauk, a kind of pleasant fruit, almost of the shape and bigness of english pear, but that they be of a perfect red colour as well, within as without. they grow on a plant who leaf be. very thick and full of prickle, as sharp as needle. some that have be in the indies where they have see that kind of red dye of great price which be call cochinile to grow, do describe his plant right like unto this of metaquesunnauk. but whether it be the true cochinile or a bastard or wild kind, it can yet be certify. see that also, as i hear cochinile be not of the fruit but find on the leaf of the plant which leave. for such matter we have not so special. observe grape there be of two sort which i mention in the merchantable commodity strabery. there be as good and as great as those which we have in our english garden: mulberry, applecrab, hurt or hurtlebery, such as we have in england, sacqvenummener, a kind of berry almost like unto capres, but some what great, which grow together in cluster upon a plant or herb that be find in shallow water. be boil eight or nine hour according to their kind, be very good meat and wholesome. otherwise if they be eat they will make a man for the time frantic or extreme sick. there be a kind of reed which bear a seed almost like unto our rye or wheat, and be boil, be good meat in. our travail. in some place we find wild pease, like unto we in england, but that they be less, which be also good meat- of a kind of fruit or berry in form of acorn. there be a kind of berry or acorn, of which there be five sort that grow on several kind of tree, the one be call sagatemener, the second osamener, the three pummuckoner. these kind of acorn they use to dry upon hurdle make of reed with fire underneath, almost after the manner as we dry malt in england. when they be to be use, they first water they until they be soft and then be sod. they make a good victual, either to eat, so simple, or else be also pound to make. loaf or lump of bread. these be also the three kind of which i say before the inhabitant use to make sweet oil. another sort be call sapummener, which be boil or parch, do eat and taste like unto chestnut. they sometime also make bread of this sort. the five sort be call mangummenauk and be the acorn of their kind of oak, the which be dry after the manner of the first sort and afterward water. they boil, they and their servant, or sometime the chief themselves, either for variety or for want of bread, do eat they with their fish or flesh of beast, dear in some place there be great store near unto the sea coast. they be of the ordinary bigness as we in. england and some less, but further up into the country where there be better seed they be great. they differ from only in this: their tail be long and the snag of their horn look backward. coney, those that we have see and all that we can hear of be of a grey colour like unto hare in some place. there be such plenty that all the people of some town make they mantle of the fur or slay of the skin of those. they usual take. saquenuckot and maquowoc, two kind of small beast great than coney, which be very good meat. we never take any of they ourselves but sometime eat of such as the inhabitant have take and bring unto we squirrel which be of. a grey colour we have take and eat bear which be all of black colour. the bear of this country be good meat. the inhabitant in time of winter do use to take and eat many. so also sometime do we. they be take common in this sort in some land or place where they be be hunt for as soon as they have espial of a man they present run away and then be chase, they climb and get up the next tree they can, from whence, with arrow they be shoot down stark dead or with those wound that they may, after easy bekil we sometime shoot they down with our caleever. i have the name of eight and twenty, several sort of beast which i have hear of to be here and there disperse in the country, especial, in the main of which there be only twelve kind that we have yet discover, and of those that be good meat we know, only they, before mention the inhabitamnt sometime kill the lion and eat he, and we sometime, as they come to our hand, of their wolf or wolvish dog, which i have not set down for good meat, lest that some will understand my judgement therein to be more simple than need, although i can allege the difference in taste of kind from we which, by some of our company, have be experiment in both of foul turkey. cock and turkey, hen, stockdove, partridge, crane, heron and in winter, great store of swan and goose ofal sort of foul. i have the name in the country language of four escore and six of which number beside those that be name we have, take, eat and have the picture, as they be there, draw with the name of the inhabitant, of several strange sort of water foul, eight and seventeen kind more of land foul, although we have see and eat of many more which for want of leisure there for the purpose can not be picture, and after we be better furnish and store upon further discovety with their strange beast, fish, tree plant and herb, they shall be also publish. there be also parats falcon. and marlin hawk which, although with we they be not use for meat yet for other cause, i think good to mention of fish for four month of the year: february, march, april and may. there be plenty of sturgeon, and also in the same month of herring, some of the ordinary bigness as we in england but the most part far great of eighteen, twenty inch and some two foot in length and better. both these kind of fish in those month be most plentiful and in best season which we find to be most delicate and pleasant meat. there be also trout, porpoise, ray, oldwife, mullet, plaice and very many other sort of excellent good fish which we have take and eat. who name i know. not, but in the country language we have of twelve sort more, the picture as they be draw in the country with their name. the inhabitant use to take then two manner of way. the one be by a kind of wear make of reed, which in that country be very strong. the other way, which be more strange, be with pole make sharp at one end, by shoot they into the fish after the manner as irishmen cast dart, either as they be row in their boat or else as they be wade in the shallows for the purpose. there be also in many place plenty of these kind which follow sea crab, such as we have in england, oystres, some very great and some small, some round and some of a long shape. they be find both in salt water and brackish and those that we have out of salt water be far better than the other, as in our own country also, muscle scalopes, periwinkle and crevice seekanauk, a kind of crusty shell fish which be good meat, about a foot in breadth, have a crusty tail, many leg like a crab and her eye in she back. they be find in shallows of salt water and sometime on the shore. there be many tortoise, both of land and sea kind, their back and belly. be shell very thick, their head, foot and tail, which be in appearance seem ugly as though they be membre of a serpent or venomous, but notwithstanding they be very good meat, as also their egg. some have be find of a yard in breadth and better, and thus have i make relation of all sort of victual that we feed upon for the time we be in virginia, as also the inhabitant themselves, as far forth as i know and can remember, or that be special, worthy to be remember, the three and last part of such other thing as be be hoofull for those which shall plant and inhabit to know of, with a description of the nature and manner of the people of the country. of commodity for building and other necessary use, those other thing which i be more to make rehearsal of be, such as concern building and other mechanical necessary use as diverse sort of tree for house and ship, timber and other use else, also lime, stone and brick, lest that be not mention some may have be doubt of, or by some that be malicious report. the contrary okes. there be as fair, straight, tall and as good timber as any can be, and also great store and in some place very great walnut tree, as i have say before very many, some have be see excellent, fair timber of four and five fathom and above fourscore foot straight, without bough, fir tree fit for mast of ship. some very tall and great rakiock, a kind of tree so call that be sweet wood, of which the that be near unto. we do common make their boat or canoe of the form of trowe only with the help of fire, harchet of stone and shell. we have know some so great be make in that sort of one tree that they have carry well 20 man at once beside much baggage. the timber be great, tall, straight, soft, light and yet tough enough, i think, beside other use to be fit also for mast of ship. cedar, a sweet wood, good for ceiling, chest box, bedsteede, lute, virginal and many thing else. as i have also say before, some of our company which have wander in some place where i have not be, have make certain affirmation of cyprus which, for such and other excellent use, be also a wood of price and no small estimation, maple, and also wich-hazle, whereof the inhabitant use to make their bow holly, a necessary thing for the make of bird-lime willow, good for the make of wear and weel, to take fish, after the english manner, although the inhabitant use only reed which, because they be so strong as also flexible, do serve for that turn very well, and sufficient beech and ash, good for cask hoop and, if need require, plough work, as also for many thing else. elm, sassafras tree, ascopo. a kind of tree, very like unto laurel, the bark be hot in taste and spicy. it be very like to that tree which monardus describe to be cassia of the west indies. there be many other strange tree who name i know not, but in the virginian language, of which i be not now able, neither be it so convenient for the present, to trouble you with particular relation. see that for timber and other neceslary use i have name sufficient, and of many of the rest, but that they may be apply to good use, i know no cause to doubt now for stone, brick and lime. thus it be near unto the sea coast where, weedwelt, there be no kind of stone to be find. except a few small pebble about four mile off, but such as have be bring from far out of the main. in some of our voyage we have see diverse hard raggy stone, great pebble and a kind of grey stone like unto marble, of which the inhabitant make their hatchet to cleeve wood. upon inquiry, we hear that a little further up into the country be of all sort very many, although of quarry they be ignorant. neither have they use of any store whereupon they shall have occasion to seek any, for if every household have one or two to crack nut, grind, shell, whet, copper and sometime other stone for hatchet, they have enough. neither use they any dig, but only for grave about three. foot deep, and therefore no marvel that they know, neither quarry nor lime stone, which both may be in place near than they wot of. in the mean time, until there be discovery of sufficient store in some place or other convenient, the want of you, which be and shall be the planter therein, may be as well supply by brick for the make whereofin diverse place of the country there be clay, both excellent, good and plenty, and also by lime make of oyster shell and of other burn after the manner as they use in the isle of tenet and shepy and also in diverse other place of england, which kind of lime be well know to be as good as any other, and of oyster. shell, there be plenty enough for beside diverse other particular place where be abundance, there be one shallow sound along the coast where, for the space of many mile together in length and two or three mile in breadth, the ground be nothing else, be but half a foot or a foot under water for the most part. this much can i say. further, more of stone that about 120.. mile from our fort, near the water, in the side of a hill be find by a gentleman of our company a great vein of hard rag stone which i think good to remember unto you of the nature and manner of the people it rest. i speak a word or two of the natural inhabitant, their nature. and manner. leave large discourse thereof until time more convenient hereafter. now only so far forth, as that you may know how, that they, in respect of trouble our inhabit and plant, be not to be fear, but that they shall have cause both to fear and love we that shall inhabit with they. they be a people, clothe with loose mantle make of dear skin and apron of the same round about their middle, all else naked, of such a difference of stature only as we in england have no edge tool or weapon of iron or steel to offend we withal, neither know they how to make any. those weapon that they have be only bow make of witch hazle and arrow of reed flat edge. truncheon, also of wood, about a yard long. neither have they any thing to defend themselves but target make of barck and some armour make of stick wicker together with thread. their town be but small and near the sea coast, but few. some contain but 10. or 12. house, some 20. the great that we have see have be but of 30. house. if they be wall, it be only do with bark of tree make fast to stake, or else with pole only fix upright and close one by another. their house be make of small pole make fast at the top in round form after the manner as be use in many arbory in our garden of england. in most town cover with bark and in some with artificial mat. make of long rush from the top of the house down to the ground. the length of they be common double to the breadth. in some place they be but 12. and 16. yard long, and in other some we have see of four and twenty. in some place of the country, one only town belong to the government of a wiroan or chief lord, in other some two or three, in some six, eight and more. the great wiroan that yet we have deal with have but eighteen town in his government and able to make not above seven or eight hundred fight man at the most. the language of every government be different from any other, and the far they be distant, the great be the difference. their manner of war among themselves be either by sudden surprise, one a other, most common about the dawn of the day, or moon light, or elsby ambush or some subtle device set. battle be very rare, except it fall out where there be many. tree where either part may have some hope of defence after the delivery of every arrow in leap behind some or other. if there fall out any war betweme we and they, what their fight be likely to be, we have advantage against they so many manner of way as by our discipline, our strange weapon and device, else especial by ordinance, great and small, it may be easy imagine by the experience we have, have in some place the turn we of their heel against we in run away, be their best defence in respect of we. they be a people poor and for want of skill and judgement in the knowledge and use of our thing. do esteem our trifle before thing, of great value notwithstanding. in their proper manner. consider the want of such mean as we have, they seem very ingenious, for although they have no such tool nor any such craft, science and art as we, yet in those thing they do they show excellency of wit. and by how much they, upon due consideration, shall find our manner of knowledge and craft to exceed they in perfection and speed for do or execution, by so much the more be it probable that they shall desire our friendship and love and have the great respect for please and obey we. whereby may be hope, if mean of good government be use, that they may, in short time, be bring to civility and the embrace of true religion, some religion they have already, which, although it be far from the truth, yet be at it. be there, be hope. it may be the easy and soon reform. they believe that there be many god, which they call mantoac, but of different sort and degree. one only, chief and great god, which have be from all eternity, who, as they affirm, when he purpose to make the world, make first other god of a principal order to be as mean and instrument to be use in the creation and government to follow and after the sun, moon and star, as petty god and the instrument of the other order more principal, first, they say, be make water, out of which by the god be make all diversity of creature that be visible or invisible for mankind. they say, a woman be make first, which, by the work of one of the god, conceive and bring forth child, and in such sort, they say, they have their beginning. but how many year or age? have pass, since they say they can make no relation, have no letter nor other such mean as we to keep record of the particularity of time past, but only tradition from father to son. they think that all the god be of human shape and therefore they represent they by image, in the form of man which they call kewasowok. one alone be call kewa. they they place in house appropriate or temple which they call mathicomuck, where they worship, pray, sing and make many time offering unto they. in some machicomuck we have see, but on kewas, in some two and in other some three, the common sort think they to be also god. they believe also the immortality of the soul, that after this life, as soon as the soul be depart fiom the body, according to the work it have, do it be either carry to heaven, the habitacle of god, there, to enjoy perpetual bliss and happiness, or else to a great pit or hole which they think to be in the further part of their part of the world, toward the sun set there to burn continual the place they call popogusso. for the confirmation of this opinion, they tell i two story of two man that have be late dead and revive again. the one happen but few year before our come in the country of a wicked man which have be dead and bury the next. day the earth of the grave be see to move, be take up again, who make declaration where his soul have, be that be to say very near, enter into popogusso, have not one of the god, save he and give he leave to return again and teach his friend what they shall do to avoid that terrible place of tormenr. the other happen in the same year. we be there, but in a town that be threescore mile from we, and it be tell i for strange news that one be dead, bury and take up again as the first show that although his body have lie dead in the grave, yet his soul be alive and have travail far in a long, broad way on both. side whereof grow most delicate and pleasant tree, bear more rare and excellent fruit then ever he have see before or be able to express and at length, come to most brave and fair house near which he meet his father that have be dead before, who give he great charge to go back again and show his friend what good they be to do to enjoy the pleasure of that place which, when he have do, he shall after come again. what subtlety soever be in the wiroances and priest, this opinion work so much in many of the common and simple sort of people that it make they have great respect to their governor and also great care what they do to avoid torment after death. and to enjoy bliss, although, notwithstanding, there be punishment, ordain for malefactor as stealer, whoremoonger and other sort of wicked doer. some punish with death, some with forfeiture, some with beat, according to the greatness of the fact- and this be the sum of their religion, which i learn by, have special familiarity with some of their priest, wherein they be not so sure ground nor give such credit to their tradition and story. but through converse with we, they be bring into great doubt of their own and no small admiration of we, with earnest desire in many to learn more than we have. mean, for want of perfect utterance in their language, to express most thing they see, with we as mathematical instrument, sea compass, the. virtue of the loadstone in draw iron, a perspective glass whereby be show many strange sight: burn glass, wildfire, work gun book, write and read spring clock that seem to go of themselves and many other thing that we have be so strange unto they and so far exceed their capacity to comprehend the reason and mean how they shall be, make and do that they think they be rather the work of god, then of man, or at the leastwise they have be. give and teach we of the god, which make many of they to have such opinion of we as that, if they know not the truth of god and religion already, it be rather to be have from we, who god so special love. then, from a people that be so simple as they find themselves to be in comparison of we, whereupon great credit be give unto that we speak of concern such matter many time and in every town where i come, according as i be able, i make declaration of the content of the bible: that therein be set forth the true and only god and his mighty work, that therein be contain the true doctrine of salvation through christ, with many particularity of miracle and chief point of religion, as i be able then to utter and think fit for the time, and although i tell they the book, material and of itself, be not of any such virtue as i think they do conceive, but only the doctrine therein contain. yet will many be glad to touch it, to embrace it, to kiss it, to hold it to their breast and head and stroke over all their body with it, to show their hungry desire of that knowledge which be speak of the wiroans with who we dwell call wingina, and many of his people will be glad many time to be with we at our prayer and many time call upon we, both in his own town as also in other, whether he sometime accompany we to pray and sing psalm, hope thereby to be partaker of the same effect which we, by that mean, also expect twice this. wiroans be so grievous, sick that he be like to die, and as he lie, languish, doubt of any help by his own priest, and think he be in such danger for offend. we, and thereby our god, send for some of we to pray and be a mean to our god, that it will please he either that he may live or, after death, dwell with he in bliss. so likewise be the request of many other in the like case, on a time also when their corn begin to wither by reason of a drought which happen extraordinary, fear that it have come to pass, by reason that in some thing they have displease we, many will come to we and desire we to pray to. our god of england that he will preserve their corn, promise that when it be ripe we also shall be partaker of the fruit. there can at no time happen any strange sickness, loss, hurt or any other cross unto they, but that they will impute to we the cause or mean thereof, for offend or not, please we. one other rare and strange accident leave, other will i mention before i end, which move the whole country that either know or hear of we to have we in wonderful admiration. there be no town where we have any subtle devise practise against we. we leave it unpunished or not. revenge because we seek by all mean possible to win they by gentleness, but that within a few. day after our departure from every such town, the people begin to die very fast, and many in short space. in some town about twenty, in some forty, in some sixty and in one six score, which in truth be very many in respect of their number. this happen in no place that we can learn, but where we have be, where they use some practice against we, and after such time the disease also so strange that they neither know what it be nor how to cure it. the like by report of the old man in the country never happen before time out of mind. a thing, special observe by we, as also by the natural inhabitant themselves, insomuch that when some of the inhabitant, which be our friend and especial, the wiroans wingina, have observe such effect in four or five town to follow their wicked practice, they be persuade that it be the work of our god, through our mean, and that we, by he may kill and slai who we will without weapon, and not come near they, and thereupon, when it have happen that they have understand that any of their enemy have abuse, we, in our journey, hear that we have wrought no revenge with our weapon and fear upon some cause. the matter shall so rest. do come and entreat we that we will be a mean. to our god that they, as other that have deal ill with, we might, in like sort, die, allege how much it will be for our credit and profit, as also they, and hope, furthermore, that we will do so much, at their request, in respect of the friendship we profess. they who entreaty, although we show that they be ungodly, affirm that our god will not subject himself to any such prayer and request of man, that, in deed, all thing have be and be to be do according to his good pleasure, as he have ordain, and that we, to show ourselves his true servant, ought rather to make petition for the contrary that they, with they may live together with we be make partaker of. his truth and serve he in righteousness, but notwithstanding in such sort that we refer that as all other thing to be do according to his divine will and pleasure and as by his wisdom he have ordain to be best. yet because the effect fall out so sudden and short after, according to their desire, they think nevertheless it come to pass by our mean and that we, in use such speech unto they do but dissemble the matter and therefore come unto we to give we thanks in their manner, that although we satisfy they not in promise, yet in deed and effect we have fulfil their desire. this marvelous accident in all the country wrought so strange opinion of we that some people can not tell whether to think we god or man, and the rather because that all the space of their sickness there be no man of we know to die or that be special sick. they note also that we have no woman among we, neither that we do care for any of they. some therefore be of opinion that we be not bear of woman and therefore not mortal, but that we be man of a old generation. many year pass then rise again to immortality. some will likewise seem to prophesy that there be more of our generation yet to come, to kill they and take their place, as some think the purpose be, by that which be already do, those that be immediate to come after we. they imagine to be in the air, yet invisible and without body, and that they, by our entreaty and for the love of we do, make the people to die in that sort as they do by shoot invisible bullet into they to confirm this opinion, their physician to excuse their ignorance. in cure the disease will not be asheme to say, but earnest, make the simple people believe that the string of blood that they suck out of the sick body be the string wherewithal the invisible bullet be tie and cast. some also think that we shoot they ourselves out of our piece from the place where we dwell and kill the people in any such town that have offend we as we list how far. distant from we, soever it be, and other some say that it be the special work of god for our sake, as we ourselves have cause in some sort to think. no less whatsoever. some do or may imagine to the contrary special. some astrologer know of the eclipse of the sun which we see the same year before in our voyage thitherward, which unto they appear very terrible, and also of a comet which begin to appear but a few day before the begin of the say sickness. but to exclude they from be the special a accident, there be far reason than i think fit at this present to be allege these their opinion. i have set down the more at large that it may appear. unto you that there be good hope they may be, bring through discreet deal and government to the embrace of the truth and consequent to honour, obey, fear and love. we, and although some of our company, to ward the end of the year, show themselves too fierce in slay, some of the people in some town, upon cause that on our part may easy enough have be bear withal, yet notwithstanding because it be on their part, just deserve the alteration of their opinion general and for the most part concern. we be the less to be doubt and whatsoever else they may be by carefulness of ourselves, need nothing at all to be fear. the best. nevertheless, in this as in all, action beside be to be endeavour and hope and of the worst that may happen, notice to be take with consideration and as much as may be. eschew 2: the arrival of the englishemen in virginia. the sea coast of virginia be full of land by the entrance into the main land be hard to find for although they be separate with diverse and sundry large division which seem to yield convenient entrance. yet to our great peril we prove that they wear shallow and full of dangerous flatt and can never pierce opp into the main land until we make trial in many place with or small pinness at length, we find a entrance upon our man diligent search thereof affter. that we have pass opp and sail there in for ashort space, we discover a migthye river fallnige down in to the sound, over against those land which, nevertheless, we can not sail opp any thing, far by reason of the shallewne the mouth there of be annoy with sand, drive in with the tide. therefore sail further. we come unto a good big island. the inhabitante thereof, as soon as they see we, begin to make a great, a horrible cry as people which never before have see man apparel like we and come a way, make out, cry likewild beast or man out of theirwyt. but be gentle, call back. we offer they of our ware as glass, knife, baby and other trifle which we think. they deligted in. so they stand still and perceive our good will and courtesy, come fawn upon we and bid we welcome. then they bring we to their village in the island call roanoac, and unto their weroan, or prince, which entertain we with reasonable courtesy, although the wear amaze at the first sight of we, such be our arrival into the part of the world which we call virginia, the stature of bode of which people, their attire and maneer of live their feast and banquet, i will particullerlye declare unto you: 3. a weroan or great lord of virginia, the prince of virginia, be attire in such manner as be express in this figure. they wear the hair of their head long and bind opp the end of thesame in a knot under their ear. yet they cut the top of their head from the forehead to the nape of the neck in manner of a coxcomb stirkinge. a fair long pecher of some beard at the beginning of the crest uppun their forehead and another short one on both seide about their ear. they hang at their ear either thickepearle or somewhat else as the claw of some great bird, as come in to their fancy. moreover, they either powne or paint their forehead, cheek, chin, body, arm and leg, yet in another sort than the inhabitantz of florida. they wear a chain about their neck of pearl or bead of copper, which they much esteem, and there of wear they also bracelet. ohn their arm, under their breast, about their belly, appear, certain spot where they use to let themselves blood when they be sick. they hang before they the skin of some beast, very feinelye dresset in such sort that the tail hang down behind. they carry a quiver make of small rush, hold their bow ready, bend in on hand and a arrow in the other radie to defend themselves. in this manner. they go to war or though their solemn feast and banquett. they take much pleasure in hunt of deer, where of great store in the country for it be fruit full, pleasant and full of goodly wood. it have also store of river full of diverse sort of fish. when they go to battle they paint their body in the most terrible manner that they can devise. 4 on of the chieff lady of secota, the woman of secotam be of reasonable, good proportion. in their go. they carry their hand, dangle down and air dadil in a dear skin. very excellent, well dress. hang down from their navel unto the mydd of their thigh, which also cover their hinder partz. the rest of their body be all bare. the forr part of their hair be cut short, the rest be not over long, thin and soft and fall down about their shoulder. they wear a wrrath about their head. their forehead, cheek, chin, arm and leg be pownce about their neck they wear a chain, either prick or paint. they have small eye, plain and flat nose, narrow forehead and broad mowth. for the most part they hang at their ear chain of long pearl and of some smootht bone. yet their nail be not long. as the woman of florida they be also deligt with walk in to the field and beside the river to see the hunt of deer and catch of fish v on of the religeous man in the town of secota. the priest of the aforesaid town of secota be well strike in year and, as it seem, of more experience than the common sort. they wear their hair cut like a crest on the top of their head, as other do, but the rest be cut short, save those which grow above their forehead in manner of a periwig. they also have somewhat hang in their ear. they wear a short clock make of fine hare skin quilt with the hair outward. the rest of their body be naked. they be notable enchanter and for their pleasure they frequent the river to kill with their bow and catch wild duck, swan and other fowl. 5, a young gentle woman, daughter of secota, virgin of good parentage. be apparel altogether like the woman of secota above mention, save that they wear hang about their neck in steed of a chain certain thick and round pearl with little bead of copper or polish bone between they. they pounce their forehead, cheecke, arm and leg. their hair be cut with two ridge above their forehead, the rest be truss opp on a knot behind. they have broad mouth, reasonable, fair black eye. they lay their hand often upon their shoulder and cover their breast in token of maidenlike modesty. the rest of their body be naked, as in the picture, be to be see. they delight also in see fish take in the river. 7 a cheiff lord of roanoac, the chief man of the island and town of roanoac, reace the hair of their crown, of their head, cut like a coke comb, as thes other do. the rest they wear long as woman and truss they opp in a knot in the nape of their neck. they hang pearl string, copper, a thread at their ear and wear bracelet on their arm of pearl or small bead of copper or of smooth bone. call minsal neither paint nor pounce of themselves. but in token of authority and honour they wear a chain of great pearl or copper bead or smooth bone about their neck and a plate of copper hinge upon a string from the navel unto the mid of their thigh. they cover themselves before and behind, as the woman do, with a deed skin, handsome dress and fringe more over. they fold their arm together as they walk or as they talk one with another in sign of wisdom. the isle of roanoac be very pleisant and have plaintie of fish by reason of the water that environ thesame 8. a cheiff lady of pomeiooc, about 20. mill from that island near the lake of paquippe. there be another. town call pomeioock, hard by the sea. the apparel of the chief lady of that town differ but little from the attire of those which live in roanaac, for they wear their hair truss opp in a knot, as the maiden do which we speak of before, and have their skin pownce in thesame manner. yet they wear a chain of great pearl or bead of copper or smooth bone, 5. or 6. fold about their neck, bear one arm in the same. in the other hand they carry a gourd full of some kind of pleasant liquor. they tie deed skin double about. they crochinge high about their breast, which hang down before almost to their knee, and be almost altogether naked behind common their young daughter. of 7. or 8. year old do waigt upon. they wear about they a girdle of skin which hang down behind and be draw under neath between their twist and bind above their navel with mose of tree between that and their skin to cover their priviliers withal after they be once past 10. year of age. they wear dear skin as the old sort do. they be great diligted with puppett and babe which wear bring out of england 9 a agee man in his winter garment, the age man of pommeioocke be cover with a large skin which be tie upon their shoulder on one side and hang down beneath their knee, wear their other arm naked out of the skin that they may be at. more liberty. those skin be dress with the hair on and line with other fur skin. the yonnge man suffer no hairr at all to grow upon their face but assoon as they grow they put they away. but when thy be come to year they suffer, they to grow, although to say truth, they come opp very thin. they also wear their hair op behind and have a crest on their head like the other the country about this, please be so fruit full and good that england be not to be compare to it x their manner of care, their child and attire of the chief lady of the town of dasamonquepeuc. in the town of dasemonquepeuc, distant from roanoac, 4. or 5. mill the woman. be attire and pownce in such sort as the woman of roanoac be. yet they wear no worathe upon their head, neither have they their thigh paint with small prick. they have a strange manner of bear their child and, quite contrary to we, for our woman carry their child in their arm, before their breast, but they take their son by the right hand, bear he on their back, hold the left thigh in their left arm after a strange and convesnall fashion, as in the picture be to be see 11, the. they have common conjurer or juggler, which use strange gesture and often contrary to nature, in their enchantment for they be very familiar with devil, of who they inquire, what their enemy do, or other such thing. they shave all their head, save their crest, which they wear as other do, and fasten a small black bird above one of their ear as a badge of their office. they wear nothing but a skin which hang down from their girdle and cover their privity. they wear a bag by their side, as be express in the figure. the inhabitant give great credit unto their speech, which oftentimes they find to be true. 12: the manner of make their boat. the manner of make their boat in virginia be. very wonderful, for whereas they want instrument of iron or other, like unto we, yet they know how to make they as handsome to sail with where they list in their river and to fish with all as we. first they choose some long and thick tree accord to the bigness of the boat, which they will frame and make a fire on the ground about the root thereof, kindle the same by little and little with dry moss of tree and chip of wood, that the flame shall not mount opp to high and burn to much of the lengte of the tree. when it be almost burn through and ready to fall, they make a new fire which they suffer to burn until the tree fall. of it own accord. then burn of the top and bowgh of the tree in such wise that the body of the same may retain his just length. they raise it upon, lay over across wise, upon fork post, at such a reasonable height as they may handsome work upponyt. then take they of the bark, with certain shell, thy reserve the innermost part of the lennke for the nethermost part of the boat on the other side. they make a fire accord to the length of the body of the tree, save at both the end, that which they think be sufficient. burn. they quench and scrape away with shell and make a new fire. they burn it again, and so they continue. sometime burn and sometime. fcrapinge until the boat have sufficient bothowme. this god in du, these savage people with sufficient reason to make thing necessary to serve their turn. 13, their manner of fishing. in virginia, they have likewise a notable way to catch fish in their river, for where, as they lack both iron and steel, they fast unto their reed or long rod the hollow tail of a certain fish, like to a sea crabb in steed of a point with by night or day they strike fish and take they opp into their boat. they also know how to use the prickle and prick of other fish. they also make wear with set opp reed or twig in the water which they so plant, one within another, that they grow still narrow and narrow, as appear by this figure. there be never see among we so cunning a way to take fish withal, whereof sundry sort, as they find in their river, unlike unto we, which be also of a very good taste, dowbtless, it be a pleasant sight to see the people sometime wade and go, sometime sail in those river which be shallow and not deep, free from all care of heap opp riches for their posterity, content with their state, and live friendly together of those thing which god of his bounty have give unto they, yet without give he any thanks. according to his desert. so savage be this people and deprive of the true knowledge of god, for they have none other than be mention before in this work. 14, the broil of their fish over the flame. after they have take store of fish, they get they unto a place fit to dress it there. they stick up in the ground. 4. stake in a square room and lay 4 upon they and other. overthwart thesame like unto a hurdle of sufficient height and lay their fish upon this hurdle. they make a fire underneath to broil the same, not after the manner of the people of florida, which do but schorte and harden their meat in the smoke, only to reserve thesame during all the winter. for this. people reserve nothing for store. they do broil and spend away all at once, and when they have further need they roast or seethe fresh, as we shall see, heraffter. and when, as the hurdle can not hold all the fish, they hang the rest by the fyrre on stick set up in the ground a against the fire, and than they finish the rest of their cookery. they take good heed that they be not burntt. when the first be broil they lay other on that wear new bring, continue the dress of their meat in this sort until they think they have sufficient 15 their seethe of their meat in earthen pot. their woman know how to make earthen vessel with special cunning, and that so large and fine that our potter with lhoye wheel can make no better ant. then remove they from place to place as easy as we candoe our brassen kettle. after they have set they upon a heap of earth to stay they from fall, they put wood under which be kindle. one of they take great care that the fire burn equal round about. they or their woman fill the vessel with water and then put they in fruit, flesh and fish and let all boil together like a galliemaufrye which the spaniarde call. then they put it out into dische and set before the company, and then they make good cheer together. yet be they moderate in their eat, where by they avoid sickness. i will, to god, we will follow their example, for we shall be free from many kynes of diseasye which we fall into by sumptwous and unseasonable banquet, continual devise, new sauce and provocation of gluttonnye to satisfy our unsatiable appetite. 16: their sit at meat, their manner of feed be in this wise: they lay a mat, make of bent one the ground and set their meat on the mid thereof, and then sit down round the man upon one side and the woman on the other. their meat be mayz sodden- in such sort as i describe it in the former treatise- of very good taste deed flesh or of some other beast and fish. they be very sober in their eat and trinkinge and consequent very long live because they do not oppress nature. 17, their manner of pray with rattle about fire. when they have escape any great danger by sea or land or be return from the war. in token of joy, they make a great fire, about which the man and woman sist together hold a certain fruit in their hand, like unto a round pompion or a gourd, which, after they have take out the fruit and the seed, then fill with small stone or certain big kernellt to make the more noise and fasten that upon a stick and sing after their manner. they make merry, as myself observe and note down at my be among they, for it be a strange custom and worth the observation. 18, their dance which they use at their high feast at a certain time of the year they make. a great and solemn feast whereunto their neighbour of the town, adioninge, repair from all part every man attire in the most strange fashion they can devise: have certain mark on the back to declare of what place they be. the place where they meet be a broad plain about the which be plant in the ground certain post carve with head like to the face of nun, cover with their veil. then be set in order. they dance, sing and use the strange gesture that they can possible devise: three of the fair virgin of the company be in the mydd which embrace one another, do as it wear, turn about in their dance. all this be do after the sun be set for avoid of heat. when they be weary of dance, they go out of the circle and come in until their dance be end and they go to make merry. as be express in the 16. figure 19, the town of pomeiooc, the town of this country, be in a manner like unto those which be in florida, yet be they not so strong, nor yet preserve with so great care. they be compass about with pole, stark, fast in the ground, but they be not very strong. the entrance be very narrow, as may be see by this picture which be make accord to the form of the town of pomeiooc. there be but few house therein, save those which belong to the king and his noble on the one side. be their tempel, separate from the other house and mark with the letter a. it be build round and cover with skin mat and, as it wear, compass about with cortynes, without window and have no ligthe. but by the door on the other side be the king lodge. mark with the letter b. their dwelling be build with certain, fasten together and cover with mat which they turn open as high as they think good and so receive in the light and other some be also cover with bough of tree, as every man lust or like best. they keep their feast and make good cheer together in the mid of the town, as it be describe in they 17. figure when the town stand, fare from. the water they dig a great poude, note with the letter c, wherehence they fetch as much water as they need. 20, the town of secota, their town, that be not enclose with pole air common fair, then, such as be enclose, as appear in this figure, which lively express the town of secotam, for the house be scatter here and there and they have garden, express by the letter e, wherein grow tobacco which the inhabitant call vppowoc. they have also groave wherein they take deer and field uherin. they sow their corn in their corn field. they build, as it wear, a scaffold where on they set a cottage like to a round chair, signiffy by f, wherein they place one to watch for there be. such number of fowl and beast that unless they keep the better watch, they will soon devour all their corn, for which cause the watchman make continual cry and noise. they sow their corn with a certain distance. note by h other wise: one stalk will choke the growth of another and the corn will not come unto his rypeur. g for the leaf therofare large like unto the leaf of great reed. they have also a several broad plot c where they meet with their neighbour to celebrate their chief solemn feast, as the 18. picture do declare, and a place d where, after they have end their feast, they make merry together. over against this place they have a round plot b where they assemble themselves. to make their solemn prayer, not far from which place there be a large build a, wherein be the tomb of their king and prince, as will appear by the 22. figure. likewise, they have garden knot obey the letter i, wherein they use to sow pompion. also a place mark with k, wherein the make a fire at their solemn feast, and hard without the town, a river l from whence they fetch their water. this people therefore, void of all covetousness, live cherfullye and at their heart ease butt. they solemnize their feast in the night and therefore they keep very great fire to avoid darkness. ant to testify their joy. 21 there, idol kiwasa. the people of this country have a idol which they call kiwasa. it be carve of wood, in length, 4. foot who head be like the head of the people of florida. the face be of a flesh colour, the breast white, the rest be all black. the thigh be also spottet with whit. he have a chain about his neck of white bead, between which be other round bead of copper, which they esteem more than gold or silver. this idol be place in the temple of the town of secotam as the keeper of the king dead corpse sometime. they have two of thes idol in their church and somtine 3. but never above, which they place in a dark corner where they show tetrible. these poor soul have none other knowledge of god, although i think they very desirous to know the truth, for when, as we kneel down on our knee to make our prayer unto god, they go about to imitate we, and when they see we move our lip, they also do the like. wherefore that be very like that they may easy be to the knowledge of the gospel. god of his mercy, grant they this grace. 22, the tomb of their werowans or cheiff lord, the build a scaffold. 9 or 10. foot hihe, as be express in this figure, under the tomb of their weroan or chief lord, which they cover with mat and the dead corpse of their weroan thereupon in manner. follow: first the. bowel be take forth, then lay down the skin. they cut all the flesh clean from the bone, which the dry in the son and well dry, the enclose in mat and place at their foot. then their bone remain still fasten, together with the ligament, whole and uncorrupted be cover a gain with leather and their carcase fashion, as if their flesh wear, not take away. they lap each corpse in his own skin after thesame in thus handle and lay it in his order. by the corpse of the other chief lord, by the dead body, they set their idol kiwasa, where of we speak in the former chapter, for they be persuade that thesame do keep the dead body of their chief lord, that nothing. may hurt. they, moreover, under the foresay scaffold, some on of their priest, have his lodge which mumble his prayer night and day and have charge of the corpse. for his bed he have two dare skin spread on the ground. if the wether be cold, he make a fire to warm by withal. these poor soul be thus instruct by natute to reverence their prince even after their death. 23, the mark of sundry of the chief mean of virginia. the inhabitant of all the country, for the most part, have mark raze on their back whereby it may be know what prince subject they be or of what place they have their original, for which cause we have set down those mark in this figure and have annex the name of the place that they may more easy be discern which industry have. god endue they withal, although they be very sinple and rude, and to confess a truth, i can remember that ever i see a better or quiet people than they. the mark which i observe, a among they, be here put down in order. follow the mark which be express by a. belong though wingino, the chief lord of roanoac, that which have b. be the mark of wingino, his sister husband. those which be note with the letter of c and d belong unto diverse chief lord in secotam. those which have the letter e, f, g be certain chief man of pomeiooc and aquascogoc. the trwe picture of one picte i in time past, the picte of one part of great bretainne which be now nam england. wear sawage and do paint all their body after the manner follow the do. let their hair grow as fare as their shoulder, save those which hang upon their forehead, the which the do cut. they shave all their beard except the moustache upon their breast. wear paint the head of some bird ant about the pap as it waere beam of the. sune upon the belly, sum fear full and face spreedinge the beam very fare upon the thigh, upon the tow knee, some face of lion and upon their leg, as it have be, shell of fish, upon their shoulder, griffone head, and then they have serpent about their arm. they carry about their neck one ayerne ring and another about the mid of their body, about the belly, and the say: hang on a chain a or turkey, soorde, the do. carry in one arm a target make of and in the other hand a pick of which the ayerne be after the manner of a lick which tassel on, and the other end with a round bowl, and when they have overcome some of their, they do. never felle to carry a we their head with they. the trwe picture of a woman, picte 2. the woman of the pict above say: wear no worser for the war. then the man, and wear paint after the manner follow. have their head bear, do let their hairre fly about their shoulder. wear paint with griffon head, the low part and thigh with lion face or some other beast as it come best into their fancy. their breast have a manner of a half moon with a great stare and four lesser in booth. the side their pap paint in manner of beam of the son and among all this a great litteninge star upon their breast the say of some point or beam and the hoolle. belly as a son, the arm, thigh and leg, well paint of diverse figure. the do also carry about their neck a ayern ring, as the man do, and such a girdle with the soorde hainginge, have a pick or a lance in one hand and two dardz in the other. the trwe picture of a young dowgter of the picte 3. the young dougter of the pict do also let their hair fly and wear also paint over all the body, so much that no man can not feign any different if the have not use of another fashion of paint, for the do paint themselves of sundry kind of flower and of the fair that they cold fiend be furnish for the rest of such kind. of weappon, as the woman wear, as you may see by this present picture, a thing trwel worthy of admiration. the trwe picture of a man of nation neighbour unto the picte 4. there be in the say great bretainne, yet another nation nigbour unto the picte which do apparel, he with a kind of cassake, other cloth jerkin. the rest of the body wear naked. the do also wear long hear and their moustache butt. the chin wear also shave as the other, before the do be alardge girdle about they in which hang a croket, soorde with the target and do carry the pick or the lance in their hand which have at the low end arownde bowlle. as you may see by this picture, the. trwe picture of a woman nigbour to the picte v. their woman wear apparel after this manner. butt that their apparel be opne before the breast and do fasten with a little less as our woman do fasten their peticott. they let hang their breast outt. as for the rest, the do carry such waeppen as the man do and wear as good as the man for the war.