to the true, honourable and right worthy knight, sr thomas smith, governor of the east india, muscou^a, northwest passage, summer island company and treasurer f^r the first colony in virginia. honourable sir haui^g, in the time of my residence in virginia, as it be true, my employment then invite i thereunto collect for my own use and benefit some few occurrent and accident which be obvious in all new employment, a thing which perhaps but few regard there to busy themselves with and few here to peruse. i resolve, indeed only to delight myself and some who i be bind to be thankful unto, in that kind, with the unworthy view of they, the rather, because i have see many publication and impression of those affair by those. who i be bind to be thankful unto in that kind, with the unworthy view of they, the rather, because i have see many publication and impression of those affair by those who book, i shall be proud to bear after they. but such be the perverseness of mankind, such their incredulity of every thing save what their eye tell they to b^ true, yea, such their backwardness in the pursuit of honorable enterprise, that though there shall be no end of writing, but every day shall draw forth his line and every line his real encouragement, as i may, in the state of the colony as it now stand, it be hard to say whether one of so many thousand as abound in england may be thereby. encouragement as i may. in the state of the colony as it now stand, it be hard to say whether one of so many thousand as abound in england may be thereby move to join with other right worthy dispose to become a har^y and devote furtherer of a action so noble as be this which thing. if i fail, in effect, i shall not lose much labour, since when i undertake this task i imagine no such thing, but mere my own delight and content. it shall be reward enough for i to express my endeavour there, though not equal with the best, yet not idle misspend. i labour not to seduce or betray any to a action or employment wherein, once personal engage, they shall have. endeavour there, though not equal with the best, yet not idle misspend. i labour not to seduce or betray any to a action or employment wherein, once personal engage, they shall have any cause to blame. i neither will i force the help of any man purse more than voluntary. if i can, beyond my art, use such effectual persuasion, there be enough in my opinion. and those, the worthy of england already unite as the way be now lay down to perfect this business. who endeavour, if they proceed without black slide and therein persist some few year long, shall be requite and pay with such treble interest as it shall not repent he that be now most cold in the pursuit to have refuse more competitor. some few year long, shall be requite and pay with such treble interest as it shall not repent he that be now most cold in the pursuit to have, refuse more competitor to be sharer in the return profit. your noble self, sir, ever emulous of virtue and honourable enterprise, shall shine to the world, more noble in the uphold of this employment, though it appear, as in the beginning, full of discouragement which nevertheless i know yourself. rest, so assure. be now more near then ever to perfection. your innate and habitual virtue need no spur your honourable endeavour. well, witness the same will god as be you all. man offering though not so ample, be so free, so hearty sacrifice, then cou^d they not thus long. spur your honourable endeavour. well, witness the same will god as be you all, man, offering though not so ample. be so free, so hearty sacrifice, then, cou^d they not thus long have want their reward, perhaps for no other ^nd detain, but to make other a thing which god profess to love and delight in more cheerful giver. accept, worthy sir, this unworthy treatise, the b^st testimony of my gratuity which, as yet, my disability may render truth, shall shroud and patronize it from the malevolent, detract multitude who blame though it incur their shame and imputation, it scorn and return unto they my zeal to the action, though i may seem to have forsake it, give i the heart to publish what i know to the and imputation it scorn, and return unto they my zeal to the action, though i may seem to have, forsake it, give i the heart to publish what i know to the world, to your s^lfe, particular your own worth, and depart to i irrequitable grant but that favourable acceptation which ever accompany your worth, and i shall ever acknowledge myself whole you, in hope, whereof i conclude with my service and rest at your command to be dispose off ralph hamo^ to the reader, ignorant or envious if you be reader, ^t be not to satisfy the best of you that i now write a more seasonable time i must take to embark myself in so rough a sea and come off safe. only his authority who satisfy the best of you that i now write a more seasonable time i must take to embark myself in so rough a sea and come off safe. only his authority who have power to compel myself and duty have command i to satisfy his affection, covetous of the dignity and truth of this pious plantation with these particular, that they be get abroad and become public be no purpose. in their first conception, though some respect have, make they so now a naked and unstrudied discourse i acknowledge without note reserve but in memory to help it. yet thus much i do avow that it have duty and truth to make good all other, the want and imperfection of it, i will labour in no further excuse. help it. yet thus much i do avow that it have duty and truth to make good all other the want and imperfection of it. i will labour in no further excuse concer^ing the virginie pious work itself, how it have thrive under the command both of sir thomas gate, knight governor, and sir thomas dale, knight and marshal of the colony, these three year and more, let i say. if, set aside thy own overweening and singularity, thy unhood eye can now at length look upon it after so many year of her patience, a^d passion, thou will easy acknowledge who finger have the al^^^-^uidance of it. and then, i doubt, nothing be^le^sed to here thyself entreat out of those gre^t plenty and have which god have. passion, thou will easy acknowledge who finger have the al^^^-^uidance of it. and then, i doubt, nothing be^le^sed to here. thyself, entreat out of those gre^t plenty and have which god have lend thou, to spare a little-little portion to the full, settle and finish up a, a holy house, a sanctuary to he, the god of the spirit of all flesh, among such poor and innocent, seduce, savage as we treat off on who, let our hope be that it have vouchsafe he now to be sufficient revenge for their forefather ingratitude and treason. and now, in his appoint time, to des^^d in mercy, to lighten they that sit in darkness and in the shadow o^ death, and to direct their foot in the way of peace. now, in his appoint time to des^^d in mercy, to lighten they that sit in darkness and in the shadow o^ death, and to direct their foot in the way of peace. sure, young though in year and knowledge i may be say to be, yet, let i remember to thou perhaps much know, reader, what the wise man that ever write or speak, except he that be both god and man have, say that such who bring other unto righteousness shall themselves shine as the star in the firmament, and doubtless, i do believe, even among the rest of my article, when these poor heathen shall be bring to entertain the honour of the name and glory of the gospel of our bless saviour, when they shall among the rest of my article. when these poor heathen shall be bring to entertain the honour of the name and glory of the gospel of our bless saviour, when they shall testify of the true and everliving god and jesus christ to be their salvation, their knowledge, so enlarge and sanctify that without he they confess their eternal death, i do believe, i say, and how can it be otherwise, that they shall break out and cry with rapture of so inexplicable mercy. bless be the king and prince of england, and bless be the english nation and bless for ever. be the most high god, possessor of heaven and earth, that send these english as ^ngels to bring such glad tiding among we. these will be: english nation and bless for ever. be the most high god, possessor of heaven and earth that send these english as ^ngels to bring such glad tiding among we. these will be doubtless the empaticke effect and exultation of ^his so christian work. and may these nothing move. alas, let s^^bal^at and tobiah, papist and plain, ammonite and horonite the seumme and dregs of the people. let they mock at this holy business. they that be filthy, let they be filthy still and let such swine wallow in the mire. but let not the rod of the wick^d fal^ upon the l^t of the righteous, let not they shrink back and call in their help from this so glorious enterprise, w^ich the prophet isaiah call the declare of. the wick^d fal^ upon the l^t of the righteous. let not they shrink back and call in their help from this so glorious enterprise. w^ich the prophet isaiah call the declare of god to the left hand, but let they that know the work re^oice and be glad in the happy success of it. proclaim that it be the everliving god that reign in england and unto the end of the world. excuse i, courteous reader, if carry beyond my purpose. i declaim passionate in this passive and innocent despise work which i be sure be so full of goodness and have be almost six year, a suffer and eye witness of his now well nigh at chieu^d happiness, the full and unstained reportory of every accident whereof. so full of goodness and have be almost six year a suffer and eye witness of his now well nigh at chieu^d happiness. the full and unstained reportory of every accident, whereof, even from his beginning, together with the cause of the backwardness in prosperity, thus ^og touch at the miraculous delivery of the scatter company cast upon the bermuda when those fortunate island, like so many fair neriades which receive our wrack company with the death of that pure and noble heart gentleman, sir george sumers, di there. my purpose be, short at large, to publish that at length some one escape leper among so many save may return back and pay his u^wes of thanks. give unto that ever to be praise merciful providence that bring. publish that at length. some one escape, leper among so many save, may return back and pay his u^wes of thanks. give unto that ever to be. praise, merciful providence that bring we thither until when. i wish thy zealous and ferne^t thought and endeavour to a business so full of piety ^^. be this our virginie plantation. ralph hamor, a true discourse of the present estate of virginia and the success of the affair there till the 18 of june 1614. the many publication and impression of virginia, a employment wherein, to this day, myself with many other, unstaid head and thirsty after new design, have be to unprofitable. engage may just excuse my silence, do not, the filial duty whereby, in all thing, to the utmost. with many other, unstaid head and thirsty after new design, have be to unprofitable engage may just excuse my silence. do not the filial duty whereby, in all thing, to the utmost of my power, i be bind to obey my father, compel i, unwilling thereunto, a task i know by himself and other, mere because i have be, thus impose upon i in the undertake and performance whereof i hearty wish that my poor relation, rich only in truth, as i shall clear, justify myself by cie witness also, may give any credit or encouragement to proceed in a business so full of honour and worth, whereunto, if there be no secondary cause, the already publish end. i mean the glory of god in the conversion of. to proceed in a business so full of honour and worth whereunto, if there be no secondary cause, the already publish end. i mean the glory of god in the conversion of those infidel and the honour of our king and country, which by right may claim at the least their superfluity from those who god have in this world make his dispensor and purse-bearer, may be a sufficient spur to resolve, christian especial, the state and condition of our colony. so stand when i leave it, and i assure myself in this time, grow more mature that a honest heart will even relent and mourn to think how poor, i dare not say unworthy, it be. prosecute. it be true that now, after five year intestine war, mature that a honest heart will even relent and mourn to think how poor, i dare not say unworthy, it be prosecute. it be true that now, after five year intestine war with the revengeful, implacable indian, a firm peace, not again easy to be break, have be late conclude, not only with the nighbour and border indidian, as on pataomecke, topahanah and other river, but even with that subtle old, revengeful powhatan and all the people under his subjection. for all who powhatan himself stand firm engage, by which mean we shall not only be furnish with what commodity their country yield and have all the help they may afford. usin our endeavour, as they be easy, teach and may, by lenity and fair usage, as sir, furnish with what commodity their country yield, and have all the help they may afford. usin our endeavour, as they be easy teach and may, by lenity and fair usage, as sir thomas dale, now principal commander there and most worthy the honour he hold be, well experience in their disposition and according make use of they be, bring be natural, though ingenious, yet idle give, to be no less industrious, nay, to exceed our english especial, those which we hitherto and as yet be furnish with, who, for the most part, no more sensible than beast, will rather starve in idleness, witness their former proceed than feast in labour. do not the law compel they thereunto, but also, which will be most for our benefit, our own. beast will rather starve in idleness, witness their former proceed, than feast in labour. do not the law compel they thereunto? but also, which will be most for our benefit? our own man may, without hazard, i may say with security by selfe-experience, follow their feveral labour whereby twenty shall now be able to perform more than heretofore have be. forty, though i conjecture and assure myself that you can be ignorant by what mean this peace have be thus happy both for our proceed and the welfare of the natural. conclude yet for the hono^^ of captain argol, who endeavour in the action, entitle he most worthy. i judge it no whit impertinent in my discourse to insert they which w^th as much brevity as i may. of captain argol who endeavour in the action entitle he most worthy. i judge it no whit impertinent in my discourse to insert they which w^th as much brevity, as i may not omit the circumstance most pertinent and material, i shall endeavour the general letter, upon my knowledge, direct and send to the honourable virginia council. be most of they, though myself most unworthy by i pen, have intimate how that the everworthy gentleman capt arga^^, in the heat of our home fury and disagreement, by his best experience of the disposition of those people, partly by gentle usage and partly by the composition and mixture of threat, have ever keep fair and friendly quarter with our neighbour border, another river of affinity, yea consanguinity, no less. partly by gentle usage and partly by the composition and mixture of threat, have ever keep fair and friendly quarter with our neighbour, border another river of affinity, yea consanguinity, no less near than brother to rowhatan, such be his well know temper and discretion. yea to this pass have he bring they that they assure trust upon what he promise and be as careful in perform their mutual promise as though they contend to make that maxim that there be no faith to be hold with infidel a mere and absurd paradox. nay, as i have hear himself relate. who be they have even be pensive and discontent with themselves because they know not how to do he some acceptable good turn, which may not only pleasure. have hear himself relate, who be they have even be pensive and discontent with themselves because they know not how to do he some acceptable good turn which may not only pleasure he but even be profitable to our whole colony and plantation. yea ever assure he that when the time shall present occasion, they will take hold of her forelock and be the instrument to work he content and even. thus they prove themselves as honest performer, as liberal promiser. it chance powhatan delight and da^ling his daughter pocahuntas, who fame have even be spread in england by the title of nonparella of virginia in her princely progress, if i may so term. it take some pleasure, in the absence of captain argall, to be among her. in england by the title of nonparella of virginia, in her princely progress, if i may so term. it take some pleasure, in the absence of captain argall, to be among her friend at pataomecke, as it seem by the relation i have, employ thither as shopkeeper to a fare to exchange some of her father commodity, for they where reside some three month or long. it fortune upon occasion either of promise or profit captain argall to arrive there who pocahuntas, desirous to renew her familiarity with the english and delight to see they as unknown, fearful perhaps to be surprise, will glad visit as she do of who no soon have captain argall intelligence. but he deal with a old friend and adopt brother of his. unknown, fearful perhaps to be surprise, will glad visit as she do of who no soon have captain argall intelligence, but he deal with a old friend and adopt brother of his, japazeus, how and by what mean he may procure her captive. assure he that now or never be the time to pleasure he, if he intend indeed that love which he have, make profession of, that in ransom of hi^ he may redeem some of our english man and arm, now in the possession of her father. promise to use she withal, fair and gentle, entr^ary japazeus. well, assure that his brother, as he promise, will use she courteous promise, his best endeavour and secrecy to accomplish his desire and thus wrought it make his wife. gentle entr^ary japazeus, well assure that his brother, as he promise, will use, she courteous promise, his best endeavour and secrecy to accomplish his desire and thus wrought it, make his wife a instrument which sex have ever be most powerful in beguile enticement to effect his plot which he have thus lay. he agree that himself, his wife and pocahuntas will accompany his brother to the water side, whether come his w^^e shall fair a great and long desire to go aboard and see the ship which be there three or four time before she have never see, and shall be earnest with her husband to permit she he seem angry with she make, as he pretend so unnecessary a request especial- be without the company of. have never see and shall be earnest with her husband to permit she. he seem angry with she. make, as he pretend, so unnecessary a request. especial be without the company of woman, which denial she take unkind must feign to weep, as who know not that woman can command tear whereupon her husband seem to pity those counterfeit tear. give her leave to go aboard, so that it will please pochahuntas to accompany she. now be the great labour to win. she guilty perhaps of her father wrong, though not know, as she suppose, to go with she. yet by her earnest persuasion she a^^^nted so forth with aboard they go. the best cheer that can be make, be seasonable, provide to supper, they go, merry on. go with she. yet by her earnest persuasion, she a^^^nted so forth with aboard they go the best cheer that can be make, be seasonable, provide to supper. they go, merry on all hand, especial japazeus and his wife who, to express their joy, will ere be tread upon capt argals foot, as who sh^^ld say it be do she be your own supper. end, pochahuntas, be lodge in the gunner room. but japazeus and his wife desire to have some conference with their brother, which be only to acquaint he by what ^ratagem they have betray his prisoner, as i have already relate. after which discourse to sleep, they go. pochahuntas, nothing mistrust this policy who nevertheless be most possess, with fear and desire of return, be betray his prisoner, as i have already relate, after which discourse to sleep they go. pochahuntas, nothing mistrust this policy, who nevertheless be most possess with fear and desire of return. be first up and hasten japazeus to be. go capt argall, have secret. well, reward he with a small copper kettle and some ^th^r valuable toy so high by he esteem, that doubtless he will have betray his own father, for they permit both he and his wife to return, but tell he that for diverse consideration. as for that, his father have then eigh of our english man many sword piece and other tool which he have at several time by trecheron murder our man take from they which, though of no use to he, he. of our english man, many sword piece and other tool which he have at several time by trecheron murder. our man take from they which, though of no use to he, he will not redeliver. he will reserve pocahuntas whereat she begin to be^ exceed pensive and discontent, yet ignorant o the deal of japazeus who, in outward appearance, be no discontent that he shall be the mean of her captivity. much a do there be to persuade she to be patient which, with extraordinary courteous usage, by little and little be wrought in she. and so to james town she be bring a messenger to her father forthwith, dispach to advertise he that his only daughter be in the hand and possession of the english there to so to james town she be, bring a messenger to her father forthwith dispach to advertise he that his only daughter be in the hand and possession of the english there to be keep till such time as he will ransom she with our man, sword piece and other tool treacherous, take from we. the news be unwelcome and troublesome unto he, partly for the love he bear to his daughter and partly for the love he bear to our man, his prisoner, of who, though with we they be unapt for any employment, he make great use and those sword and piece of we which, though of no use to he, it delight he to view and look upon. he can not, without long advice and delibertion, great use and those sword and piece of we which, though of no use to he, it delight he to view and look upon. he can not, without long advice and delibertion with his council, resolve upon any thing. and it be true, we hear nothing of he till three month after, by persuasion of other, he return, we seven of our man, with each of they a musket unserviceable, and by they send we word that whensoever we please to deliver his daughter he will give we in satisfaction of his injury. do to we and for the rest of our piece, break and steal from he 500 bushel of corne^ and be for ever friend with we, the man and piece in part of payment we. and for the rest of our piece break and steal from he 500 bushel of corne^ and be for ever friend with we, the man and piece in part of payment we receive and return. he answer that his daughter be very well and kind entreat and so shall be, howsoever he deal with we. but we can not believe that the rest of our arm be either lose or steal from he and therefore, till he return they all, we will not by any mean deliver his daughter, and then it shall be at his choice whether he will establish peace or continue enemy with we. this answer, as it seem, please he not very well, for we hear no more from he till in march last. choice, whether he will establish peace or continue enemy with we. this answer, as it seem, please he not very well, for we hear no more from he till in march last, when, with captain argall ship and some other vessel belong to the colony, sir thomas dale, with a hundred and fifty man well appoint, go up into his own river, where his chief habitation be, and carry with we his daughter, either to move they to fight for she, if such be their courage and boldness as have be report, or to restore the residue of our demand which be our piece sword tool, some of the same man which he return, as they promise, run to he again, and because he have put we to residue of our demand which be our piece, sword, tool, some of the same man which he return, as they promise, run to he again and because he have put we to the trouble, to fetch they five hundred bushel of corn, a great bravado, all the way as we go up the river. they make demand, the cause of our come thither, which we tell they be, to deliver pocahuntas who purposely we have bring with we and to receive our arm, man and corn, or else to fight with they, burn their house, take away their canoe, break down their fish, wear and do they. what other damage we can some of they, to set a good face on the matter, reply that if we come, away their canoe break down, their fish wear and do they what other damage we can some of they, to set a good face on the matter, reply that if we come to fight with they we be welcome for they be provide for. we council we rather to retire. if we love our safety, then proceed. brag as well they may that we have ever have the worst of they. in that river instance by capt ratliefe, not worthy remember, but to his dishonour who, with most of his company, they betray and murder. we tell they, since they dare remember we of that mischief. unless they make the better and more speedy agreement, we will now revenge that treachery, and with this discourse, by the way, tell they, since they dare remember we of that mischief. unless they make the better and more speedy agreement, we will now revenge that treachery, and with this discourse, by the way, as we go, we proceed and have no soon enter the narrow of the river, the channel there lie, within shoot of the shore, but they let their arrow fly among we, in the ship themselves, unseen to we, and in the forehead hurt one of our man whic^ may have hazard his life without the present help of a skilful chirurgeon. be thus just provoke, we present man, our boat, go ashore and burn in that very place some forty house and of the thing we find therein, make freeboote and pillage and as themselves just provoke. we present man, our boat, go ashore and burn in that very place some forty house and of the thing we find therein, make freeboote and pillage and as themselves afterward confess unto we, hurt and kill five or six of their man with this revenge, satisfy ourselves for that, their presumption in shoot at we, and so the next day proceed high up the river. the indian call unto we and demand why we go a shore, burn their house, kill and hurt their man and take away their good. we reply that though we come to they in peaceable manner and will have be glad to have receive our demand with love and peace, yet we have heart and power to take revenge and though we come to they in peaceable manner and will have be glad to have receive our demand with love and peace. yet we have heart and power to take revenge and punish where wrong shall be offer, which have now do, though not so severe as we may we rest content therewith and be ready to embrace peace with they if they please. many excuse. they seem to pretend that they shoot not a^ we, but if any such abuse be offer, it be some straggle indian, ignorant of our pretence in come to they affirm that they themselves will be right, glad of our love, and will endeavour to help we to what we come for, which be in the possession of powhatan, their king. they affirm that they themselves will be right, glad of our love, and will endeavour to help we to what we come for, which be in the possession of powhatan, their king. they will without delay dispatch messenger to he to know his purpose and pleasure, desire fair quarter, some 24 hour, for so long they pretend it will be, before their messenger may return. this we grant, and what we promise we ever exact perform. the time now come, we inquire what powhatan will do and have for answer that our englishman, late with he, fearful to be put to death by we, be run away and some of powhatan man send abroad in quest of they. but our sword and piece, so many as he have, shall. to be put to death by we be run away and some of powhatan man send abroad in quest of they. but our sword and piece, so many as he have shall be, bring the next day, which mere to delay time they bear we in hand. the next day they come, not high up the river we go and anchor near unto the chief residency, powhatan have, at a town call matchcot, where be assemble which we see about 400 man, well appoint with their bow and arrow to welcome we here. they dare we to come a shore, a thing which we purpose before. so a shore we go. our best land be up a high, steep hill which may have give the enemy much advantage. to come a shore, a thing which we purpose before. so a shore we go. our best land be up a high, steep hill which may have give the enemy much advantage against we, but it seem they as we be unwilling to begin and yet will glad have be at blow be land, as if they have no show of fear. they stir not from we but walk up and down by and among we. the best of they inquire for our weroance or king, with who they will glad consult to know the occasion of our come thither, whereof, when they be inform, they make answer that they be there ready to defend themselves if we please to assault. they desire nevertheless some small time to of our come thither, whereof, when they be inform, they make answer that they be there, ready to defend themselves if we please to assault. they desire nevertheless some small time to dispatch two or three man once more to their king to know his resolution which, if not answerable to our request in the morning, if nothing else but blood will then satisfy we. they will fight with we and thereby determine our quarrel, which be but a further delay to procure time to carry away their provision. nevertheless, we agree to this. their request, assure they till the next day by noon. we will not molest, hurt nor detain any of they. and then, before we fight, our drum and trumpet shall gi^e they warning upon. assure they, till the next day by noon, we will not molest, hurt nor detain any of they. and then, before we fight our drum and trumpet, shall gi^e they, warning upon which promise of we two, of powhatan son, be very desirous to see their sister who be there present ashore with we. come unto we at the sight of ^hom and she well fare, who they suspect to be worse entreat, though they have often h^ard the contrary, they much rejoice and promise ^hat they will undoubted persuade their father ^o redeem she and to conclude a firm peace forever with we. and upon this resolution, the two brother with we retire aboarde. we have first dispatch two englishman, ma^ster john rolfe and master spark, to to conclude a firm peace forever with we and upon this resolution, the two brother with we retire aboarde. we have first dispatch two englishman, ma^ster john rolfe and master spark, to acquaint their father with the business in hand. the next day, be kind, entreat, they return, not at all admit powhatan presence, but speak with his brother apachamo, his successor, one who have already the command of all the people who likewise, promise we his best endeavour to further our just request. and we, because the time of the year be then april, call we to our business at home to prepare ground and set corn for our winter provision. upon these term depart, give they respite t^ll harvest to resolve what be best for they. we to our business at home to prepare ground and set corn for our winter provision upon these term depart. give they respite t^ll harvest to resolve what be best for they to do, with this proviso that if final agreement be not make betwixt we, before that time, we will thither return again and destroy and take away all their corn, burn all the house upon that ri^er, leave no^ asish^ng be stand, nor a canoe in any c^eeke thereabout, and destroy and kill as many of they as we coul^. long before t^is time, a gentleman of approve behaviour and hone carriage master, john r^lfe, have be in love with pocahuntas and ^he with he, which thing at the instant that we be in parley with, a gentleman of approve behaviour and hone carriage master, john r^lfe, have be in love with pocahuntas and ^he with he, which thing at the instant that we be in parley with they myself make know to sir thomas dal^ by a letter from he, whereby he entreat his advice and furtherance in his love, if so it seem fit to he, ^or the good of the plantation and pocahuntas herself acquaint her brother therewith, which resolution sir thomas da^e well approve be the only cau^e he be so mild among they who otherwise will not have depart their river without other condition. the bruit of this pretend marriage come soon to powhatan knowledge, a thing acceptable to he as appear by his sudden consent thereunto who some have depart their river without other condition. the bruit of this pretend marriage come soon to powhatan knowledge, a thing acceptable to he, as appear by his sudden consent thereunto who, some t^n day after ^ent a ol^e uncle of she name, opachisco, to give she as his deputy in the church, and two of his son to see the marriage solemnize, which be according do about the fist of april and ever since. we have have friendly commerce and trade not only with powhatan himself but also with his subject round about. we so as now, i see no reason why the coll^nie shall not thrive a pace beside this love. by this mean, with powhatan conclude, it will be worth my pa^nes to tunover our friendship. now i see no reason why the coll^nie shall not thrive a pace beside this love. by this mean with powhatan, conclude it will be worth my pa^nes to tunover our friendship with our next neighbour. the chicohomin^es late confirm a lusty and dare. people who have long time live free from powhatan subjection, have law^s and governor within themselves. these people hear of our. conclude peace with powhatan, as the no^se thereof be soon bruit abroad. send two of their man unto we and two fat buck for present to our king. for so, sir thomas dale, be general repute and term among they and offer themselves and service unto he. allege that, albeit in former time, they have be our enemy and we they. yet they thomas dale be general repute and term among they and offer themselves and service unto. he allege that, albeit in former time, they have be our enemy and we they. yet they will now, if we please, become not only our trusty friend but even king james, his subject and tributaries, and relinquish their old name of ch^cohominies and ^ake upon they, as they call we, the name of tossantessa^. and because they h^^e no principal commander or wer^ance, they will entreat sir thomas dale as king james, his deputy, to be their supreme head, king and governor and in all just cause and quarrel to defend they, as they will be ready at all time to aid he only their desire be to enjoy their own law. and governor and in all just cause and quarrel to defend they, as they will be ready at all time to aid he only their desire be to enjoy their own law and liberty, and because himself, by reason of his many other employment beside the charge he have of his own people, may not be always present among they, to be govern as former by eight of the elder and principal man among they, as his substitute and councillor, and even this be the sum and effect of their embassy, sir thomas dale, appoint a day to send some man into their river to propose certain condition unto they, whereunto, if they assent, he will glad accept of their proffer friendship and be himself their weroance and day to send some man into their river to propose certain condition unto they, whereunto, if they assent, he will glad accept of their proffer friendship and be himself their weroance. and with this answer, offer they copper for their venison, which they refuse to take. dismiss they when the appoint day come, sir thomas dale himself and captain argall, with 50 man in a barge and frigate- well appoint, lest any treachery may be- intend set forward to chicohominie, a arm of our river, some seven mile from james town, where we find the people, according to promise, expect our come, assemble and meet together who, after their best and most friendly manner, bid we welcome, and because our business at home will permit, we but small. according to promise, expect our come, assemble and meet together. who, after their best and most friendly manner, bid we welcome, and because our business at home will permit we but small time of stay with they, they present send for their principal man, some of who be then absent, which hasten unto we and the next morning very early assemble and sit in counsel about this business. captain argall supply sir thomas dales place among they who, though there present for some respect, conceal himself and keep aboard his barge. after long discourse of their former proceed, captain argall tell they that now, since they have entreat peace and promise their love and friendship, he be send unto they from the great weroance to conclude the same. former proceed. captain argall tell they that now, since they have entreat peace and promise their love and friendship, he be send unto they from the great weroance to conclude the same all former injury on both side set apart and forget, which he will do upon these condition: first, that they shall take upon they, as they promise, the name of tassant^sses or english man, and be king james, his subject, and be forever honest, faithful and trusty unto his deputy in their country. second, that they shall never kill any of our man or cattle. but if either our man or cattle shall offend they or run to they, they shall bring they home again and shall receive satisfaction for the trespass. do they three they cattle. but if either our man or cattle shall offend they or run to they, they shall bring they home again and shall receive satisfaction for the trespass do they. three: they shall at all time be ready and willing to furnish we with three or four hundred bowman to aid we against the spaniard who name be odious among they for powhatan father, be drive by they from the west-indy into those part, or against any other indian which shall, contrary to the establish peace of^er we, any injury. four: they shall not, upon any occasion whatsoever, break down any of our pale or come into any of our town or fort by any other wries issue or port then ordinary, but first call and say the. occasion whatsoever break down any of our pale or come into any of our town or fort by any other wries issue or port, then ordinary, but first call and say the tossantessas be there, and so come. they shall at all time be let in and kind entertain five, so many fight man as they have, which may be at the least five hundred, shall yearly bring into our store house at the begin of their harvest two bushel of corn a man, as tribute of their obedience to his majesty and to his deputy there, for which they shall receive so many iron tomahawkes or small hatchet. last the eight chief man which govern as substitute and councillor under sir thomas dale, shall at all time there, for which they shall receive so many iron tomahawkes or small hatchet. last, the eight chief man which govern as substitute and councillor under sir thomas dale, shall at all time see these article and condition due perform, for which they shall receive a red coat or live^y from ou^ king yearly, and each of they th^ picture of his majesty engrave in copper wi^h ^ chain of copper to hang it about his neck, whereby they shall be know to be king james, his noble man, so as if these condition or any of they be break, the offender themselves shall not one^y be punish, but also those co^maundets because they stand engage ^or they after these article be. thus propose, the whole assembly assent thereunto. they be break, the offender themselves shall not one^y be punish, but also those co^maundets because they stand, engage ^or they, after these article be. thus propose: the whole assembly assent thereunto. answer with a great sho^t and noise that they will ready and willing perform they all ^ and immediate begin the chief of the eight to make a oration to the rest bend his speech first to the old man, then to the young man and in conclusion to the woman and child. give they thereby to understand the sum of the propose condition and how strict they be to observe they, in consideration whereof he further declare what we have promise to do for they not only ^o defend and keep they from the fury. and how strict they be to observe they in consideration, whereof he further declare what we have promise to do for they, not only ^o defend and keep they from the fury and danger of powhatan, which thing they most fear, but even from all other enemy, domestic or foreign, and that we will yearly, by trade, furnish they with copper bead, hatchet and many other necessary yea which like they best, that we will permit they to enjoy their own liberty, freedom and law and to be govern as former by eight of their chief man. it shall not be unnecessary to insert the occasion, as we imagine, of this their much desire, unexpected friendship which be questionless, some sudden fear of powhatan displeasure be unite with. man. it shall not be unnecessary to insert the occasion, as we imagine, of this. their much desire, unexpected friendship which be questionless, some sudden fear of powhatan displeasure, be unite with we ^ow able to revenge their disobedience do unto he. for you must imagine, these people presume upon their own strength and number in no one place in those part which we know so many together to have a long time neglect powhatan and refuse which the place have be former accutome and as his right may challenge the homage and duty of subject which they ought to have perform, to which obedience fear our power may compel they. they choose rather to subject themselves to. we then be enemy to both to expose and lay. which they ought to have perform, to which obedience, fear, our power may compel they, they choose rather to subject themselves to. we then be enemy to both, to expose and lay themselves open to powhat^ns tyranny and oppression. for this they do, chief, insist upon that he be a ill weroaule, full of cruelty and minstice, covetous of those thing they have, and implacable if they deny he whatsoever he demand and f^r these reason, desire to be make one people. wi^h we to curb the pride and ambition of powhatan? from who to def^nd they? they tell we, it will be no breach of peace on our part, since now they be no long chicohomimes or natural of that place, but tossantessar and king james his they. they tell we, it will be no breach of peace on our part, since now they be no long chicohomimes or natural of that place, but tossantessar and king james, his subject, who we be bind to defend so soon as there be a end of speak and the peace firm. conclude and assent unto captain argall by the gui^t of eight great piece of copper and eight gr^at tomahawkes, bind the eight gr^at me^ or councillor to the exact performance and keep of t^e same according to the condition proclaim, which they, very glad and thankful, accept and return he, as testimony of their love, venison, turkey freshfish, basket, mat and such like thing as they be then furnish with. and so the council brook up. and thankful, accept and return he, as testimony of their love, venison, turkey, freshfish, basket, mat and such like thing as they be then furnish with. and so the council brook up and t^en every man, bring to sell to our man skin bowl, ma^s basket, tobacco, etc. and become as familiar amongst we as if they have be english man iudeede. thus have i, brief as the matter will permit, discourse, our established friendship with the natural and the occasion thereof, which i hope will continue so long between we, till they shall have the understanding to acknowledge how much they be bind to god, for send we among they than which what work will be more acceptable to god, more honourable to our king and country? understanding to acknowledge how much they be bind to god, for send we among they than which. what work will be more acceptable to god, more honourable to our king and country? the great and many enemy and disturber of our proceed, and that which have hitherto deter our people to address themselves into those part, have be only two: enmity with the natural and the bruit of famine. one of these two, and that indeed which be some cause of the other, i have already remove and shall as easy take away the other, howbeit it be too great folly, i may say, impudence in i, to aver that there have reign no such in^ection in the colony occasion, mere by misgovernment, idleness and faction and chief. it be too great folly, i may say impudence in i, to aver that there have reign no such in^ection in the colony, occasion mere by misgovernment, idleness and faction, and chief by the absence of the ever worthy commander, sir thomas gate and sir george summer. by the providence of god, miraculous wreck and save upon the hopeful sumer island, since myself can but witness, of which i have some taste in what a miserable condition we find the colony at our arrival there from the bermuda. not live above threescore person therein and those scarce, able to go alone, of wellnigh six hundred, not full ten month before. yet. now i dare and will bold affirm to the great adversary of the plantation that shall aver. scarce, able to go alone, of wellnigh six hundred, not full ten month before. yet now i dare and will bold affirm to the great adversary of the plantation that shall aver the contrary, that there be that plenty of food, which every man, by his own industry, may easy and do procure, that the poor there and most in want have not be so much pinch with hunger this 4 year that, if he will take any pain, he know not where to fetch a good meal, meat. and true it be that every day, by the providence and blessing of god and their own industry, they have more plenty than other. the reason hereof be at hand for former, when our people be feed out of. by the providence and blessing of god and their own industry, they have more plenty than other. the reason hereof be at hand for former. when our people be feed out of the common store and labour joint in the manure of the ground and plant corn, glad be that man that can slip from his labour. nay, the most honest of they in a general business will not take so much faithful and true pain in a week as now he will do in a day. neither care they for the increase. presume that, howsoever their harvest prosper, the general store must maintain they, by which mean we reap not so much corn from the labour of 30 man as three m^n have do for themselves to. their harvest prosper, the general store must maintain they, by which mean we reap not so much corn from the labour of 30 man as three m^n, have do for themselves. to prevent which mischief hereafter, sir thomas dale have take a new course throughout the whole colony, by which mean the general store, apparel only except, shall not be charge with any thing, and this it be. he have allot to every man in the colony three english acre of clear corn ground which every man be to mature and tend, be in the nature of farmer. the bermuda undertaker only except, and they be not call unto any service or labour, belong to the colony more than one month in the year, which shall neither be. of farmer, the bermuda undertaker only except, and they be not call unto any service or labour, belong to the colony more than one month in the year, which shall neither be in seed time or in harvest, for which do no other duty to the colony. they be yearly to pay into the store two barrel and a half of corn, there to be reserve to keep new man which shall be send over the first year after their arrival, and even by this mean i dare say our store will be bountiful furnish to maintain three or four hundred man whensoever they shall be send thither to we that money which hitherto have be disburse to provide a tweluemoneths^ victual, if there be, but now half. maintain three or four hundred man, whensoever they shall be, send thither to we that money which hitherto have be disburse to provide a tweluemoneths^ victual, if there be. but now, half so much, bestow in clothes and bedding, will be such comfort to the man a^ even. thereby the life of many shall not only be preserve, but also themselves keep in strength and heart, able to perisome such business as shall be impose upon them^, and thus shall also the former charge b^ well save and yet more business effect the action renown and more commodity return to the merchant and ye^ saint, for want of encouragement, concern the undertake of the bermuda city, a business of great hope, ever begin in our territory. there, their more commodity return to the merchant. and ye^ saint, for want of encouragement, concern the undertake of the bermuda city, a business of great hope ever begin in our territory, there. their patent, which i purpose in this treatise to insert, do apparent, demonstrate upon what term and condition they, voluntary, have undertake that employment. how forward that business be in his due place, shall be express only give. i leave with as much brevity as i may, lest any man shall divert his mind and be fearful to adventure his person thither, for fear of famine and penury, to amplify a little the plenty there. for if it be true, as most eertaine, it be that those who i have describe under the title of farmer can. famine and penury, to amplify a little the plenty there. for if it be true, as most eertaine it be, that those who i have describe under the title of farmer can pay into our store two barrel and a half of corn yearly, and other who labour eleven month in the general business of the colony, and but one to provide themselves victual, why shall any man, if he be industrious, mistrust starve if otherwise? for any part, and i think all that be engage in the action and understand the business, accord with i herein and will not wish his company there. nay, they shall much wrong themselves and the action if they do not withstand such and deny they passage, for even they and none. herein and will not wish his company there. nay, they shall much wrong themselves and the action, if they do not withstand such and deny they passage, for even they and none else have be the occasion of the manifold imputation and disgrace which virginia have innocent undergo through their default. i will therefore, by these relation, not only encourage, honest and industrious, but also deter all lazy, impotent and ill liver from address themselves thither as be a country too worthy for they and altogether disconsonant to their nature, which must either brook labour or hazard and undergo much displeasure, punishment and penury. if they escape, a thing which few idler have, do the scurvy dis^ase with which few or none, once infect, have, recover to proceed. hazard and undergo much displeasure, punishment and penury. if they escape, a thing which few idler have, do the scurvy dis^ase with which few or none, once infect, have recover. to proceed, therefore, in my encouragement to painful people such as either through cross in this world or wreck rent, or else grea^ charge of child and family lieu here, and that not without much care and sweat in^o extreme poverty, for those this country have present remedy. every such person, so wel^ dispose to adventure thither, shall soon find the difference between their own and that country. the affair in the colony be so well, order and the hard task already overpass that whosoever now or hereafter shall happy arrive. there shall find^ a handsome house of. that country. the affair in the colony be so well, order and the hard task already overpass that whosoever now or hereafter shall happy arrive. there shall find^ a handsome house of some four room or more, if he have a family to repose himself in, rent free, and twelve english acre of ground adjoin thereunto, very strong impale, which ground be only allot unto he for root, gardaine, herb and corn. neither shall he need to provide himself, as be wont, the first of a year provision of victual, for that the store there will be able to afford he, and upon these condition he shall be entertain. he shall have for himself and family a competent^ 1^ month provision deliver unto he, in which time it. be able to afford he, and upon these condition he shall be entertain. he shall have for himself and family a competent^ 1^ month provision, deliver unto he, in which time it must be his care to provide for himself and family ever after, as those already there. to this end, he shall be furnish with necessary tool of all sort, and for his better subsistence he shall have poultry and swine, and, if he deserve it, a goat or two, perhaps a cow give he, which once compass how happy he may live, as do many there who, i be sure, will never return. i submit to their own future well, experience judgement now, lest any man shall yet rest discourage, because as yet no mention be. many there who i be sure, will never return, i submit to their own future. well, experience judgement now, lest any man shall yet rest discourage, because as yet no mention be make of any other provision of victual, save only of bread, corn which, grant it may, with labour, be competent, procure, will afford but a bare and miserable live. i think there be no man so ignorant to conceive that such a main continent as be virginia, boundless for aught we have discover, and so goodly river, no where else to be, parral shall be more barren of cattle, fish and foul than other land. assure they be not, for true it be that the land be store with plenty and variety of wild beast, lion. be more barren of cattle, fish and foul than other land, assure they be not, for true it be that the land be store with plenty and variety of wild beast, lion, bear. decree of all sort only differ from we in their increase, have usual three or four fawn at a time. none that i have see or hear off under two, the reason whereof some of our people ascribe to the virtue of some grass or herb which they eat, because our goat often time bring forth three, and most of they two. for my part, i rather impute their fecundiry to the providence of god, who for every mouth provideh meat. and if this increase be not the natural will assure starve f^r of the. my part, i rather impute their fecundiry to the providence of god, who for every mouth provideh meat. and if this increase be not the natural will assure starve f^r of the deer. they kill, as do we beef in england all the year long, neither spare young nor old. no, not the do ready to fawn, nor the young fawn if but two day old beaver, otter, fox, racounes, almost as big as a fox, as good meat as a lamb, hare, wild cat, musk, rat, squirrel, fly and other of three or four sort, apossume of the bigness and likeness of a pig of a month old, a beast of as strange as incredible nature. she have common seven young one, sometime more and sometime less, apossume of the bigness and likeness of a pig of a month old, a beast of as strange as incredible nature. she have common seven young one, sometime more and sometime less, which, at her pleasure, till they be a month old or more, she take up into her belly and put forth again, without hurt to herself or they. of each of these beast, the lion, except myself, have many time eat and can testify that they be not only tasteful but also wholesome and nourish food. there be ^oule of diverse sort, eagle, wild turkey, much big than our english crane, heron, white and ^usset hawk, wild pigeon, in winter, beyond number or imagination myself have see three or four hour together, flock in the air. turkey, much big than our english crane, heron white and ^usset hawk, wild pigeon in winter beyond number or imagination myself have see three or four hour together, flock in the air so thick that even they have shadow the sky from. we turckie, bussard, partridge, suipes, owl, swan goose, brant duck and mallard, droeis, shel drake, cormorant, teal, widgeon, curlewe puit beside other small bird as blacke-birde, hedge, sparrow, oxey, wood pecker and in winter about christmas, many flock of parakertoth. for fish the river be plentiful store with sturgeon, porpasse, base, rockfish, carp, shad, herring, eel, catfish, perch, flat-fish, troute, sheepshead, drummer, jarfish, crevice, crab oyster and diverse other kind of all which myself have see great quantity. take especial the last summer at smith island. herring, eel, catfish, perch, flat-fish, troute, sheepshead, drummer, jarfish, crevice, crab, oyster and diverse other kind of all which myself have see great quantity, take especial the last summer at smith island, at one hale, a frigate lade of sturgeon base and other great fish in captain argals savie, and even at that very place, which be not above fifteen mile from pointeomfort, if we have be furnish with salt to have save it, we may have take as much fish as will have serve we that whole year. nor be these provision of bread, flesh and fish all we have for sustentation of man life. behold more change and variety of food which our soil and climate afford: carrot, parsnep, turnip, radish, pumpion of the west indie. and fish, all we have for sustentation of man life. behold more change and variety of food which our soil and climate afford: carrot, parsnep, turnip, radish, pumpion of the west indie kind, in great abundance. of one seed i have see a hundred, much better than we, and last all the year- cabbadge, parsley, all manner of potherb and other herb, marger^^, time, wi^ter-savory, lettice, purslane, etc. and beside the natural grain of that country as wheat, pease and bean it do i much good to view our english wheat, how forward it be, full ear of one grain, forty care or more, a span long and only want ripen in mid june. our english pease then ripe and bean very forward and english barley very hopeful. ear of one grain, forty care or more, a span long and only want ripen in mid june. our english pease then ripe and bean very forward and english barley very hopeful, such as i e^es never behold better in england, and if that soil bring forth these thing, as can those which have be there with i affirm and witness, as plentiful and unchangeable for taste and quantity as england or any other country, why shall any man that have his limb in a peaceable state as be that so much as dream of starve? to go yet a little further, i myself know no one country yield without art or industry so many fruit- sure i be england do. wild grape in abundance, all the wood. to go yet a little further. i myself know no one country yield without art or industry so many fruit- sure i be england do. wild grape in abundance, all the wood over their juice, sweet and pleasant in taste. some of they we have replant in a vineyard adjoin to henrico. the quantity of three or four acre, which be this year very plentiful, lade to what perfection they will come. the next return will advertise cherry, little inferior to we, which if replant may prove as much better as now they be worse. pissmienplum in bigness and fashion like a medlar of a flipticke quality, other sort of plum like to our wheat plum, and in goodness answerable great field and wood abound with strawberry much. in bigness and fashion, like a medlar of a flipticke quality, other sort of plum, like to our wheat plum, and in goodness answerable, great field and wood abound with strawberry, much fair and more sweet than we. mulberry of great bigness, and about the bermuda city and hundird thereunto belong great store thereof maricock, of the fashion of a lemon who blossom may admit comparison with our most delight some, and beautiful flower and the fruit exceed pleasant and tast^^^^^ ches^^it-trees towards the false. as many as oak and as fertile, many goodly. grove of chincomen tree with a husk like unto a chestnut, raw or hoyl, luscious and hearty meat. walnut of three or four sort, where o^ (@) may be, yearly make great quantity of. chincomen tree with a husk like unto a chestnut, raw or hoyl, luscious and hearty meat walnut of three or four sort, where o^ (@) may be yearly, make great quantity of oyl^s as useful and good as that of olive. some filbert i have see crab great store less but not so sour as we, which graft with the scion of english apple tree, without question will bear very good fruit and we doubt not. but to have the scion enough the next year there be in sir thomas gate, his garden at james town. many forward apple and pear tree come up of the kernel set the year before. if all this be not sufficient, lo further encouragement: the colony be already furnish with two hundred. many forward. apple and pear tree come up of the kernel set the year before. if all this be not sufficient, lo further encouragement: the colony be already furnish with two hundred neat cattle, as many goat, infinite hog in herd all over the wood. beside those, to every town belong in general, and every private man, some mare, horse and colt poultry, great store beside tame turkey, peacock and pigeon plentiful increase and thrive there. in no country better of our young steer. the next winter we doubt not to have three or four plough go which once compass we shall in short time be able to repay england the corn they have lend we. if i know yet any further impediment which may seem to give. go, which once compass, we shall in short time be able to repay england the corn they have lend we. if i know yet any further impediment which may seem to give discouragement to adventure thither, i shall as easy remove. they object that please the want of clothes so long as there be wild beast there and the beast have skin on their back. if the necessity be such, why shall not we, as do the natural, clothe our self therewith? it be no worse than our forefather have wear before we and such as will save we from the cold in winter and heat in summer, but admit there be no skin or be there, our people disdain to wear they if there be any man. will save we from the cold in winter and heat in summer, but admit there be no skin or be there our people disdain to wear they, if there be any man that have be so ill a husband here that he can furnish himself with a year provision of apparel, if i may counsel he shall not be suffer to go thither for that country. be not for he. as for other who can provide apparel for the first year, i hold he a worse husband than the former. that shall at any time after be worse clothe than he go over the valuable commodity of tobacco of such esteem in england, if there be nothing else which every man may plant, and with the least part. be worse clothe than he go over the valuable commodity of tobacco, of such esteem in england. if there be nothing else which every man may plant and with the least part of his labour, tend and care, will return he both clothes and other necessary for the goodness whereof answerable to west-indie trinidado, or admit there have no such be return. let no man doubt, into the discourse whereof, since i be obuious, enter, i may not forget the gentleman worthy of much commendation which first take the pain to to make trial thereof, his name, mr john 1612.. partly for the love he have a long time bear unto it and partly to raise commodity to the adventurer in who behalf i witness and vouchsafe to. name mr john 1612.. partly for the love he have a long time bear unto it and partly to raise commodity to the adventurer in who behalf i witness and vouchsafe to hold my testimony in beleef^ that during the time of his abode there, which draw near upon six year, no man have labour to his power by good example there and worthy encouragement into england by his letter than he have do. witness his marriage with rowhatans daughter, one of rude education manner, barbarousand curse generation mere for the good and honour of the plantation. and lest any man shall conceive that some sinister respect allure he hereunto, i have make bold, contrary to his knowledge, in the end of my treatise to insert the true. plantation. and lest any man shall conceive that some sinister respect allure he hereunto, i have make bold, contrary to his knowledge, in the end of my treatise to insert the true copy of his letter, write to sir thomas dale to acquaint he with his proceed and purpose therein, the, rather to give testimony to the misconstrue and ill censure multitude of his integrity in the undertake, a matter of so great a consequent who, in my hear, have not spare to speak their pleasure. his own letter hit they home. and the better sort who know to censure judicious, can but high commend and approve so worthy a undertake. thus far i have apply myself to encourage personal adventurer. i will glad now, by worthy motive, who know to censure judicious, can but high commend and approve so worthy a undertake. thus far i have apply myself to encourage personal adventurer. i will glad now, by worthy motive, allure the heavy undertaker to persist with alacrity and cheerfulness, both for their own reputation, the honour of god and their king and country. the worthy sort, i mean those noble and other of that honourable counsel, interest therein need no spur. their own innate virtue, drive they a pace. the merchant only want some feel and present return of those commodity which he be persuade the country afford to. they therefore, i will address my speech and if i may, persuade they to be constant in their proceed some small time long, the benefit will. be persuade the country afford to. they, therefore, i will address my speech and, if i may, persuade they to be constant in their proceed some small time long, the benefit will be the great and the more welcome when it come. it be not for nothing sir thomas dale, so noble, without respect to his live, to his lady, here in england, past the prefix time of his resolve, return yet remain there. i be sure, if he please, he may return with as much honour as any man from thence. i say not more. i shall little need, and indeed it be but waste and idle for i to repeat and mention the commodity which, with only labour, may be there, procure many treatise, have they? i shall little need, and indeed it be but waste and idle, for i to repeat and mention the commodity which, with only labour, may be there, procure many treatise, have they at full sample, have be send home, and no man dispute the goodness or the quantity there to be have. take, therefore, double courage to yourselves and let these two year neglect be restore by a cheerful and new onset. and for your encouragement, read yet a little further and view the face of the colony, even superficial portray, see what effect these three year have wrought. in may 1611, sir thomas dale, with a prosperous passage not full eight week, arrive there with he about three hundred people, such as for the present speed and year have wrought. in may 1611, sir thomas dale, with a prosperous passage not full eight week, arrive there with he. about three hundred people, such as for the present speed and dispatch can then be provide of worse condition than those former there who, i sorrow to speak it, be not so provident though, once before bite with hunger and penury, as to put corn into the ground for their winter bread. but trust to the store then furnish, but with eight month provision. his first care therefore be to employ all hand about se^ting of corn at the two fort seat upon ke^oughtan, henry and charles, whereby the season than not full pass, though about the end of may we have there a indifferent crop of. of corn at the two fort seat upon ke^oughtan, henry and charles, whereby the season than not full pass, though about the end of may we have there a indifferent crop of good corn. this business take order for, and the care and trust of it commit to his under officer. to james town he hasten where the most company be and their daily and usual work bowl in the street. these he employ about necessary work as fell of timber, repair their house ready to fall upon their head, and provide pale post and rail to impaile his purposed new town which, by reason of his ignorance in those part but new arrive there. he have not resolve where to seat, for his better knowledge therefore, of to impaile his purposed new town which, by reason of his ignorance in those part but new arrive there, he have not resolve where to seat. for his better knowledge, therefore, of those part, himself with a hundred man, spend some time in discovery: first nansamund river, which, in despite of the indian than our enemy, he discover to the head. after that our own river, to the fall, whereupon a high land environ with the main river, some sixteen or twenty mile from the head of the fall, near to a indian town call arsahattocke, he resolve to plant his new town, and so do, whereof, in his due place, i shall make a brief relation. it be no mean trouble to he to reduce his people. he resolve to plant his new town, and so do whereof. in his due place, i shall make a brief relation. it be no mean trouble to he to reduce his people, so timely, to good order, be of so ill a condition, as may well witness his severe and strict imprint book of article, then needful, with all severity and extremity, to be execute now much mitigate for more deserve death in those day, then do now the least punishment so as if the law shall not have restrain by execution. i see not how the utter subversion and ruin of the colony shall have be prevent. witness web and prize design the first year since that abbot and other, more dangerous than the former and even the utter subversion and ruin of the colony shall have be prevent witness web and prize design. the first year since that, abbot and other, more dangerous than the former, and even this summer, coal and kitchen plot with three more bend their course towards the southward, to a spanish plantation report. to be there who have travel? it be now a time of peace, some five day journey to ocanahoe^ there, cut off by certain indian hire, by we to hunt they home to receive their desert. so, as sir thomas dale, have not be tyrannous nor severe at all. indeed the offence have be capital and the offender dangerous, incurable member, for no use so fit as to make example to other but the manner of tyrannous nor severe at all. indeed, the offence have be capital and the offender dangerous, incurable member for no use, so fit as to make example to other. but the manner of their death may some object have be cruel, unusual and barbarous, which indeed they have not be. witness france and other country for less offence. what if they have be more severe than usual in england, there be just cause for it. we be rather to have regard to those who we will have terrify and make fearful to commit the like offence, then to the offender, just condemn. it be ^rue that among those people who for the most part be sensible only of the body, torment the fear of a cruel, painful and unusual. to the offender, just condemn. it be ^rue that, among those people who for the most part be sensible only of the body, torment the fear of a cruel, painful and unusual death. more restrain they then death itself. thus, much obuious, i proceed in his endeavour until sir thomas gate, his happy arrival, which be only in prepare timber, pale, post and rail for the present impal, this new town, to secure himself and man from the malice and treachery of the indian in the midst and heart of who he be resolve to set down. but before he can make himself ready for that business, sir thomas gate, though his passage, more long than usual, to second he herein happy arrive about the second of august. down. but before he can make himself ready for that business, sir thomas gate, though his passage, more long than usual, to second, he herein happy arrive about the second of august with six good ship, man provision and cattle who, as yet not full, discover, we suppose to be a spanish fleet, thus induce the rather to believe because in company with he be three carual vessel which never before have be send thither, and now only for the transportation of the cattle. it do i much good and give great courage to the whole company to see the resolution of sir thomas dale. now, whole busy our land fortification to weak to withstand a foreign enemy, in lade, our provision, aboard the two good ship, the company to see the resolution of sir thomas dale. now, whole busy, our land fortification, to weak to withstand a foreign enemy, in lade, our provision aboard the two good ship, the star and prosperous, and our own deliverance, then ride before james town aboard which ship he have resolve to encounter the suppose enemy, animate his people not only with the hope of victory, if they ready obey his direction, but also assure they that if by these mean, god have ordain to set a period to their life, they can never be sacrifice in a more acceptable service. himself promise rather to fire the spanish ship with his own, then either base to yield or to be take, and in nothing he seem so much discontent. a more acceptable service, himself promise rather to fire the spanish ship with his own, then, either base to yield or to be take, and in nothing he seem so much discontent as that we can not possible lade aboard all our provision before the wind. be then very fair, they may have be with we, while therefore the rest be labour their utmost to lade aboard our provision. he cause a small shallop to be, man with thirty ready and good shot to discover direct what ship they may be, and withal speed to return. he certain word which, within three hour they do assure he that be be a english, ^eete sir thomas gate, general thereof, which news how welcome it be unto he principal, because he certain word which within three hour they do assure he that be be a english. ^eete sir thomas gate, general thereof, which news, how welcome it be unto he principal, because now he doubt not the happy progression of the affair in hand. let any man equal with he affect to the good and welfare of the action, judge and determine the worthy be. meet after salutation and welcome, give and receive sir thomas dale. acquaint sir thomas gate, both with such business as he have affect since his arrival, and also of his resolution to build a new town at the fales, which design and purpose of he, sir thomas gate, then principal governor in virginia, well approve. furnish he with three hundred and fifty man. to build a new town at the fales, which design and purpose of he sir thomas gate, then principal governor in virginia, well approve, furnish he, with three hundred and fifty man such as himself, make choice of. and the beginning of september 1611 he set from james town and in a day and a half land, at a place where he purpose to seat and build, where he have not be ten day before, he have very strong empale, seven english acre of ground for a town which, in honour of the noble prince henry, of ever happy and bless memory, who royal heart be ever strong affect to that action, he call by the name of henrico. no soon be he thus fence. and in a of ever happy and bless memory. who royal heart be ever strong affect to that action he call by the name of henrico. no soon be he thus fence, and in a manner secure from the indian. but his next work, without respect to his own health or particular welfare, be build at each corner of the town, very strong and high commander or watchtower, a fair and handsome church and storehouse which finish. he begin to think upon convenient house and lodging for himself and man which, with as much speed as be possible, be more strong and more handsome than any former in virginia, contrive and finish, and even in four month space he have make henrico much better and of more worth than all the. more strong and more handsome than any former in virginia. contrive and finish, and even in four month space he have, make henrico much better and of more worth than all the work ever since the colony begin therein do. i shall be to tedious if i shall give up the account of every day labour, which therefore i purposely omit, and will only describe the town in the very state and perfection which i leave it. and first for the situation: it stand upon a neck of a very high land, 3 part thereof environ, with the main river and cut over between the two river with a strong pale which make the neck of land a island. there be in this town 3 street of well. with the main river and cut over between the two river with a strong pale which make the neck of land a island. there be in this town 3 street of well frame house, a handsome church and the foundation of a more stately one, lay of brick in length a hundred foot and fifty foot wide, beside store house, watch house and such like. there be also, as ornament belong to this town, upon the verge of this river, five fair block house or commander wherein live the honest sort of people, as in farm in england, and there keep continual centinel for the town security. and about two mile from the town into the main, a pale of two mile in length, cut over from river. in england and there keep continual centinel for the town security and about two mile from the town into the main, a pale of two mile in length, cut over from river to river, guard likewise with several commander, with a great quantity of corn ground, empale sufficient if there be no more in the colony secure to maintain with, but easy manure and husbandry more man than i suppose will be address thither, the more be the pity. these 3 year for the further enlargement yet of this town on the other side of the river by impal likewise, for we make no other fence be secure to our use, especial for our hog to feed in. about twelve english mile of ground by name hope in. river by impal likewise, for we make no other fence be secure to our use, especial for our hog to feed in. about twelve english mile of ground by name, hope in faith, coxendale, secure by five fort, call charity fort, mount malado, a retreat or guest house for sick people, a high seat and wholesome air. elizabeth fort and fort patience. and here have mr whitacres choose his parsonage or church land, some hundred acre empale and a fair frame parsonage house build thereupon, call rock hall of this town and all the fort. thereunto belong have captain james davis, the principal command and government. i proceed to our next and most hopeful habitation, whether we respect commodity or security, which we principal aim at against foreign. belong have captain james davis, the principal command and government. i proceed to our next and most hopeful habitation, whether we respect commodity or security, which we principal aim at against foreign design and invasion. i mean the bermuda city begin about christmas last which, because it be the near adjoin to henrico, though the last undertake i hold it pertinent to handle in the next place, this town or plantation be seat by land, some 5 mile from henrico, by water, fourteen be the year before the habitation of the appamatuck. to revenge, the treacherous injury of those people do unto, we take from they, beside all their corn, the former before, without the loss of any save. only some few of those indian pretend our hurt. injury of those people do unto, we take from they, beside all their corn, the former before, without the loss of any save. only some few of those indian pretend our hurt. at what time sir thomas dale, be himself upon that service and due, consider how commodious a habitation and seat it may be, for we take resolution to possess and plant it and at that very instant give it the name of the new bermuda, whereunto he have lay out and annex to be belong to the freedom and corporation for ever. many mile of champion and woodland in several hundred as the upper and neither hundred, rochdale hundred, west shirley hundred, and digges his hundred in the neither hundred. he first begin to plant and of champion and woodland in several hundred as the upper and neither hundred, rochdale hundred, west shirley hundred- and digges his hundred in the neither hundred he first begin to plant and inhabit. for that there lie the most convenient quantity of corn ground and with a pale cut over from river to river about two mile long, we have secure some eight mile circuit of ground, the most part champion and exceed good corn ground upon which pale and round about upon the verge of the river. in this hundred, half a mile distant from each other, be very fair. house already build beside diverse other particular man house, not so few as fifty, according to the condition of the patent grant, they which who so please. each other be very fair. house already build beside diverse other particular man house, not so few as fifty, according to the condition of the patent grant. they which who so please to peruse shall, in the end of my discourse find it, insert in this plantation, next to sir thomas dale, be principal in the command, captain georg yardley, sir thomas gate, his lieutenant, who see endeavour, have ever deserve worthy commendation in that employment. rochdale, hundred by a cross pale, well nigh four mile long, be also already empale, with border house all along the pale in which hundred our hog and other cattle have twenty mile circuit to graze in. secure the undertake of the chief city, defer till their harvest, be in which once. the pale in which hundred our hog and other cattle have twenty mile circuit to graze in, secure the undertake of the chief city, defer till their harvest. be in which once reap, all hand shall be. employ thereon which sir thomas dale purpose, and he may, with some labour, effect his design- to make a impregnable retreat against any foreign invasion, how powerful so ever. about fifty mile from this seat, on the other side of the river, be james town, situate upon a goodly and fertile island which, although former scandole with unhealthful air, we have since approve as healthful as any other place in the country, and this i can say by my own experience that that corn and garden ground which, with much labour, we have since approve, as healthful as any other place in the country, and this i can say by my own experience, that that corn and garden ground, which with much labour be, when we first seat upon it a thick wood we have clear and empale, be as fertile as any other. we have have experience and trial off the town itself, by the ca^e and providence of sir thomos gate, who for the most part have his chief residence there, be reduce into a handsome form and have in it two fair row of house, all offramed timber, two story and a upper garret or corn lof^. high beside three large and substantial storehowse join together in length some hundred and twenty foot and in breadth. house, all offramed timber, two story and a upper garret or corn lof^. high beside three large and substantial storehowse join together, in length some hundred and twenty foot and in breadth forty. and this town have be late new and strong empale and a fair platform for ornance in the west bulwark raise. there be also without this town in the island some very pleasant and beautiful house, two blockhouses to observe and watch lest the indian at any time shall swim over the back river and come into the island and certain other farm house. the command and government of this town have master john scarpe, lieutenant to captain francis west, brother to the right, honourable the lord lawarre, from james town downward some forty and house, the command and government of this town have master john scarpe, lieutenant to captain francis west, brother to the right, honourable the lord lawarre, from james town downward some forty and odd mile at the mouth of the river, near point comfort upon kecoughtan, be two pleasant and commodious fort, henry and charles, goodly seat and much corn ground about they abound with the commodity of fish, foul dear, and fruit whereby the man live there, with half that maintenance out of the store which in other place be allow certain this habitation will be no whit inferior to the best we have there, save as yet with the poor mean we have. we can secure it if a foreign enemy, as we have just can to. no whit inferior to the best we have there, save as yet with the poor mean we have. we can secure it if a foreign enemy, as we have just can to expect daily, shall attempt it. and of these, fort captain georg we^ be late establishd the principal commander. it have be our great care and labour hitherto, and yet, but these three year, the former four mere misspend to compass these business which be thus settle and bring to such perfection as i have describe now, do the time approach that commodity may be expect, and if mean be send over, will assure be return. what honest spirit have hitherto labour herein will, at the upshot, as i may so term it be, discourage or desist. expect and if mean be send over, will assure be return. what honest spirit have hitherto? labour herein will, at the upshot, as i may so term it, be discourage or desist, i hope none. rather more will be animate, if need require, to put too their help, hand and purse, and even thus i have shadow, i hope without the guilt of tedious or prolix discourse as i have be able. the trne condition, though many circumstance omit, of virginia, what may the substance be when the external show be so forward, so glorious. i have purposely omit the relation of the country, commodity which every former treatise have abundant, the hope of the better mine, the more base, as iron, allom and such like perfect discover. have purposely omit the relation of the country, commodity which every former treatise have, abundant the hope of, the better mine, the more base as iron, allom and such like, perfect discover and make trial off. and sure of these thing i can make so ample relation as other who, in the discovery of those affair, have be than myself more often conversant only of the hopeful and merchantable commodity of tobacco, silk grass and silk worm, i dare thus much affirm. and first of tobacco, who, goodness, my own experience and trial induce i to be such that no country under the sun may or do afford more pleasant, sweet and strong tobacco than i have taste there, even of my own plant, which howsoever be then. be such that no country under the sun may or do afford more pleasant, sweet and strong tobacco than i have taste there, even of my own plant which, howsoever be then the first year of our trial thereof, we have not the knowledge to cure and make up. yet be there some now resident there out of the last year. well, observe, experience which both know and i doubt not, make and return such tobacco this yeer^ that eu^n england shall acknowledge the goodness thereof. now i proceed to the silk grass which grow like unto our flax. i mean not of that kind former send over. i have see even of the natural and wild plant which captain martin, who much delight in those business, have. unto our flax. i mean not of that kind former send over. i have see even of the natural and wild plant which captain martin, who much delight in those business, have make exceed fine and exceed strong silk, and himself have replant many of the wild plant this year. the silk whereof he purpose to return for trial, the silk worm send thither from england in seed the last winter come forth, many of they the beginning of march, other in april, may and june, thousand of they grow to great bigness and a spin and the rest well thrive of their increase and commodity well know to be reap by they. we have all most assurance, since, sure i be, no country afford more store of. and the rest well thrive of their increase and commodity well know to be reap by they. we have all most assurance, since sure i be no country afford more store of mulberry tree or a kind with who leaf they more delight or thrive better. it may be here happy expect that i shall give up the relation of captain argall, particular voyage and endeavour, and even, as in a plat, demonstrate his norward discovery, from which business i desire to be excuse, partly because himself be best able to make his own relation and partly because my home employment will not permit i leisure to accompany he, though myself desirous in any of his voyage, who endeavour, if i shall endeavour, to make, know and publish. partly because my home employment will not permit i leisure to accompany he though, myself desirous in any of his voyage. who endeavour, if i shall endeavour, to make know and publish, can receive no honour at all by my commendation or description, much may they be impair through my ignorance or unskillfullnes to set they forth. yet can i omit to publish to the world what present relief he have do to the colony? furnish we by two trade voyage with three and twenty hundred bushel of corn into our store, deliver beside what he reserve for his man provision, what he bestow upon well deserver and what his man appropriate. i pass by the benefit of peace in those part by reason of his captive pochahuntas. reserve for his man provision. what he bestow upon, well deserver, and what his man appropriate, i pass by the benefit of peace in those part by reason of his captive pochahuntas, conclude, establish and will only name the commodity by his mean. do unto we in repair of our weatherbeten boat and furnish we with new b^th, strong and useful. without who assistance herein, unless we shall have omit other necessary employment, i see not how we shall have have passage one to another. his norward discovery towards sacadeh^c and beyond, to and thereabouts, may not be conceal, in which his adventure, if he have bring home no commodity to the colony, which yet he do very much, both of apparel, victual and many other necessary, the. not be conceal in which his adventure, if he have bring home no commodity to the colony which yet he do very much, both of apparel, victual and many other necessary, the honour which he have do unto our nation by displant the french there, begin to seat and fortesie within our limit and take of their ship and pinnace which he bring to james town will have be reward enough for his pain and will ever speak loud his honour and approve valour. i have hear it credible report, even from the mouth of captain argall, that in one small ship and in one voyage the french have clear eight thousand pound by trade with the indian for ^^rs which benefit will be as easy by we. argall that in one small ship and in one voyage the french have clear eight thousand pound by trade with the indian for ^^rs, which benefit will be as easy by we procure. it be true, the saluadges there inhabit before captain argall arrival, esteem the french as demi-god and have they in great estimation. but see they vanquish and overcome by. we forsake the^ yea which be no mean point of policy. desire our friendship. tell captain argall that he have undo they for ever for that the french by yearly trade with they for fur. furnish they with ma^y necessary, whereof they have great want, which trade by this mean may happy be hinder. but captain argall have agree with they to reserve their fur for fur, furnish they with ma^y necessary, whereof they have great want, which trade by this mean may happy be hinder. but captain argall have agree with they to reserve their fur for he and promise the^ once a year to come thither and truck with they. they seem very well content. assure he that though the french shall at any time arrive there and proffer they trade, they will reserve all their fur for he. and what profit by this mean only may be return to the virginia adventurer. i submit to captain argall own opinion and judgement. i purrpose omit one thing in the treatise of our conclude peace, wherewith i intend to conclude my discourse, which already i have draw to a long period than i. and judgement, i purrpose omit one thing in the treatise of our conclude peace, wherewith i intend to conclude my discourse, which already i have draw to a long period than i purpose, whereby we have gather the better assurance of their ho^est inward intention, and this it be it. please, sir thomas dale, my self be much desirous, before my return for england to visit powhatan and his court, because i will be able to spea^ somewhat thereof by my own knowledge, to employ myself and a^ english boy for my interpreter on thomas savage, who have live three year with powhatan and speak the language natural, one who powhatan much affect upon a message unto he which be to deal with he, if by any mean. who have live three year with powhatan and speak the language natural one who powhatan much affect upon. a message unto he which be to deal with he. if by any mean i may procure a daughter of he who, pochahuntas be already in our possession, be general report to be his delight and darling, and sure he esteem she as his own soul. for sure pledge of peace. i depart the fifteen of may early in the morning with the english boy and two indian guide from the bermuda and come to his court or residence, as i judge, some three score mile distant from we be seat at the h^^d almost of pama^nkie river, at a town call m^tchcot. the next night, after about twelve of, residence, as i judge, some three score mile distant from we be, seat, at the h^^d almost of pama^nkie river, at a town call m^tchcot, the next night, after about twelve of the clock, the former night lodging in the open wood, fearless and without danger, when we be come opposite to his town, the main river between he and we, lest at any time we shall march by land, unto he undiscovered, my indian guide call f^r a canoe ^ boat make only of one tree after the fashion of a hollow trough to transport. we give they to know that there be two english send upon business to powhatan from the english weroance, which once know a canoe be present, send and we ferry over powhatan. we give they to know that there be two english send upon business to powhatan from the english weroance, which once know a canoe be present send and we ferry over powhatan himself attend at the land place to welcome we. his first salutation be to the boy who he very well remember. after this manner, my child, you be welcome. you have be a stranger to i these four year. at what time i give you leave to go to, for so be james, town call before our seat there to see your friend, and till now you never return. you say he be my child by the donative of captain newport, in lieu of one of my subject, namontacke, who i purposely send to king james. till now you never return. you say he be my child, by the donative of captain newport in lieu of one of my subject, namontacke, who i purposely send to king james, his land, to see he and his country and to return i the true report thereof. he as yet be not return, though many ship have arrive here from thence since that time. how you have deal with he, i know not. have. thus end his speech to he, he address himself to i and his first salutation, without any word at all, be about my neck and with his hand he seel round about it. so, as i may have imagine, he will have cut my throat, but that i know he dare not. he. about my neck and with his hand he seel round about it, so as i may have imagine he will have cut my throat, but that i know he dare not. he ask i where the chain^ of pearl be. i demand what chain that, say he which i send my brother, sir thomas dale, for a present at his first arrival. which chain, since the peace conclude, he send i word, if he send any englishman upon occasion of business to i, he shall wear about his neck, otherwise i have order from he to bind he and send he home again. it be true, sir thomas dale, have send he such word which till then myself never hear of, and for this purpose have give his bind he and send he home again. it be true, sir thomas dale, have send he such word which till then myself never hear of, and for this purpose have give his page order to deliver. i the say chain who forget it? i be doubtful at the first how to answer he yet present. i reply that i be not ignorant of that message from his brother, former send unto he, whereby he only cutend that if upon extraordinary and sudden occasion he shall be constrain to send a english man unto he without a indian guide, then in testimony that he send he he shall wear the chain about his neck but in case any of his own people shall conduct any english unto he as indian guide. then, in testimony that he send he, he shall wear the chain about his neck, but in case any of his own people shall conduct any english unto he, as do i, two of his own man, one of they a counsellor, unto he who be acquaint with my business, their testimony s^ould be sufficient, and the chain then needless to be wear. which answer please he? well, and four with he, bring we to his house, not full a stone cast from the waterside, whereinto be come himself sit down on his bedstead side bed. th^re be none mo^e than a single mat. on each hand of he be place a comely and personable young woman, not twenty year old, the eld^^^ which they call. side bed th^re be none mo^e than a single mat. on each hand of he be place a comely and personable young woman, not twenty year old, the eld^^^, which they call his queen the house, with, in round about be^ set wi^h they, the outside guard, with a hundred bowman, with their quiver of arrow at their back, which at all time and place attend his person. the first thing he offer we be a pipe of tobacco, which they call pissimore, whereof himself fi^st drink and then give it i, and when i have drink what i please, i return his pipe, which with his own hand he vouchsafe to take from i. th^n begin he to inquire how his brother, sir thomas dale, fare after. drink what i please. i return his pipe which with his own hand he vouchsafe to take from. i th^n begin he to inquire how his brother, sir thomas dale, fare after that of his daughter, welfare her marriage hi^ unknown son, and how they like live and love together. i resolve, he, that his brother be very well and his daughter so well content that she will not change her life to return and live with he, whereat he laugh hearty and say he be very glad of it. now proceed, say he, to deliver the cause of your unexpected come. i certify he, my message be private to be deliver to himself without the presence of any save one of his councillor by name, pepas^hicher one. the cause of your unexpected come. i certify he my message be private to be deliver to himself, without the presence of any, save one of his councillor by name pepas^hicher, one of my guide who be acquaint with my business, he instant comm^uded all, both man and woman, out of the house, his two queen only except, who, upon no occasion whatsoever, may sequester themselves. now, say he speak on, and myself, by my interpreter, thus begin: sir thomas dale, your brother, the principal commander of the english man, send you greeting of love and peace on his part inviolable, and have in testimony thereof, by i send you a worthy present vid: two large piece of copper, five string of white and blue bead, five wooden. peace on his part, inviolable, and have in testimony thereof by i send you a worthy present vid: two large piece of copper, five string of white and blue bead, five wooden comb, ten fishhook and a pair of knife. all which i deliver he, one thing after another, that he may have time to view each particular, he will. i also to certify you that when you please to send man, he will give you a great grind stone. my message and gift hitherto, please he, i proceed thus, the bruit of the exquisite perfection of your young daughter be famous through all your territory. have come to the hear of your brother, sir thomas dale, who, for this purpose, have address i hither to increate you. of your young daughter be famous through all your territory. have come to the hear of your brother, sir thomas dale, who for this purpose have address i hither to increate you by that brotherly friendship you make profession of, to permit she with i to return unto he, partly for the desire which himself have and partly for the desire her ^^^ter have to see she of who, if fame have not be prodigal as like enough it have not, your brother, by your favour, will glad make his near companion, wife and bedfellow. many time he will have interrupt my speech, which i entreat he to hear out, and then, if he please, to return, i answer, and the reason hereof be because be now friendly. time he will have, interrupt my speech, which i entreat he to hear out, and then, if he please, to return. i answer, and the reason hereof be because be now friendly and firm, unite together and make one people, as he suppose, and believe in the band of love. he will make a natural union between we principal, because himself have take resolution to dwell in your country so long as he live and will therefore not only have the firm assurance he may of perpetual friendship from you, but also hereby bind himself thereunto. when i have thus make a end of speak, the soon by his often interruption, i have no need to require his answer, which, ready ^nd with no less gravity, he return. when i have thus make a end of speak, the soon by his often interruption i have no need to require his answer which, ready ^nd with no less gravity he return. thus i glad accept your king salute of love and peace which, while i live, i shall exact, both myself and subject, maintain and conserve. his pledge thereof i receive with no less thanks, albeit they be not so ample, howbeit himself a great weroance, as former captain newport, who i very well love be accustom to gratify i with, but to the purpose, my daughter, who my brother desire i sell within these few day to be wife to a great weroance, for two bushel of roanoake, a small kind of bead make of oystershel. my daughter, who my brother desire i sell within these few day to be wife to a great weroance for two bushel of roanoake, a small kind of bead make of oystershel which they use and pass one to another as we do money: a cubit length value six penny, and it be true she be already go with he three day journey from i. i reply that i know his greatness and power to be such that if he please herein to gratify his brother, he may restore the roanoake without the imputation of injustice, take home his daughter again, the rather because she be not full twelve year old and therefore not marriageable, assure he beside the band of peace. so much the firm he shall. take home his daughter again, the rather because she be not full twelve year old and therefore not marriageable, assure he beside the band of peace, so much the firm he shall have, treble the prize of his daughter in bead, copper, hatch^ts and m^ny other thing more useful for he. his answer hereunto be that he love his daughter as dear as his own life, and though he have many child he delight in none so much as in she who, if he shall nor often behold he can not possible live which she live with we. he know he can not have with himself resolve, upon no term whatsoever, to put himself into our hand or come among we, and therefore entreat i to urge that. with we. he know he can not have with himself resolve upon no term whatsoever to put himself into our hand or come among we, and therefore entreat i to urge that suit no further, but return his brother this answer. i desire no firm assurance of his friendship than his promise which he have already make unto i. from i he have a pledge, one of my daughter which so long as she live shall be sufficient. when she die he shall have another child of i, but she yet live. i hold it not a brotherly part of your king to desire to bereave i of two of my child at once. further, give he to understand that if he have no pledge at all, he a brotherly part of your king to desire to bereave i of two of my child at once. further, give he to understand that if he have no pledge at all he shall not need to distrust any injury from i o^ any under my subjection. there have be too many of his man and my kill, and by my occasion there shall never be more. i, which have power to performeit have, say it no, n^^'though i shall have just occasion offer, for i be now old and will glad end my day in peace, so as if the english offer i injury my country be large enough, i will remove myself far from you. thus much, i hope, will satisfy my brother now, because yourselves be so as if the english offer i injury my country be large enough, i will remove myself far from you. thus much, i hope, will satisfy my brother now, because yourselves be weary and i sleepy. we will thus end the discourse of this business. then call he one of his man and will he to get some bread for we himself, the mean, while tell we that they not expect our come as usual, they do eat up all their other victnal present. the bread be bring in. two great wooden bowl the quantity of a bushel sod bread, make up round of the bigness of a tennis b^ll, whereof we eat some few and dispose the rest to many of his hungry guard which attend about. a bushel sod bread make up round of the bigness of a tennis b^ll, whereof we eat some few and dispose the rest to many of his hungry guard which attend about we when we have eat. he cause to be fetch a great glass of sack, some three quart or better, which captain newport have give he six or seven year, since careful preserve by he not much above a pint in all this time spend and give each of we in a great oyster shell some three spoonful, and so give order to one of his people to appoint we a house to lodge in, take his leave for that night and we depart. we have not be half a hour in the house before the of his people to appoint we a house to lodge in, take his leave for that night and we depart. we have not be half a hour in the house before the flea begin, so to torment we that we can not rest there but go forth and under a broad oak upon a mat, repose ourselves that night. no soon be we awake and up in the morning. but powhatan himself come to we and ask we how we fare and immediate lead we to his house where be provide for our breakfast a great bowl of indian pease and bea^es, boil together, and as much bread as may have suffice a dozen hungry man about a hover. after boil, fresh fish, and not long after that. bowl of indian pease and bea^es, boil together and as much bread as may have suffice a dozen hungry man about a hover. after boil, fresh fish and not long after that roast, oyster crevice and crab his ^en. in this time be abroad a hunt, some venison, other turkey and such like beast and foul as their wood afford, who return before ten of the clock with three do and a buck, very good and fat venison and two great cock turkey. all which be dress that day and supper end scarce a bone to be see. while i yet remain there, by great chance come a english man thither, almost three year before that time, surprise as he be at work near fort henry one william. be see while i yet remain there. by great chance come a english man thither, almost three year before that time, surprise, as he be at work near fort henry one, william parker, grow so like both in complexion and habit to the indian that i only know he by his tongue to be a englishman. he seem very joyful, so happy to meet i there of he. when we often inquire the indian ever tell we that he fall sick and die, which till now we beleeved^. he entreat i to use my best endeavour to procure his return, which thing i be purpose. so soon as i know he and immediate go with he to powhatan and tell he that we credible believe that he be. to procure his return, which thing i be purpose. so soon as i know he and immediate go with he to powhatan and tell he that we credible believe that he be dead. but since it be otherwise, i must needs have he home for myself, of necessity, must acquaint his brother that i have see he there who, if he return not, will make another voyage thither purposely for he powhatan. seem very much discontent and thus reply: you have one of my daughter with you and i be therewith well content, but you can no soon see or ^now of any english man being with i, but you must have he away or else bre^ke peace and friendship. if you must needs h^ue he, he shal^. no soon see or ^now of any english man being with i, but you must have he away or else bre^ke peace and friendship. if you must needs h^ue he, he shal^ go with you, but i will send no guide along with you so as if any ill befall you. by the way, thank yourselves, i answer that rather than i will go without he, i will go alone the way i kne^ well enough, and other danger i fear not, since if i return not safe, he must expect our revenge upon he and his people. give he further to know that his brother, our king, may have just occasion to distrust his love to he by his slight respect of i. if he return, i his people give he further to know that his brother, our king, may have just occasion to distrust his love to he by his slight respect of i if he return i home without guide. he reply not hereunto but in passion and discontentment. from i not, till suppertime, speak any more unto i when send for i. he give i share of such cates as be for himself, provide and as good aspect and countenance as before, but not a word concern my return till himself. at midnight come to i and the boy where we lay awake we, and tell i that pepaschech^r and another of his man in the morning shall accompany we home. earnest request i to remember his brother, to send he these: we lay awake, we, and tell i that pepaschech^r and another of his man in the morning shall accompany we home. earnest request i to remember his brother to send he these particular ten piece of copper, a shave, kni^e, a iron from to cleave board, a grind stone not so big but four or five man may carryit, which will be big enough for his use, two bone comb, such as captain newport have. give he the wooden one. his own man can make a hundred fishhook or, if he can spare it rather, a fish sane and a cat and a dog. with which thing, if his brother will furnish he, he will require his l^ue with the return of skin wherewith he be now altogether. fish sane, and a cat and a dog, with which thing, if his brother will furnish he, he will require his l^ue with the return of skin, wherewith he be now altogether unfurnished, as he tell i, which yet i know he be well store with, but his disposition, mistrustful and jealous love to be on the sure hand wh^ he have deliver message. he ask i if i will remember every particular which i must repeat to he for his assurance, and yet ^till doubtful that i may forget any of they. he bid i write they down in such a table book as he show i, which be a very fair one, i desire he it be of no use to he to give it i. write they down in such a table book as he show i, which be a very fair one. i desire he it be of no use to he to give it i. but he tell i it do he much good to show it to stranger which come unto he. so in my own table book i write down each particular and he depart in the morning himself and we be timely stir to be go to breakfast. first we go with a good boil turkey, which end he give we a whole turkey beside that we leave and three basket of bread to carry we home. and when we be ^eady to depart he give each of we a excellent buck skin, very well dress and white. we leave and three basket of bread to carry we home. and when we be ^eady to depart, he give each of we a excellent buck skin, very well dress and white as snow, and s^nt his son and daughter. each of they one demand, if i well remember his answer to his brother, which i repeat to he. i hope lay he this will give he good satisfaction. if it do not, i will go three day journey f^rther from he and never see english man more. if upon any other occasion he send to i again, i will glad entertain his missive and to my power accomplish his just request and even thus himself conduct we to the water. sid^, he take leave of we and i again, i will glad entertain his missive and, to my power, accomplish his just request and even thus himself conduct we to the water. sid^, he take leave of we and we of he, and about ten of the clock the next night, after we be come to the bermuda. this discourse i have, brief as i can and as the matter will permit, the rather relate to make know how chary powhatan be of the conservation of peace, a thing much desire and i doubt not right. welcome news to the undertaker here, as may appear by his answer to my request and also by my safe passage thither and homewards, without the lest show of injury offer unto we though diverse times^by the way, many. may appear by his answer to my request and also by my safe passage thither and homewards, without the lest show of injury, offer unto we, though diverse times^by the way, many stragliug indian meet we which in former time will glad have take so ^aire occasion to work their mischief and bloody design upon we. by all which, as likewise by our forward progression in our affair, i hope such good success and benefit to be speedy. reap that ^y self, though i bless god for it- who have so provide for i that i may live more happy here than many who be fearful to adventure thither. can eu^n willing make a three voyage thither if by my poor endeavour the business may receive the least? may live more happy here than many who be fearful to adventure thither. can eu^n willing make a three voyage thither. if by my poor endeavour the business may receive the least furtherance, god, i hope, will raise up, mean beyond man imagination to perfect his own glory and honour in the conversion of those people of who, undoubted, as in all other part in the world, he have predestinate some to eternal salvation, and bless shall those be that be the instrument thereof. i hope this poor narration will move every honest heart to put his help hand thereunto. for my part, as i have be five year a personal workman in that build, so shall i ever, as my mean may permit, i be ready to. his help hand thereunto. for my part, as i have be five year a personal workman in that build, so shall i ever, as my mean may permit, i be ready to offer my mite towards the furnish of other, and again, if need require, personal labour. therein to the reader, there be two property especial, remarkable, which shall move all man, earnest and constant, with all their mean and endeavour to desire the a^cheiving of any thing and bring of the same unto perfection. first, the worth and excellency. second, the durableness and continuance thereof. for as that thing which be not durable by reason of fragility and fugacitie, be not usual esteem of man, though it be excellent, so that likewise which be not precious be. for as that thing which be not durable by reason of fragility and fugacitie be not usual esteem of man, though it be excellent, so that likewise, which be not precious be worthy little regard, though it be never so durable. now the virginian plantation have both these notable property, if at the least we will and impeach they not ourselves. for what be more excellent, more precious and more glorious then to convert a heathen nation from worship the devil to the sa^ing knowledge and true worship of god in christ jesus. what more praiseworthy and charitable then to bring a savage people from barbarism unto civi^^itie? what more honourable unto our ^^^ntre^ then to reduce a far disjoin foreign nation under the d^e obedience of our and charitable then to bring a savage people from barbarism unto civi^^itie. what more honourable unto our ^^^ntre^ then to reduce a far disjoin foreign nation under the d^e obedience of our dread sovereign, the king majesty. what more convenient then to have good s^ates abroad for our ever flow multitude of people at home? what more profitable then to purchase great wealth which most now adays gape after over-greedy, all which benefit be assure to b^e have and obtain by well and plentiful uphold of the plantation in virginia, and for the durableness of all these great and singular blessing there ^an by god, assistance be no doubt at all. make if man heart unto who god have lend, ability be but enlarge, cheerful to adventure and these great and singular blessing there ^an by god, assistance be, no doubt at all. make, if man heart unto who god have lend, ability be but enlarge, cheerful to adventure and send good company of honest, industrious m^n thither with a mind to enlarge christ kingdom. for than will god assure, maintain his own cause. but alas, as there be never yet any action so good, so honourable, so glorious, so pious and so profitable, but have have check and disconr^gements both by open enemy abroad and intestine adversary at home with in it own bowel. even so, may i true say, have this m^st glorious, most honourable, most pious and most profitable enterprise have for as of old, when zerubbabel, ezra and nehemia return from babel. bowel. even so, may i true say, have this m^st glorious, most honourable, most pious and most profitable enterprise have for as of old. when zerubbabel, ezra and nehemia return from babel, by allowance of the king of persia, to jerusalem and begin to repair the wall thereof and to restore god service there, want not a sanballat and other to say: what do these weak^ jew? will they fortify themselves? will they sa^crific^, will they finish it in a day? no, for although they build, yet if a fox go up he shall even break down that stony wall. even so, deal many sanballate and tobiahe foreign and domestical enemy of this most religious work. yea, there be many who will not seem enemy thereunto, but yet down that stony wall. even so, deal many sanballate and tobiahe, foreign and domestical, enemy of this most religious work. yea, there be many who will not seem enemy thereunto, but yet will neither further the business themselves. no, not according to their own engagement, which, in conscience and ^redit^ they ought nor quiet suffer o^hers that otherwise ^old, but discourage they therein all they may, some say, as judah once do, the strength of the bearer be weaken and there be much earth so as we be n^t able to build the wall, some, s^ying with the unfaithful spy, send forth to search the l^^d of canaan, the land we go through to ^earch it out be a land that eat up the inhabitant thereof for all. with the unfaithful spy, send forth to search the l^^d of canaan. the land we go through to ^earch it out be a land that eat up the inhabitant thereof. for all the people we see in it ar^ strong and m^n of ^reat stature. yea and some other say there be much already expend, and yet n^ profit arise. neither be there victual to be have for the preserve of life and soul together. but oh, my dear countryman, be not so far bewitch herewith as to be still discourage thereat, for t^ose that bring a vild slauder upon this action may die by a plague before the lord, as those man do, but rather remember your ancient worth renown, valour and bounty. hearken unto caleb and a vild slauder upon this action may die by a plague before the lord, as those man do, but rather remember your ancient worth, renown, valour and bounty. hearken unto caleb and josua who still the people mourn, say: let we go up at once and possess it for undoubted we shall overcome it, yet not so much now by force of arm, as the israelite do, then by warrant from god, nor by utter destroy of they, as some have cruel do since, as by gentleness, love, amity and religion. as for profit, it shall come abundant if we can, with the husbandman, but free, cast our corn into the ground and with patience wait for a blessing, and of victual there be now no complaint at. come abundant, if we can, with the husbandman, but free, cast our corn into the ground and with patience wait for a blessing, and of victual there be now no complaint at all, and that which be happen by the mere lazy negligence of our own people. now to the end that you may, the better perceive these thing to be true and be thereby the more animate, cheerful, to go forward in the uphold of this holy work. i will no long detain you from the perusal of some caleb and josu^hs faithful report. write there in june last this present year, 1614, and send hither by the last ship that come thence for further encouragement to put hereunto, speedy and plentiful, your help hand with al^lacrity. there in june last this present year, 1614, and send hither by the last ship that come thence for further encouragement to put hereunto speedy and plentiful, your help hand with al^lacrity. as for the that be able and yet will not further but endanger the ruin of this so glorious a cause by their miserableness, be without love and charity, to the great dishonour of god and our country, perpetual shame shall it now sink and fall to the gonnd. i leave they to he that make they to dispose of they according to his infinite wisdom. and so come to the letter themselves, the first and chief whereof be from sir thomas dale, martial and governor of virginia, unto a minister of london, to the r. infinite wisdom. and so come to the letter themselves, the first and chief whereof be from sir thomas dale, martial and governor of virginia, unto a minister of london, to the? r and my most esteem friend, mr dm, at his house at f? ch in london, right reverend sr, by sr thomas gate. i write unto you of such occasion as then present themselves, and now again by this worthy gentleman, captain argall. i salute you for such be the reverend regard i have of you. as i can omit any occasion to express the sincere affection i bear you you have ever give i encouragement to persevere in this religious warfare until your last letter, not for that you be now less well affect thereunto, but sincere affection i bear you you have ever give i encouragement to persevere in this religious warfare until your last letter, not for that you be now less well affect thereunto, but because you see the action to be in danger by many of their performance who under take the business i have undertake and have, as faithful and with all my might, endeavour the prosecution with all alacrity as god that know the heart can bear. i record what recompense or what reward by who or when. i know not where to expect, but from he in who vineyard i labour, who church, with greedy appetite i desire to erect my glorious master. be go, prince henry that will have ennamel with his favour, the labour i. he in who vineyard i labour, who church. with greedy appetite i desire to erect my glorious master. be go prince henry that will have ennamel with his favour, the labour i undertake for god cause and his immortal honour. he be the great captain of our israel, the hope to have build up this heavenly new jerusalem. he inter i think the whole frame of this business fall into his grave. for most man forward, at least seem so- desire a^e quench and virginia stand in desperate hazard. you there, do your duty. i will no way omit i. the time i promise to labour be expire. it be not a yoke of ox have draw i from this feast. it be not the marriage of a. no way omit i the time i promise to labour be expire. it be not a yoke of ox have draw i from this feast. it be not the marriage of a wife. make i haste home though that salad. give a appetite to cause i return ^ut i have more care of the stock then to set it upon a die and rather put myself to the courtesy of noble and worthy censure, then ruin this work and have a jury, nay, a million of foul mouth detractor scan upon my endeavour, the end whereof they can dive into. you shall brief understand what have betide since my last and how we now stand and be likely to grow to perfection if we be not altogether neglect. they can dive into. you shall brief understand what have betide since my last and how we now stand and be likely to grow to perfection if we be not altogether neglect my stay ground upon such reason as have i now return, it will have hazard, the ruin of all. sir thomas gate have embark himself for england. i put myself into captain argall ship ^ith. a hundred and fifty man in my frigate and other boat go into pamaunkie river where powhatan have his residence and can in two or three day draw a thousand man together with i. i carry his daughter who have be long prisoner with we. it be a day or two before we hear of they. at length. they demand why. thousand man. together with i. i carry his daughter, who have be long prisoner with we. it be a day or two before we hear of they. at length they demand why we come. i give for answer that i come to bring he his daughter. conditional he will, as have be agree upon for her ransom, render all the arm, tool, sword and man that have run away and give i a ^^ip full of co^ne for the wrong (@) have do unto we. if they will do this, we will be friend. if not burn all they demand time to send to their king, i assent, i take. they receive two pledge to carry my message to powhatan all night. my two man lay not far. burn all they demand time to send to their king. i assent, i take. they receive two pledge to carry my message to powhatan. all night my two man lay not far from the water side about noon the next day they tell they the great king be three day ^ourney off, that opochankano be hard by to who they will have. have they deliver their message, say that what he agree upon and do the great king will confirm this. opocankano be brother to powhatan and be he and their chief captain and one that can as soon, if not soon as powhatan command the man. but my man refuse to do my message unto any save^ powhatan. so they be bring back and i s^nt they. can as soon, if not soon, as powhatan command the man. but my man refuse to do my message unto any save^ powhatan. so they be, bring back and i s^nt they to they. they tell i that they will fetch simons to i who have thrice play the runagate ^hose lie and villainy. much hinder our trade for corn but they delay we. so as we go a shore they shoot at we. we be not behind hand with. they, kill some, hurt other, march into the land, burn their house, take their corn and quarter all night ashore. the next day we go further up the river they dog we and call to know white we go. we answer to burn all if they will not. quarter, all night ashore. the next day we go further up the river. they dog we and call to know white. we go. we answer to burn all if they will not do as ^e demand and have be agree upon they will. they say, bring all the next day. so we for ba^e all hostility, go a s^ore, their man, in good number come among we, but we be very cautious and stand to our arm. the king daughter go ashore but will not talk to any of they scarce to they of of the best sort, and to they only that if her father have love she, he will not value she less than old sword piece or axe, wherefore she will still dwell with the best sort and to they only that if her father have love she, he will not value she less than old sword piece or axe, wherefore she will still dwell with the english man who love she. at last come one from powhatan who tell we that simons be run away to nonsowhaticond, which be a truth, as afterward appear, but that the other english man be dead. that prove a lie. for since mr hamor, who i employ to powhatan, bring he to i our piece, sword and tool within fifteen day shall be send to james town with some corn and that his daughter shall be my child and ever dwell with. i desire to be ever friend and name such of his people and neighbour. to james town with some corn and that his daughter shall be my child and ever dwell with. i desire to be ever friend and name such of his people and neighbour, king as he desire to be, include and have the benefit of the peace promise. if any of our man come to he without leave from i, he will send they back and that if any of his man steal from we or kill our cattle he will send they to we to be punish as we think fit. with these condition, we return and within the time limit, part of our arm be send and 20.. man with corn and promise more, which he have also send opachankano desire, i will call he friend and and within the time limit, part of our arm be send and 20.. man with corn and promise more, which he have also send opachankano desire. i will call he friend and that he may call i, so say he be a great captain and do always fight, that i be also a great captain and therefore he love i and that my friend shall be his friend. so the bargain be make. and every eight or ten day i have message and present from he with many appearance that he much desire to continue friendship. now may you judge, sir, if the god of battle have not a help hand in this, that have our sword draw, kill their man, burn their house and take their corn. now may you judge, sir, if the god of battle have not a help hand in this, that have our sword draw, kill their man, burn their house and take their corn. yet they tender we peace and strive with all alacrity to keep we in good opinion of they, by which many benefit arise unto we. first part of our arm, disgraceful lose long ago, keep by the savage as monument and trophy of our shame. redeliver some repair to our honour. our cattle to increase, without danger of destroy our man at liberty to hunt, free for venison, to fish, to do any thing else or go any whither without danger to follow the husband of their corn secure, whereof we have above five hundred acre. hunt free for venison, to fish, to do any thing else, or go any whither without danger to follow the husband of their corn secure, whereof we have above five hundred acre set, and god be praise, in more forwardness than any of the indian that i have see or hear off this year. root and herb we have in abundanue, all doubt of want be, by god blessing, quite vanish and much plenty expect, and which be not the least material. we may, by this peace, come to discover the country better, both by our own travel and by the relation of the savage as we grow infamiliarity with they. powhatan daughter, i cause to be careful instruct in christian religion who, after she have, make some own travel and by the relation of the savage as we grow infamiliarity with they. powhatan daughter, i cause to be careful. instruct in christian religion who, after she have make some good progress therein, renounce public her country idolatry open, confess her christian faith, be as she desire, baptize and be since marry to a english gentleman of good understanding, as by his letter unto i coutain the reason for his marriage of she, you may perceive a other knot to bind this peace the strong. her father and friend give approbation to it and her uncle give she to he in the church she live civil and love with he and i trust will increase in goodness as the knowledge of god increase in she. she. her uncle, give she to he in the church. she live civil and love with he and i trust will increase in goodness as the knowledge of god increase in she. she will go into england with i and be it but the gain of this one soul. i will think my time, toil and present stay well spend. since this accident. the governor and people of checkahomany, who be five hundred bowman and better a s^out and warlike nation, have make mean to have we come unto they and conclude a peace where all the governor will meet i they have thus three or four time importune^ i i resolve to go. so take captain argall with fifty man in myfrigot and barge i go thither, captain. governor will meet i. they have thus three or four time importune^ i. i resolve to go. so take captain argall with fifty man in myfrigot and barge, i go thither, captain argall, with forty man land, i keep aboard for some reason. upon the meeting they tell captain argall, they have long to be friend, that they have no king but eight great man who govern they. he tell they that we come to be friend. ask they if they will have king james to be their king and whether they will be his man. they, after some conference between themselves, seem willing of both. demand if we will fight against their enemy. he tell they th^t. if any do they injury, they shall sen^ i word. they, after some conference between themselves, seem willing of both, demand if we will fight against their enemy. he tell they, th^t, if any do they injury, they shall sen^ i word and i will agree they. or if their adversary will not t^en, i will let they have as many man as they will to help they. they like well of that and tell he that all their man shall help we all. this be agree upon. c argall, give every councillor a ta^aha^k and a piece of copper which be kind take. they request further that if their boat shall happen to meet with our boat and that they say they be the chikahominy englishman and king james his man, we will let they pass we. further that if their boat shall happen to meet with our boat and that they say they be the chikahominy englishman and king james his man, we will let they pass. we agree unto it so that they pronounce themselves english man and king james his man. promise within fift^en day to c^^e (@) james town to see i and conclude these: ^ every bowman be to give i, as a tribute to king james, two measure of corn every harvest. the two measure contain two bushel and a half, and i to give every bowman a small tamahawke and to every counsellor a suit of red cloth, which do much please they. this people never acknowledge any king before, no, nor ever will acknowledge powhatan for their a small tamahawke and to every counsellor a suit of red cloth, which do much please they. this people never acknowledge any king before, no, nor ever will acknowledge powhatan for their king, a stout people they be and a delicate seat they have. now, sir, you see our condition. you and all worthy man may judge whether it will not be a grief to see these fair hope frostbitten and these fresh bud plant to wither, which have, i return, have assure follow for ^eer. be no one that the people will have to ^overn, they but myself, for i have now come away- have i not find a general desire in the best ^ort to return for england, letter upon letter, request upon request from their they, but myself, for i have now come away, have i not find a general desire in the best ^ort to return for england, letter upon letter, request upon request from their friend to return. so as i know not upon who to confer the care of this business in my absence, who i think fit be general dista. so as see the eminent ensue danger, shall i have leave this multitude not yet full refine, i be resolve to stay till harvest b^ get in and then settle thing according to my poor understanding and return if in the interim there come no authorize governor from england. consider, i pray you, since thing be bring to this pass, as you see, and that i shall have come. return if, in the interim, there come no authorize governor from england. consider, i pray you, since thing be bring to this pass, as you see, and that i shall have come ^way ^f th^n through their factious humour, mutiny or indiscretion of the chief i have leave behind, this shall fall to ruin. i then shoul^ receiu^ th^ (@) i incur the blame for quit the plantation, although i may do it both with my honour. my promise, stay of time be expire, an^ hau^ng warrant from my soneraigne, the king majesty. but the (@) reason move i, and that this action of such price, such excellency, and assure profit to (@) own knowledge, shall not die to the scorn of our nation and to give cause. reason move i, and that this action of such price, such excellency and assure profit to (@) own knowledge shall not die to the scorn of our nation and to give cause of laughter to the papist that desire cur^uine. i can assure you, no country of the world afford more, assure hope of infinite riches which, both by mi^e o^n p^^pl^s discovery and the relation of such savage who fidelity^e have often find, assure i. oh. why shall so many prince and noble man engage themselves and thereby intermeddle herein, have cause a number of so^es, transport themselves and be transport hither? why shall they, i say, relinquish this so glorious a action? for if their end be to build god a church, ^hey ought to persevere. so^es transport themselves and be transport hither. why shall they, i say, relinquish this so glorious a action? for if their end be to build god a church, ^hey ought to persevere. if otherwise, yet their honour engage th^m to be consiant. howsoever they stand, affect here be enough to content. they let their end^ be either for god or mammon. these th^ngs have animate i to stay for a little season, to leave those i be tie in conscience, to return unt^ to le^^e the assure benefit of my other fortune, the sweet society of my friend and acquaintance with all m^ndall delight, and reside here with much turmoil. w^ich i will constant do, rather than see god glory diminish my king and country dishonour, and these my friend and acquaintance with all m^ndall delight and reside here with much turmoil. w^ich i will constant do, rather than see god glory diminish my king and country, dishonour and these poor people i have the charge of ruin, and so i beseech you to answer for i, if you hear i tax for my stay, as some may just do, and that these be my chief motive. god i take to witness. remember i and the c^use i have in hand in your daily meditation and reckon i in the number of those that do sincere love you and you, and will ever rest in all office of a friend to do you service. from james town in virginia, the 18 of june 1614, thomas dale. do sincere love you and you, and will ever rest in all office of a friend to do you service. from james town in virginia, the 18 of june 1614, thomas dale, to my very dear and love cousin, m g, minister of the b? f in london. sir, the colony here be much better, sir thomas dale, our religious and valiant gevernour have now bring that to pass which never before can be effect for by war upon our enemy and kind usage of our friend he have. bring they to seek for peace of we which be make and they dare not break but that which be best one. pocahuntas or matoa, the daughter of powhatan, be marry to a honest and discreet english gentleman, master. we which be make and they dare not break, but that which be best. one pocahuntas or matoa, the daughter of powhatan, be marry to a honest and discreet english gentleman, master rolfe, and that, after she have open, renounce her country idolatry, confess the faith of jesus christ and be baptize, which thing, sir thomas dale, have labour along time to ground in she. yet, notwithstanding, be the virtuous deed of this worthy knight much debase by the letter which some wicked man have write from hence, and especial by one c ^. if you hear any condemn this noble knight or do fear to come hither for those slanderous letter, you may, upon my word, bold reprove they. you know that no malefactor can abide the. hear any condemn this noble knight or do fear to come hither for those slanderous letter you may, upon my word, bold, reprove they. you know that no malefactor can abide the face of the judge but themselves scorn to be. reprove do prosecute withal haired all those that labour their amendment. i marvel much that any man of honest life shall fear the sword of the magistrate, which be unsheathe only in their defence. but i () muse that so few of our english minister that be so hot against the surplis and subscription come hither where neither speak of. do they not either wilful, hide their talent or keep themselves at home for fear of lose a few pleasure. be there not any among they of. hither, where neither speak of, do they not, either, wilful, hide their talent or keep themselves at home for fear of lose a few pleasure. be there not any among they of moses, his mind, and of the apostle that for forsake all to follow christ. but i refer they to the judge of all heart and to the king that shall reward every one according to the gain of his talent. but you, my cousin, hold fast that which you ^ave, and i, though my promise of 3 year service to my country be expire, will abide in my vocation here until i be lawful call from hence. and so betake we all unto the mercy of god. in christ jesus, i rest for ever. virginia june. will abide in my vocation here until i be lawful. call from hence, and so betake we all unto the mercy of god. in christ jesus, i rest for ever. virginia, june 18. 1614. your most dear and love cousin alex whitaker, the copy of the gentleman letter to sir thomas da^e that, after marry powhatan daughter contain the reason mou^ing he thereunto: honourable sir and most worthy governor, when your leisure shall best serve you to peruse these line, i trust in god the beginning will not strike you into a great admiration than the end will give you good content. it be a matter of no small moment. concern my own, particular, which here i impart unto you and which touch i so near as the. end will give you good content. it be a matter of no small moment. concern my own particular, which here i impart unto you and which touch i so near as the tenderness of my salvation, howbeit i free, subject myself to your grave and mature judgement, deliberation, approbation and determination, assure myself of your zealous admonition and godly comfort, either persuade i to desist or encourage i to persist there in, with a religious fear and godly care for which, from the very instant that this begin to root itself within the secret bosom of my breast, my daily and earnest prayer have be, still be and ever shall be. proe forthwith as sincere a godly zeal as i possible may to be, direct aid and govern. my breast, my daily and earnest prayer have be, still be and ever shall be, proe forthwith as sincere a godly zeal as i possible may to be, direct aid and govern in all my thought, word and deed to the glory of god, and for my eternal consolation to persevere, wherein i never have more need nor, till now, can ever imagine to ha^e be move with the like occasion. but my case stand as it do, what better worldly refuge can i here seek, then, to shelter myself under the safety of your favourable protection? and do not my ease proceed from a unspotted conscience. i shall not dare to offer to your view and apr^oved judgement these passion of my trouble soul so full of. protection and do not my ease proceed from a unspotted conscience. i shall not dare to offer to your view and apr^oved judgement these passion of my trouble soul, so full of fear and tremble, be hypocrisy and dissimulation. but know my own innocency and godly fervour in the whole prosecution hereof. i doubt not of your benign acceptance and clement construction. as for malicious, depraver and turbulet spirit, to who nothing be tastful but what please^h their unsavoury palate, i pass not for they be well, assure in my persuasion by the often trial and prove of myself in my holy meditation and prayer that i be call hereunto by the spirit of god, and it shall be sufficient f^r i to be protect by yourself in. prove of myself in my holy meditation and prayer that i be call hereunto by the spirit of god, and it shall be sufficient f^r i to be protect by yourself in all virtuous and pious endeavour and for my more happy proceed herein my daily oblation shall ever be address to bring to pass so good effect that yourself and all the world may true say this be the work of god and it be marvelous in our eye. but to avoid tedious preamble and to come near the matter first, suffer i with your patience to swcepe and make c^eane the way wherein i walk from all suspicious and doubt which may be cover therein, and faithful to re^eale unto yo^ what shall move i hereunto. patience to swcepe and make c^eane the way wherein i walk from all suspicious and doubt which may be cover therein, and faithful to re^eale unto yo^ what shall move i hereunto. let therefore this my well advised protestation which here i make between god and my own conscience, be a sufficient witness at the dreadful day of judgment, when the secret of all m^ns heart shall be open to condemn. i herein, if my chief intent and purpose be not to strive with all my power of body and mind in the undertake of so mighty a matter, no way lead so far forth as man weakness may permit, with the unbridled desire of carnal affection. but for the good of this plantation, for the honour of mighty a matter no way lead so far forth as man weakness may permit, with the unbridled desire of carnal affection. but for the good of this plantation, for the honour of our country, for the glory of god, for my own salvation and for the convert to the true knowledge of god and jesus christ, a unbelieve creature, namely pokahuntas, to who my hearty and best thought be and have a long time be so entangle and enthrall in so intricate a labyrinth that i be even awearied to unwind myself thereout. but almighty god, who never fail his that true invocate his holy name, have open the gate and lead i by the hand that i may plain see and discern the safe path wherein to who never fail his, that true, invocate his holy name, have open the gate and lead i by the hand that i may plain see and discern the safe path wherein to trease. to you, therefore, most noble sir, the patron and father of we in this country, do i utter the effect of this? my settle and long continue affection, which have make a mighty war in my meditation. and here i do, true, relate to what issue this dangerous combat be come unto, wherein i have not only examine but throughle, try and pare my thought, even to the quick, before i can find any fit, wholesome and ^apt application to cure so dangerous a ulcer. i never fail to offer my daily and faithful prayer. my thought even to the quick, before i can find any fit, wholesome and ^apt application to cure so dangerous a ulcer. i never fail to offer my daily and faithful prayer to ^od for his sacred and holy assistance. i forget not to set before my eye the frailty of mankind, his prone to evil, his indulgency of wicked thought with many other imperfection, wherein man be daily ensnare and oftentimes overthrow, and they compare to my p^es^nt estate. nor be i ignorant of the heavy displeasure which almighty god conceive against the son of levy and israel for marry strange wife, nor of the inconvenience which may thereby arise with other, the like good motion which make i look about wary and with good circumspection into levy and israel for marry strange wife, nor of the inconvenience which may thereby arise with other. the like good motion which make i look about wary and with good circumspection into the ground, and principal agitation which thus shall provoke i to be in love with one who education have be rude, her manner barbarous, her generation accurse and so discrepant in all nurtriture from myself that oftentimes with fear and tremble, i have end my private controversy with this: sure these be wicked instigation hatch by he who seek and delight in man destruction, and so, with fervent prayer to ^e ever preserve from such diabolical assault as i take those to be, i have take some rest. thus, when i have think i have obtain. and so, with fervent prayer to ^e ever preserve from such diabolical assault as i take those to be, i have take some rest. thus, when i have think i have obtain my peace and quietness, behold another but more gracious tentation have make breach into my holy and strong meditation, with which i have be put to a new trial in a straight manner than the former. for beside the many passion and suffering which i have daily, hourly, yea, and in my sleep, in^ured even awake i, to astonishment, tax i, with remissness and carelessness, refuse and neglect to perform the duty of a good christian, pull i by the ear and cry: why do not thou endeavour to make she a christian? and these have carelessness, refuse and neglect to perform the duty of a good christian, pull i by the ear and cry: why do not thou endeavour to make she a christian? and these have happen, to my great wonder, even when she have be further separate from i, which, in common reason, be it not a undoubted work of god, may breed forgetfulness of a far more worthy creature beside. i, say the holy spirit of god, have often demand of i why i be create, if not for transitory pleasure and worldly vanity, but to labour in the lord vineyard there, to sow and plant, to nourish and increase the fruit thereof daily. add, with the good husband in the gospel, somewhat to the talent that in the end, the lord vineyard there, to sow and plant, to nourish and increase the fruit thereof daily. add, with the good husband in the gospel, somewhat to the talent that in the end the fruit may be reap to the comfort of the labourer in this life and his salvation in the world to come. and if this be as undoubted, this be the service jesus christ require of his best servant. w^ unto he that have these instrument of piety put into his ^ands and wilful despise to work with. they likewise add hereunto her great appearance of love to i, her desire to be teach and instruct in the knowledge of god, her capableness of understanding, her aptness and willingness to receive any good impression, and also appearance of love to i, her desire to be teach and instruct in the knowledge of god, her capableness of understanding, her aptness and willingness to receive any good impression, and also the spiritual beside her own incitement, stir i up hereunto. what shall i do? ^hall i be of so untoward a disposition as to refuse to lead the blind into the right way? shall i be so unnatural as not to give bread to the hungry, or uncharitable as not to cover the naked? shall i despise to actuate these pious duty of a christian? shall the base fear of displease the world overpower and withhold i from reucal unto man these spiritual work of the lord which, in my meditation and prayer, i have daily? christian. shall the base fear of displease the world overpower and withhold i from reucal unto man these spiritual work of the lord, which in my meditation and prayer i have daily make know unto he, god forbid. i assure trust he have thus deal with i for my eternal felicity and for his glory, and i hope so, to be guide by his heavenly grace that in the end, by my faithful pain and christian-like labour, i shall attain to that bless promise pronounce by that holy prophet daniel unto the righteous, that bring many unto the knowledge of god, namely that they shall shine like the star forever and ever. a sweet comfort can be to a true christian, nor a great encouragement for he to. unto the knowledge of god, namely that they shall shine like the star forever and ever. a sweet comfort can be to a true christian, nor a great encouragement for he to labour all the day of his life in the performance thereof, nor a great game of consolation to be desire at the hour of death and in the day of judgement. again, by my read and conference with honest and religious person have i receive no small encouragement beside the clearness of my conscience, clean from the fi^th of impurity which be unto i as a brazen brickwall, if i shall set down at large the perturbation and godly motion which have strive within i, i shall but make a tedious and unnecessary volume, but i as a brazen brickwall. if i shall set down at large the perturbation and godly motion which have strive within i, i shall but make a tedious and unnecessary volume, but i doubt not these shall be sufficient both to certify you of my tr^^ intent in discharge of my duty to god and to yourself, to who, gracious providence, i humble submit myself. for his glory, your honour, our country good, the benefit of this plantation and for the convert of one unregenerate to regeneration, which i beseech god to grant for his dear son christ jesus. his sake now, if the vulgar sort who square all man action by the base rule of their own filthiness shall tax or taunt i in this, my godly labour. christ jesus, his sake. now, if the vulgar sort who square all man action by the base rule of their own filthiness shall tax or taunt i in this, my godly labour, let they know it be not any hungry appetite to gorge myself with incontinency. sure, if i will, and be so sensual inclive, i may satisfy such desire, though not without a sear conscience, yet with christian more please to the eye and less fearful in the offence unlawful commit. nor be i in so desperate a estate that i regard not what become of i, nor be i out of hope but one day to see my country, nor so void of friend, nor mean in birth, but there to obtain a match to my. of i, nor be i out of hope but one day to see my country, nor so void of friend, nor mean in birth, but there to obtain a match to my great content. nor have i, ignorant, pass over my hope there or regardless, seek to lose the love of my friend by take this course. i know they all and have not rash, overslip any, but shall it please god, thus to dispose of i, which i earnest desire to fulfil my end before set down. i will hearty accept of it as a goaly tax appoint i, and i will never cease. god assist i until i have accomplish and bring to perfection so holy a work in which i will daily pray god to. goaly tax appoint i, and i will never cease. god assist i until i have accomplish and bring to perfection so holy a work in which i will daily pray god to bless i, to i and her eternal happiness, and thus desire no long to live to en^oy the blessing of god than this. my resolution do tend to such godly end as be by. i before declare not doubt of your favourable acceptance, i take my leave. beseech almighty god to rain down upon you such plenitude of his heavenly grace as your heart can wish and desire, and so i rest at your command, most willing to be dispose off john rolfe. virginia therefore, stand now in such a goodly proportion and fair forwardness of. can wish and desire, and so i rest at your command, most willing to be dispose off john rolfe. virginia therefore, stand now in such a goodly proportion and fair forwardness of thrive as it be never yet hitherto see in, since it begin to be first plant can but soon come to perfection, to the exceed great comfort of all, well affect christian, and no small profit of the planter and adventurer, if it be well second, and supply with a good number of able man. wherefore, let none be hereafter unwilling, all they may, to further this most honourable action and be forward to uphold and support it from fall by their speech and countenance, and free adventure thither, both in their person and also by to further this most honourable action and be forward to uphold and support it from fall by their speech and countenance, and free adventure thither both in their person and also by their purse, as god have enable they to conclude. as azariah say once to king azah, juda and benjamin, so say i unto all: be you strong, therefore, and let not your hand be weak, for your work shall have a reward. and as the holy apostle say to the corinthian, be you therefore steadfast, unmovable, abundant always in the work of the lord, for as much as you know, your labour be not in vain in the lord. let we not, therefore, be weary of welldoing, for in due season we shall reap if we. for as much as you know, your labour be not in vain in the lord. let we not therefore be weary of welldoing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not as the apostle tell the galatian farewell.