the observation of sir richard hawkins knight in his voyage into the south sea, 1593.. sect i, with the counsel, consent and help of my father, sir john hawkins knight, i resolve a voyage to be make for the land of japan, of the phillippinas and moluea, the kingdom of china and east indies, by the way of the strait of magelan and the south sea. the principal end of our designment be the necessary use of discovery, to make a perfect discovery of all those part where i shall arrive as well, know as unknown, with their longitude and latitude, the lie of their coast, their headland of travail, their pons and bay, their city, town, and peopling their manner of government with the commodity which the country yield and of which they have want and be in necessity. for this purpose, in the end of 1588. return from the journey against the spanish armado, i cause a ship to be build in the river of thames, betwixt three and four hundred ton, which be finish in that perfection as can be require for she be please to the eye o^ ship profitable. for stowage, good of sail and well condition the day of her launch be appoint the lady hawkins, my mother in law, crave the name of the ship, which be easy. grant she who know what voyage be pretend to be undertake. name she the repentance. what her thought be be, keep secret to herself. and although many time i expostulate with she to declare the reason for give she that uncouth name, i can never have any other satisfaction than that repentance. be the safe ship we can sail in to purchase the haven of heaven. well, i know she be no prophetess, though, a religious and most virtuous lady and of a very good understanding, yet too prophetical it fall out by god secret judgment which. in his wisdom, be please to reveal unto we by so unknown a way and be sufficient for the present to cause i to desist from the enterprise and to leave the ship to my father who willing take she and pay the entire charge of the building and furnish of she which i have concort, or pay, and this i do not for any superstition i have in name or for that i think they able to further or hinder any thing, for that all immediate depend upon the providence of almighty god and be dispose by he alone, improper name for ship. yet advise i all person, ever as near as they can, by all mean and in all occasion, to presage unto themselves the good. they can and in give name to terrestrial work, especial to ship, not to give such as mere represent the celestial character, for few have i know or see come to a good end which have have such attribute as be plain see in the revenge, the revenge which be ever the unfortunate ship the late queen majesty have during her reign for come out of ireland with sir john parrot, she be like to be cast away upon the kentish coast after in the voyage of sir john hawkins, my father, 1586.. she strike aground, come into plymouth before her go to sea upon the coast of spain. she leave her fleet ready to sink with a great leake at her return into the harbour of plymouth. she beat upon winter stone and after, in the same voyage, go out of portsmouth haven, she run twice aground and in the latter of they lay twenty two hour, beat upon the shore and at length, with eight foot of water in hold, she be force off and present run upon the oose and be cause that she remain there with other three ship of her majesty six month till the spring of the year. when, come about to be deck, enter the river of thames, her old leak break upon she have like to have drown all those which be in she in 1591.. with a storm of wind and weather ride at her mooring in the river of rochester, nothing but her bare ma^ts over. head she be turn topse-turvie, her keel uppermost, and the cost and loss she wrought. i have too good cause to remember in her last voyage in which she be lose, when she give england and spain just cause to remember. she for the spaniard themselves confess that three of their ship sink by her side and be the death of above 1500.. of their man, see m^ster hac^u^ts relation with the loss of a great part of their fleet by a storm which sudden take they the next day. what english die, in she many live be, witness among which be sir richard greenfeild, a noble and valiant gentleman, vide-admiral in she of her majesty fleet, so that well, consider she be even a ship load, and full fraught. with ill success. the like we may behold in the thunderbolt of london, the thunderbolt o^ london, who in one voyage, as i remember, have her mast cleave with a thunderbolt upon the coast of ^arbary, after, in dartmouth, go for admiral of the waftage and guard of the fleet for the river of bourdieux, have also all her poop blow up with fire sudden, and until this day never can be know the cause or manner, how and last she be burn with her whole company in. the river of bourdieux and master edward wilson, general in she slay by his enemy, have escape the fire. the success of the jesus of lubeck. the jesus of lubeck in saint john de vlua in the spania, infamous to the spaniard. with my repentance in the south sea, the repentance take by force, have utter impoverish and overthrow our house. the journey of spain, pretend for england. the journey of spain 1587. call the journey of revenge, leave the principal of their man and ship on the rock of cape finister and the rest make a lamentable end, for the most part in the groin. no more for this point, but to our purpose, sect 2, the repentance be put in perfection and ride at detford the. queen, majesty, pass by she to her palace of greenwych, command her bargeman to row round about she and view she from post to stem, dislike nothing but her name and say that she will christian, she a new, and that thenceforth she shall be call the dainty, which name she brook as well for her proportion and grace as for the many happy voyage she make in her majesty service. have take for her majesty a great bysten of five hundred ton load with iron and other commodity, under the conduct of sir martin furbusher, a carrack bind for the east in^ies under my father charge, and the principal cause of take the great carrack bring to dartmouth by sir john borrow and the earl of cumberland. ship 1592.. with other of moment in her other voyage to we she never bring but cost trouble and care. therefore my father resolve to sell she, though with some loss which he impart with i and for that i have ever a particular love unto she and a desire she shall continue we. i offer to case he of the charge and care of she and to take she with all her furniture at the price he have before. take she of i with resolution to put in execution the voyage for which she be first build, although it lay six month and more in suspense, partly upon the pretend voyage for and panama, which then be fresh a foot, and partly upon the carrack at dartmouth. in which i be employ as a commissioner. but this business be end and the other pretence wax cold. the five of march, i resolve and begin to go forward with the journey so often talk of and so much desire consideration for, pretend voyage and have make a estimate of the charge of victual munition, imprest sea-store and necessary for the say ship consort, another of a hundred ton which i wait for daily from the strait of giberalter, with a pynace of sixty ton all my own, and for a competent number of man for they, as also of all sort of merchandise for trade and traffic. in all place where we shall come. i begin to wage man to buy all manner of victual and provision and to lade she with they and with all sort of commodity which i can call to mind fit and dispatch order to my servant in plymouth to put in a readiness, my pynace as also to take up certain provision which be better, cheap in those part then in london, provision better provide at plymouth then at london as beef, pork, biscuit and cider. and with the diligence i use and my father furtherance, at the end of one month i be ready to set sail for plymouth to join with the rest of my ship and provision. but the expect of the come of the lord. high admiral, sir robert cecil, principal secretary to her majesty, and sir walter rawley, with other, to honour my ship, and i, with their presence and farewell, detain i some day, and the rain and untemperate weather deprive i of the favour which i be in hope to have receive at their hand, whereupon be loath to loose. more time and the wind serve according to my wish. the eight of april 1593.. i cause the pilot to set sail from blackwall and to veil down to gravesend, whether that night i purpose to come have. take my unhappy last leave of my father, sir john hawkins. i take my barge and row down the river and come to bark. we may see my ship at a anchor. in the midst of the channel, where ship be not wont to more themselves. this breed in i some alteration and come aboard. she one and other begin to recant the peril they have pass of loss of ship and good, which be not little, for the wind be at east, north-east when they set sail and veer out southerly, it force they for the double of a point to bring their tack aboard and looff up the wind fresh. sudden the ship begin to make a little heel and for that she be very deep load and her port open. the water begin to enter in at they, which no body have regard unto note, think themselves safe in the river. it augment in such manner as the weight of the water begin to press down the side more than the wind at length. when it be see and the sheet fly, she can hardly be bring upright. but god be please that, with the diligence and travel of the company, she be free of that danger, which may be a gentle warning to all, such as: take charge of ship, even before they set sail, either in river or harbour or other part, to have a eye to their port and to see those shut and callk which may cause danger, for avoid the many mishap which daily chance for the neglect thereof and have be most lamentable spectacle and example unto we experiment in the great harry. admiral of england which be overset and sink at ports-mouth with her captain carew and the most part of his company drown in a goodly summer day, with a little flaw of wind for that her port be all open and make a small heel by. they enter their destruction where, if they have be shut, no wind can have hurt. she especial in that place, in the river of thames, master thomas candish have a small ship overset through the same negligence and one of the fleet of sir francis drake in santo domingo harbour turn her keel upward, likewise, upon the same occasion, with many other which we never have knowledge of. and when this come to pass, many time negligence be cloak with the fury. of the wind which be a double fault, for the truth be know, other will be warn to shun the like neglect, for it be a very bad ship who mast crack not asunder, who sail and tackle fly not in piece before she overset, especial if she be english build. and that which over-setteth the ship be the weight of the water that press down the side which as it enter more and more increase the weight, and the impossibility of the remedy for the water not enter, with case of the sheate, or strike the sail or put the ship before the wind or sea or other diligence as occasion be offer, and all expert mariner know remedy be easy find. with this mischance, the mariner be so daunt that they will not proceed with the ship any further, except she be light, which indeed be needless for many reason which i give. but, mariner, be like to a stiff neck horse which take the bridle, betwixt his tooth, force his rider to what he list, ma^ger his will. so they have once conclude and resolve, be, with great difficulty, bring to yield to the reins of reason and to colour their negligence. they add cost, trouble and delay. in fine, see no other remedy. i dispatch that night a servant of i to give account to my father of that which have pass and to bring i present some bark of london to go along with i to plymouth, which not find. he bring i a hoy in which i load some six or eight tun to give content to the company, and so set sail the 13. of april, and the next day we put in at harwich, for that the wind be contrary, and from thence depart the 18. of the say month. in the morning, when we be clear of the sand, the wind veer to the south-west and so we be force to put into margat roade, whether come present after we, a fleet of hollander of above. a hundred sail bind for rochel to load salt and in their company a dozen ship of war, their waster. very good ship and well appoint in all respect, all which come alongst by our ship, and ^^^ured we, as be the custom of the sea, some with three, other with five, other with more piece of ordinance. the next morning, the wind vere easterly. i set sail and the hollander with i, and they with the flood in hand, go out at the north-sands-head and i through the gull to shorten my way and to set my pilate shore. come near the south-sore-land, the wind begin to veer to the southeast, and by south. so as we can not double the point of the land and be close aboard the shore and put our ship to slay, what with the chap sea and what with the tide upon the bow, she miss stay and put we in some danger before we can flact about. note, therefore, for double the point of any land better be ever a short board, then, to put all in peril, be tack about, we think to anchor in the down, but the sail set, we make a small board and after cast about again, double the foreland and run alongst the coast till we come to the i will of wight, where be becalm, we send a shore master, thomson of harwich, our pilot not be able. before to set he on shore. for the perverseness of the wind, be clear of the wight, the wind veer southerly and before we come to port-land, to the west, south-west, but with the help of the ebb, we recover port-land, ronde, where we anchor all that night, and the next morning, with the ebb, we set sail again, the wind at west, south-west, purpose to bear it up all the ebb and to stop the flood. be under sail. sect 3: the fleet of fleming, which have be in our company before come tower into the road, the providence o^ the dutch, which certain be a thing worth the note to behold the good order. the master observe in guard of their fleet, the admiral, the r^st. of the man of war spread alongst to windward. all save the vice-admiral and her consort, which be leemost and stern-most of all, and except the admiral which be the first that come to a anchor, none of the other man of war anchor before all the fleet be in safety, and then they place themselves round about the fleet. the vice-admiral, seamost and leemost, which we have, teach unto most nation, and they observe it now a day better than we, to our shame. the english author of sea discipline, that be the author and reformer of the best discipline and law in sea cause be become those which do now worst, execute they. and i can gather whence this contempt have grow, except of the neglect. of discipline, or rather in give command for favour to those, by they again neglect, which want experience of what be commit to their charge, or that there have be little curiosity in our country in write of the discipline of the sea which be not less necessary. for we then that of the law, and i be of opinion that the want of experience be much more tolerable in a general by land, then in a governor by sea, for in the field the lieutenant general, the sergeant maior and the colonel supply what be want, in the general, for that they all command, and ever there be place for counsel, which in the sea by many accident be deny, and the head be he that manage. all in, who alone, if there be defect, all be bad, govern for by ignorance. how can error be judge or reform? and therefore i wish all to take upon they that which they understand and refuse the contrary as sir henry palmer. the modesty of sir henry palmer, a wise and valiant gentleman, a great commander and of much experience in sea cause, be appoint by the queen majesty counsel to go for general of a fleet for the coast of spain, 1583.. submit himself to their lordship pleasure, excuse the charge. say that his train up have be in the narrow sea and that of the other. he have little experience and therefore be in duty. bind to entreat their honour to make choice of some. other person that be better acquaint and experiment in those sea that her majesty and their lordship may be, the better serve. his modesty and discretion be doubtless to be have in remembrance, and great estimation for the ambition of many which covet the command of fleet and place of government, not know their compass, nor how, nor what to command, do purchase to themselves shame and loss to those that employ they be. require in a commander at sea part. require in a commander at sea a sharp wit, a good understanding, experience in ship practise in mannagement of sea, business knowledge in navigation and in command. i hold it much better to deserve it and not to have it then to have it not deserve it. sect 4. the fruit and inconvenience of the latter we daily partake of to our loss and dishonour, as in the fleet that go for burdieux 1592.. which have six gallant ship for waster. the loss of the burdieux fleet ^592 at their go out of plymouth. the vide-admiral that shall have be starnmost of all, be the headmost and the admiral the light, and he that do execute the office of the vide-admiral, launch off into the sea, draw after he the great part of the fleet, and night come on and both bear light, cause a separation so that the head have a quarter of the body and the fleet three quarter, and he that shall go before come behind, whereof ensue that the three part. meet with a few spanish man of war want their head be a prey unto they, for the vide-admiral and other waster that shall be the shepherd to guard and keep their flock and to carry they in safety before they be headmost, and they the man who make most haste to fly from the wolf, the caus^, whereas if they have do as they ought, in place of loss and infamy, they have gain, honour and reward. this i have be inform of by the spanish and english which be present in the occasion, and a ship of i be one of the starnmost, free herself for that she be in warlike manner, with her false net, many pendent and streamer, and at least 16. or 18.. piece of artillery. the enemy think she to be a waster or ship of war. not one of they dare lay she aboard, and this the master and company vaunt of at their return in the same voyage in the river of burdieux. as be credible report. if the six waster have keep together, they have not only not receive damage but get much honour and reputation. for the admiral of the spanish armado be a flemish ship of not above 130.. ton, the weakness of the enemy, and the rest flie-boate and small ship for the most part, and although they be 22. sail in all, what manner of ship they be and how furnish and appoint, be well know with the difference in the fleet of. her majesty, under the charge of my father, sir john hawkins, 1590.. upon the coast of spain, the voyage of sir john hawkins, 1590.. the vide-admiral be a head, one morning, where his place be to be a stern, lose we the take of eight man of war, load with munition, victual, and provision for the supply of the soldier in britain, and although they be seven or eight league from the shore, when our vide-admiral begin to fight with they, yet for that the rest of our fleet be some four, some five league and some more distant from they, when we begin to give chase, the spaniard recover into the harbour of among, before our admiral can come up to give direction. yet well, beat with. loss of above two hundred man, as they themselves confess to. i after, and doubtless if the wind have not overblown and that to follow they, i be force to shut all my low port. the ship i undertake, doubtless have never endure to come to the port but be double fli-boate and all good of sail they bear for their life and we what we can to follow and fetch they up in this point, at the i will of flores, sir richard greenfield get eternal honour and reputation. of great valour, sir richard greenfield, at flores, and of a experiment soldier, choose rather to sacrifice his life and to pass all danger whatsoever then to sail in his obligation by gather together those which have remain. a shore in that place, though with the hazard of his ship and company, and rather we ought to embrace a honourable death then to live with infamy and dishonour by fail in duty. and i account that he and his country get much honour in that occasion for one ship and of the second sort of her majesty, sustain the force of all the fleet of spain and give they to understand that they be impregnible for have buy dear the board of she. diverse and sundry time and with many joint and with a continual fight of 14. or 16. hour at length leave she, without any mast stand, and like a log in the sea she make, notwithstanding, a most honourable composition of life and liberty for above two hundred and sixty man, as by the pay-booke appear which her majesty of her free grace command, in recompense of their service, to be give to every one his six month wage. all which may worthy be write in our chronicle in letter of gold in memory for all posterity, some to beware and other by their example, in the like occasion to imitate the true valour of our nation in these age in point of providence, which captain vavisor in the foresight give also good proof of his valour. captain vavisor, in cast about upon the whole. fleet, notwithstanding the greatness and multitude of the spanish armad^, to yield that succour which he be able. although some do say, and i consent with they, that the bes^ valour be to obey and to follow the head, seem that good or bad which be command. for god himself tell we that obedience be better than sacrifice. yet in some occasion where there be difficulty or impossibility to know what be command, many time it be great discretion and obligation judicious to take hold of the occasion to yield succour to his associate without put himself in manifest danger. but to our voyage, sect v be clear of the race of portland, the wind begin to suffle with fog and mizzling rain and force we to a short sail which continue with we three day. the wind never vere one point, nor the fog. suffer we to see the coast. the three day in the fog, we meet with a bark of dartmouth which come from rochel and demand of they if they have make any land, answer that they have only see the edie stone that morning, which lie thwart of the sound of plymouth and that dartmouth, as they think, bear off we north, north-east, which seem strange unto we, for we make account that we be thwart of exmouth within two hour after the. wether begin to clear up and we find ourselves thwart of the berry and may see the small bark bear into torbay, have over-shot her port, which error often happen to those that make the land in foggy weather and use not good diligence, by sound, by lie off the land and other circumstance to search the truth and be cause of the loss of many a ship and the sweet life of multitude of man. that evening we anchor in the range of dartmouth. till the flood be spend and the ebb come, we ^et sail again, and the next morning early be the 26. of april, we harbour ourselves in plymouth, my ship at a anchor and i ashore, i present, dispatch a messenger to london. to advise my father, sir john hawkins, what have pass which, not only to he but to all other that understand what it be, seem strange that the wind contrary, and the weather such as it have be, we can be able to gain plymouth. but doubtless the dainty be a very good sea ship and excellent by the wind which, with the neap stream and our diligence to benefit ourselves of all advantage, make sezible that which almost be not to be believe. and in this occasion i find by experience that one of the principal part require in a mariner, part, requisite in a good mariner that frequent our coast of england, be to cast his tide and to know how they set from point to point, with the difference of those in the channel from those of the shore. sect 5 now present, i begin to prepare for my dispatch and to hasten my departure and find that my ship, which i expect from the strait come not and that she be to go to london to discharge and uncertain how long she may stay, i resolve to take another of my own in her place, though lesser call the hawk only for a victualler purpose in the coast. of brasill or in the strait to take out her man and victual and to cast she off sect 7. with my continual travel, the help of my good friend, and excessive charge which none can easy believe but those which have prove it, towards the end of may i be ready to set sail with my three ship, draw out into the sound and begin to gather my company aboard. the 28. of may, as i remember, begin a storm of wind westerly. the two lesser ship present, harbour themselves, and i give order to the master of the dainty, call hugh cornish, one of the most sufficient man of his coat, to bring she also into catt-water, which he labour to do, but be near the mouth of the harbour and doubt least the anchor be weigh, the ship may cast the contrary way and so run on some peril, entertain himself a while in lay out a warp, and in the mean time, the wind fresh and the ship ride by one anchor, break the flooke of it, and so force they to let fall another, by which, and by the warp they have lay out, they rydd the storm be such a cruel storm as be within hear. of those upon the shore, we be not able by any mean to send they succour, and the second day of the storm desire much to go aboard there. join with i, captain william anthony, captain john ellis and master henry courton, in a light-horsman which i have all man exercise in charge, and therein the effect of courage and advise and of valour and sufficiency, and from their youth breed up in business of the sea. which notwithstanding, and that we labour what we can for the space of two hour against wave and wind, we can find no possibility to accomplish our desire which, see, we go aboard the other ship and put they in the best security we can, thus busy we may see come. drive by we the main mast of the dainty which make i to fear the worst, and so haste ashore to satisfy my long. and come upon catt-downe we may see the ship heave and set which manifest show the loss of the mast. only which be well, employ for it, save the ship man and good for have she drive a ship length more. she have no doubt be cast away and the man in that place can not choose but run into danger. come to my house to shift i for that we be all wet to the skin. i have not well change my clothes when a servant of i who be in the pynace at my, come ashore the loss of the pynace enter. almost out of breath with news that she be beat upon the rock, which though i know to be remediless. i put myself in place where i may see she and in a little time after she, sink down right. these loss and mischance, trouble and grieve, but nothing daunt i, for common experience teach i that all honourable enterprise be accompany with difficulty and danger. i esperanca of hard beginning, many time come prosperous and happy event, and although a wellwilling friend wise, foretell i they to be presage of future bad success. and so dissuade i what lie in he with effectual reason, from my pretence, yet the hazard of my credit and danger of disreputation, to take in hand that which i shall not prosecute. by all mean possible be more powerful to cause i to go forward than his grave good counsel to make i desist. and so the storm cease, i begin to get in the dainty to mast she anew and to recover the fancy my pynace which, with the help and furtherance of my wine father, who supply all my want, together with my credit, which i thank god, be unspotted in ten day, put all in his former estate or better. and so, once again, in god name, i bring my ship out into the, find the wind be easterly and begin to take my l^ave of my friend and of my dear friend, my second ^elfe, who unfeigned tear have wrought i unto irresolution and send some other in my room. have i not consider that he that be in the dance must needs dance on, though he do, but hopp except, he will be a laugh stock to all the looker on. so remember that many have their eye set upon i with diverse affection, as als^ the hope of good success. my intention be honest and good. i shut the door to all impediment and my ear to all contrary counsel and give place to voluntary. banishment from all that i love and esteem in this life, with hope thereby better to serve my god, my prince and country, then to increase my talent any way. and so begin to gather my company aboard which occupy my good friend, abuse of some seafaring man and the justice of the town two day and force we to search all lodging, tavern and alehouse, for some will ever be, take their leave and never depart. some drink themselves, so drink that except they be, carry aboard. they of themselves be not able to go one step. other know the necessity of the time, feign themselves sick other to be indebt to their host and force i to ransom. they, one his chest, another his sword, another his shirt, another his card and instrument for sea and other, to benefit themselves of the impress give they absent themselves, make a lewd live in deceive all who money they can lay hold of, which be a scandal too ri^e among our seaman. by it they commit three great offence: 1. robbery of the good of another person. 2. breach of their faith and promise. 3. and hindrance with loss of time unto the voyage. all be a common injury to the owner, victualler and company, which many time have be a utter overthrow and undo to all. in general a abuse in our commonwealth necessary to be reform. and as a person that have both see and feel by experience these inconvenience, i wish it to be remedy. for i can but wonder that the late lord high admiral of england, the late earl of cumberland and the lord thomas howard, now earl of suffolk, be of so great authority, have, to their cost and loss, so often make experience of the inconvenience of these lewd proceed. have not unite their goodness and wisdom to redress this disloyal and base absurdity of the vulgar master thomas candish. in his last voyage, master thomas candish, in the sound of plymouth, be ready to set sail. complain unto i, that person which have absent themselves in imprest. have cost he above a thousand and five hundred pound. these varlet, within a few day after his departure i see walk the street of plymouth who the justice have before seek for with great diligence and without punishment, and therefore it be no wonder that other presume to do the like impunit, as the like complaint make, master george reymond. master george reymon^ and in what sort they deal with i be notorious and be such that if i have not be provident to have have a three part more of man than i have need of, i have be force to go to the sea unman or to give over my voyage and many of my company at sea vaunt. how they have cozen the earl. of cumberland, master candish, master reymond and other, some of five pound, some of ten, some of more and some of less, and true i think my voyage prosper. the worse for they and other lewd person company which be in my ship, which i think may be redress by some extraordinary, severe and present justice to be execute on the offender by the justice in that place where they shall be find and for find they, it be good that all captain and master of ship, at their departure out of the port, shall give unto the head justice the name and sign of all their runaway and they present to dispatch to the ^igher port the advise agreeable where meet with they without further delay or process to use martial law upon they. without doubt see the law once put in execution they and all other will be terrify from such villainy it may be. remedy, also by utter take away of all imprest, the inconvenience of imprest, which be a thing late, creep into our commonwealth and in my opinion of much more hurt. then good unto all and although my opinion seem harsh, it be a deed of charity to help the needy, which i wish ever to be exercise and by no mean will contradict. yet for that such as go to the sea for the most part consume that money lewd before they depart, as common experience teach we, and when they come from sea many time come more beggarly home then when they go forth have receive and spend their portion before they embark themselves and have neither rent nor maintenance, more than their travel, to sustain themselves. be force to theeve, to cozen or to run away in debt beside many time it be a occasion to some to lie upon a voyage a long time, whereas if they have not that impress, they may perhaps have gain more in another employment and have be at home again to serve that which they wait^ for. for these and many more weighty reason, i be still bold to maintain my former assertion: the true use of imprest those only use in his majesty ship. i comprehend, not in this my opinion, neither the imprest make to marry man which will be give to their wife monthly in their absence for their relief. for that be well know that all which go to the sea nowadays be provide of food and houseroom and all thing necessary during the time of their voyage and in all long voyage, of apparel also, so that nothing be to be spend during the voyage, that money which be wont to be cast away in imprestes may be employ in apparel and necessary at the sea and give to those that have need at the price it be buy, to be deduct out of their share or wage at their return, which be reasonable and charitable, this course. take, if any will run away, in god name, fare he. well, some have a more colourable kind of cunning to abuse man and to sustain themselves. such will go to sea with all man and go never from the shore for as long as board-wage last they be of the company. but those take end or the ship in readiness. they have one excuse or other and think themselves no long bind. but whilst they receive money and then pluck their head out of the collar, a abuse also worthy to be reform. sect 8, the great part of my company, gather aboard. i set sail the 12. of june 1593.. about three of the clock in the afternoon and make a board or two off and in wait the return of my boat, which i have send ashore for dispatch of some business which be come aboard and all put in order, i looft near the shore to give my farewell to all the inhabitant of the town, whereof the most part be gather together upon the how to show their grateful correspondency to the love and zeal which i, my father and predecessor have ever bear to that place. as to our natural and mother town, and first with my noise of trumpet, after with my wait, and then with my other music, and last with the artillery of my ship, i make the best signification. i can, of a kind farewell. this they answer with the wait of the town and the ordinance on the shore and with shout of voice which, with the fair evening and silence of the night, be hear a great distance off all which take end. i send instruction and direction to my other ship, the consequence of instruction at departure, which be a point of special importance, for that i have see, commander of great name and reputation, by neglect and omission of such solemnity to have run into many inconvenience and thereby have learn the necessity of it, whereby i can but advise all such as shall have charge, commit unto they ever before they depart out of the port, to give unto their whole fleet. not only direction for civil government but also where, when and how to meet if they shall chance to loose company, and the sign how to know one another afar off with other point and circumstance as the occasion shall minister matter different at the discretion of the wise commander. but some one may say unto i that in all occasion it be not convenient to give direction, for that. if the enemy happen upon any of the fleet or that there be any treacherous person in the company, their designment may be discover and so prevent. to this i answer that the prudent governor, by good consideration, may avoid this by publication of that which be good and necessary for the guide of his fleet and people. by all secret instruction to give they seal and not to be open, but come to a place, appoint, after the manner of the turkish direction to the pasha who be their general, and in any eminent peril to cast they by the board or otherwise to make away with they. for he that set sail, not give direction in write to his fleet, know not if the night or day follow he may be separate from his company, which happen sometime, and then if a place of meeting be not know, he run in danger not to join they together again. and for place of meeting when separation happen. i be of opinion to appoint the place of meeting in such a height, twenty or thirty or forty league off the land or island, east or west, be not so fit if the place afford it, as some sound betwixt land or some island or harbour. it may be allege, in contradiction and with probable reason, objection against meeting in harbour, that it be not fit for a fleet to stay in a harbour for one ship, nor at a anchor at a island for be discover or for hindrance of their voyage. yet it be the best for when the want be, but for one or two ship. answer: a pynace or ship may wait the time appoint. and remain with direction for they but common. one ship, though, but a bad sailor, make more haste than a whole fleet and be at the meeting place first. if the accident be not very important, the place of meeting, if it may be, will be able to give at the least refresh of water and wood. sect 9 launch out into the channel. the wind be at east and by south and east, south east which blow hard and a flood in hand, cause a chap sea. and my vide-admiral bear a good sail, make some water and shoot off a piece of ordinance. i edge towards she to know the cause. who answer i, that they have spring a great leake and that of force. they must return into the sound which see to be necessary. i cast about where anchor and go aboard present, find that betwixt, wind and water false calk, the calker have leave a seam uncalk which be fill up with pitch. only the sea labour that out have be sufficient to have sink she in short space, if it have not be discover in time and true, there be little care, use now adays among our countryman in this profession, in respect of that which be use in time past and be accustom in france, in spain and in other part, which necessity will cause to be reform in time by assign the portion. that every workman be to calke, that if there be damage through his default, he may be force to contribute towards the loss occasion through his negligence, for prevention thereof and for more security. i hold it for a good custom use in some part in make a end of calk and pitch the ship. the next tide to fill she with water which will undoubted discover the defect, for no pitch place without calk can suffer the force and pease of the water in neglect, whereof i have see great damage and danger to ensue. the ark royal of his majesty may serve for a example, example which put all in danger at her first. go to the sea by a trivuell-hole, left-open in the post, and cover only with pitch. in this point no man can be too circumspect, for it be the security of ship man and good sect x, this be remedy. i set sail in the morning and run south-west till we be clear of vsshent and then south south-west till we be some hundred league off where we meet with a great hulk of some five or six hundred ton. well appoint the which my company, as be natural to all mariner present, will make a prize advise for shoot at sea and load with spaniard good and without speak to she wish that the gunner may shoot at she to cause she to amain, which be a bad custom. receive and use of many ignorant person present to gun at all whatsoever they discover before they speak with. they be contrary to all discipline and many time be cause of dissension. betwixt friend and the breach of amity, betwixt prince, the death of many and sometime loss of ship, and all make many obstinate, if not desperate, whereas in use common courtesy they will better bethink themselves and so with ordinary proceed, justify by reason and the. custom of all, well discipline people may perhaps many time breed a increase of amity, a succour to necessity and excuse diverse inconvenience and suit which have impoverish many. for it have chance by this error that two english ship neither carry flag for their particular respect, sundry mischance for neglect thereof, to change each with other a dozen pair of shot with hurt, to both be after too late to repent their folly. yea, a person of credit have tell i that two english man of war in the night have lay each other aboard willing, with loss of many man and damage to both, only for the fault of not speak one to the other, which may seem to carry with it some excuse if they. have be near the shore, or that the one have be a hull and the other under sail, in fear she shall have escape, not know what she be, though in the night it be no wisdom to board with any ship, but in the main sea and both desire to join, be a sufficient declaration that both be seeker and therefore, by day or night, he that can speak with the ship he see be bind upon pain to be repute void of good government to hail she before he shoot at she. some man may say that in the mean time object she may gain the wind in such cause and many other answer necessity give exception to all law, and experience teach what be fit. to be do master thomas hampto. master thomas hampton, once general of a fleet of waster, send to rochel 1585.. with secret instruction, consider and, as a man of experience, wise, understand his place and affair. in like case, shut his ear to the instigation and provocation of the common sort. prefer the public good of both kingdom before his own reputation with the vulgar people and as another, the french king fleet come where he be. the french and english fleet salute one another and to windward of he, all his company be in a uproar for that he will not shoot present at they before they see their intention. wherein have be commit three great fault. the first and principal, the breach of amity, betwixt, the. prince and kingdom. the second, the neglect of common courtesy in shoot before he have speak with they. and the three, in shoot first be to lee-ward of the other beside. there be no loss of reputation because the french king fleet be in his own sea and therefore for it to come to windward or the other to go to lee-ward be but that which in reason be require: the kingdom be in peace and amity. for every prince be to be acknowledge and respect in his jurisdiction. and where he pretend it to be, he, the french general, likewise seem well to understand what he have in hand, for though he be far superior in force, yet use he the term which be require and come. within speech hail they and ask if there be peace or war betwixt england and france, whereunto answer be make that they know of no other but peace. they salute each other after the manner of the sea and then come to a anchor all together as and friend visit each other in their ship. one thing the french suffer, upon what occasion or ground i know not, that the english always carry their flag display which in all other part and kingdom be not permit. at least in our sea the english carry up their flag. in the french sea if a strange fleet meet with any of his majesty ship, the foreigner be bind to take in their flag or his majesty ship. to force they. to it, though thereof follow the breach of peace or whatsoever discommodity. and whosoever shall not be jealous in this point, he be not worthy to have the command of a cockboat commit unto he yea. no stranger ought to open his flag in any port of england. the honour of his majesty ship, where there be any ship or fort of his majesty, upon penalty to loose his flag and to pay for the powder and shot spend upon he yea. such be the respect to his majesty ship in all place of his dominion that no english ship display the flag in their presence but run the like danger, except they be in his majesty service and then they be in predicament of the king ship. which good discipline in other kingdom be not in that regard as it ought, but sometimes through ignorance, sometime of malice, neglect be make of that duty and acknowledgement which be require, to the cost and shame of the ignorant and malicious in queen mary reign king philip of spain come to marry with the queen practise at the come in of k^ng philip into england and meet with the royal navy of england. the lord william haward, high admiral of england, will not consent that the king in the narrow sea shall carry his flag display until he come into the harbour of plymouth. i be of tender year. there come a fleet of spaniard of above fifty sail of ship, bind for flaunders to fetch the queen, dona anna de austria, and in the passage of dona anna de austria, last wife to philip, the ^econd of spain, which enter betwixt, the island and the main, without vail their topsayle or take in of their flag, which my father, sir john hawkins, admiral of a fleet of her majesty ship, then ride in catt-water, perceive, command his gunner to shoot at the flag of the admiral that they may thereby see their error which, notwithstanding, they persevere, arrogant to keep display, whereupon the gunner, at the next shot, lact the admiral through and through, whereby the spaniard find that the matter begin to grow to earnest. take in their flag and topsayle and so run to a anchor. the general present send his boat with a principal personage to expostulate the cause and reason of that proceed. but my father will not permit he to come into his ship nor to hear his message, but by another gentleman command he to return and to tell his general that in as much as in the queen port and chamber he have neglect to do the acknowledgement and reverence which all owe unto her majesty especial. her ship be present and come with so great a navy. he can not but give suspicion by such proceed of malicious intention and therefore require he that within twelve hour he shall depart the port upon pain to be. hold as a common enemy and to proceed against he with force which answer the general understanding present, embark himself in the same boat and come to the jesus of lubeck and crave licence to speak with my father, which at the first be deny he, but upon the second entreaty be admit to enter the ship and to parley the spanish general, begin to demand if there be war betwixt england and spain, who be? answer that his arrogant manner of proceed usurp the queen, his mistress right as much as in he lay have, give sufficient cause for breach of the peace, and that he purpose present to give notice thereof to the queen and her counsel and in the mean time, that he may depart. whereunto the spanish general reply that he know not any offence he have commit and that he will be glad to know wherein he have mis-behaved himself. my father, see he pretend to escape by ignorance, begin to put he in mind of the custom of spain and france and many other part, and that he can by no mean be ignorant of that which be common right to all prince in their kingdom. demand, if a fleet of england shall come into any port of spain, the king majesty ship be present, if the english shall carry their flag in the top, whether the spanish will not shoot they down and if they persevere, if they will not beat they out of their port. the spanish general. confess his fault, plead ignorance, not malice, and submit himself to the penalty my father will impose, but entreat that their prince through they may not come to have any. jar my father a while, as though offend, make himself hard to be, entreat but in the end all be shut up by his acknowledgement and the ancient amity. renew by feast each other, aboard and ashore. the self same fleet, at their return from flaunders, meet with her majesty ship in the channel as also in her repassage, though send to accompany the aforesaid queen. be constrain during the time that they be with the english, to veil their flag and to acknowledge that which all must do, that pass through the english sea, but to our. voyage. sect 11 come within the hail of the hulk, we demand whence she be, whether she be bind and what her load. she answer that she be of denmark, come from spain, load with salt. we will, she to strike her topsayle, which she do, and show we her charter-party and dille of load, and then salute we, as be the manner of the sea, and so depart sect 12. the next day, the wind become southerly and somewhat too much, and my ship, be all deep, load, begin to feel the tempest so that we, not able to lie by it, neither a hull nor a try, and so, with a easy sail, bear up before the wind with intent to put into falmouth. but god be please that come within ten league of silly. the wind veer to the north-east, and so we go on in our voyage. thwart of the flee of bayon, we meet with a small ship of master waltre of london call the elizabeth, which come out of plymouth some eight day after we, of who we inform ourselves of some particularity and write certain letter to our friend, make relation of what have pass till that day, and so take our farewell each of the other. the like we do with a small carvell of plymouth which we meet in the height of the rock in portugal. from thence we direct our course to the land of madera and about the end of june, in the sight of the land, we descry a sail, some three, league to the east-ward and a league to windward of we, which by her manner of work and make, give we to understand that she be one of the king frigart, for she be long and snugg and spread a large clue and stand to the westward and we^ to the east-ward to recover her wake. when we east about, she begin to ^eco sheet and to go away lask, and within two glass- i^ be plain- see that she go from we and so we follow on our course. and she see that present, strike her topsail, which our pynace perceive and be within shoot, continue the chase till i shoot off a piece and call she away, which fault many run into, think to get thereby and sometime loose themselves by be too bold to venture from their fleet. for it be impossible for we be to leeward to take she or to succour our own. she be a ship of about two hundred ton and pynace to meddle with ship. the duty of pynace be to buy repentance at too dear. a rate for their office be to wait upon their fleet in calm, with their oar, to follow a chase and, in occasion, to anchor near the shore when the great ship can, without peril. above all, to be ready and obedient at every call. yet will i not that any wrest my meaning? neither say i that a pynace or small ship arm may not take a great ship unarm, for daily experience teach we the contrary. the madera land be two, the madera land, the great call la, and the other porto santo, of great fertility and rich in sugar, conserve wine and sweet wood, whereof they take their name. other commodity they yield, but these be the principal. the chief town and port be on. the souther side of the madera, well fortify, they be subject to the kingdom of portugal, the inhabitant and garrison all portugal. the three of july, we pass along the land of canaria, canaria, land which have the name of a kingdom and contain these seven land: grand canaria, tenerifa, palma, gomera, lancerota, forteventura and fierro. these land have abundance of wine, sugar, conserve, orcal, pitch, iron and other commodity and store of cattle and corn, but that a certain worm call gorgosh^ breed in it, gorgosh^ which eat out the substance, leave the husk in manner whole. the head island where the justice, which they call, be resident and whither all suit have their appealation and final sentence be the grand canaria, although the tenerifa be hold. for the better and rich island and to have the best sugar and the wine of the palma. be repute for the best. the pitch of these land melt not with the sun and therefore be proper for the high work of ship betwixt. forteventura and lancerota be a goodly find, fit for a meeting place for any fleet, where be good anchor and abundance of many sort of fish. there be water to be have in most of these land, but with great vigilance for the natural of. they be venturous and hardy and many time climb up and down the steep rock and break hill which seem impossible, which i will hardly have believe, have i not see it? and that, with the great art and agility that may be, their arm for the most part be lance of nine or ten foot with a head of a foot and half long, like unto boar-spear, save that the head be somewhat more broad. two thing be famous in these land: the pike of tenerifa, which be the high land, in my judgement, that i have see, and man of credit have tell they have see it more than forty league off. it be like unto a sugar loaf and continual cover with snow and place in the midst of a goodly valley, most fertile and temperate. round about it the description of tenerif, out of which go up the pike, the cold be so great that it. be insufferable and go down to the town of the island, the heat seem most extreme till they approach near the coast. the other be a tree in the island, fierro, of a tree in fierro, which some write and affirm, with the drop of his leaf to give water for the sustenance of the whole island, which i have not see although i have be on shore on the island. but those which have see it have recount this mystery, different to that which be write, in this manner: that this tree be place in the bottom of a valley ever flourish, with broad leaf, and that round about it be a multitude of goodly high pine which overtop it and, as it seem, be plant by the divine providence to preserve it from sun and wind. out of this valley ordinary rise every day, great vapour and exhalation which, by reason that the sun be hinder to work his operation with the height of the mountain towards the southeast, convert themselves into moisture and so bedew all the tree of the valley, and from those which overtop this tree drop down the dew upon his leaf, and so from his leaf into a round well of stone which the natural of the land have make to receive the water of which the people and cattle have great relief. but sometime it rain, and then the inhabitant do reserve water for many day to come in their cistern and tynax, which, be that they drink of and wherewith they principal, sustain themselves. the city of the grand canaria and chief port be on the west side of the island, the head town and port of tenerifa be towards the south part and the port and town of the palma and gomera on the east side. in gomera, some three league southward from the town, be a great river of water, but all these land be perilous to land in for the siege cause by the ocean sea, which always be forcible and require great circumspection, whosoever have not urgent cause be either to go to the east-ward or to the westward of all these land as well, to avoid the calm which hinder sometime eight or ten day sail as the contagion which their distemperature be wont to cause. and with it to breed which we call burn fever. these land be say to be first discover by a frenchman. the first discoverer of these land call john de betancourt, about the year 1405.. they be now a kingdom subject to spain, sect 13. be clear of the land. we direct our course for cape blauce, and two hour before sun set we have sight of a carvell, some league in the wind of we, which seem to come from gynea or the land of cape verde, and for that he which have the sery-watch neglect to look out, be too lee-ward of the land and so, out of hope of sight of any ship for the little trade and contrariety of the wind. that though a man will, from few place he can recover the land come from the southward, we have the wind of she and perhaps the possession also whereof man of war. be to have particular care note for, in a hour and place unlooked for many time, chance accident contrary to the ordinary course and custom, and to have younker in the top continual be most convenient and necessary, not only for descry of sail and land but also for any sudden gust or occasion that may be offer. see myself past hope of return back without some extraordinary accident, i begin to set order in my company and victual and for tha^ to the southward of the canary, exercise upon the southwards of the canary be. for the most part a idle navigation i devise to keep my people occupy as well, to continue they in health, for that too much case in hot country be neither profitable nor healthful, as also to divert they from remembrance of their home and from play which breed many inconvenience and other bad thought and work which idleness be cause of. and so shift my company, as the custom be, into starboard and larboard man, the half to watch and work while the other sleep and take rest. i limit the three day of the week which appertain to each to be employ in this manner: the one for the use and cleanse of their arm, the other for roomege, make of sail, nettings, deck and defence. for our ship and the three for cleanse their body, mend and make their apparel and necessary, which though it come to be practise. but once in seven, day for that the sabbath be ever to be reserve for god alone, with the ordinary obligation which each person have beside, be many time of force to be omit. and thus we entertain our time with a fair wind and in few day, have sight of the land of barbary some dozen league to the northwards of cape black. before we come to the cape, we take in our sail and make preparation of hook and line to fish, for in all that coast be great abundance of sundry kind of fish, but especial of which we call breame. many portingall and spaniard go yearly thither to fish as our countryman to the newfoundland, and within cape black have good harbour for reasonable ship where they dry their fish, pay a certain easy tribute to the king collector. in two hour we take store of fish for that day and the next, but long it will not keep good, and with this refresh, set sail again and direct our course betwixt the land of cape de and the main cape verd. these land be hold to be situate in one of the most unhealthy climate of the world and therefore it be wisdom to shun the sight of they. how much more to make abode in they in two time that i have be in they either. cost we, the one half of our people, with fever and flux of sundry kind, the unwholsomnesse thereof. some shake, some burn, some partake of both. some possess with frenzy, other with sloth, and in one of they it cost i six month sickness with no small hazard of life, which i attribute to the distemperature of the air for be within fourteen degree of the equinoctial line. the sun have great force all the year, and the more for that often they pass two, three and four year without rain, and many time the earth burn in that manner. as a man well shod, the heat can endure to go where the sun shine, with which extreme heat the body fatigate. greedy desire: refresh and long the. come of the breze. the brezes, which be the north-east wind that seldom fail in the afternoon at four of the clock or soon, which come cold and fresh and find the poor of the body open and for the most part naked, penetrate the very bone and so cause sudden distemperature and sundry manner of sickness, as the subject be diverse whereupon they work, depart out of the calm of the land and come into the fresh brese. it cause the like, and i have see, within two day after that we have partake of the fresh air of two thousand man above a hundred and fifty have be craze in their health. the inhabitant of these land use a remedy for this, the remedy which, at my first be among they, seem unto i ridiculous, but since time and experience have teach to be ground upon reason, and be that upon their head they wear a nightcap, upon it a moutero and a hat over that, and on their body a suit of thick cloth and upon it a gown, fur or line with cotton or bay to defend they from the heat in that manner as the inhabitant o^ cold country to guard themselves from the extremity of the cold, which doubtless be the best diligence that any man can use. and whosoever prove it shall find himself less annoy with the heat then if he be thin clothe. for that, where the cold air come, it pierce, not so subtle, the m^one. also, in this climate, as in the coast of guyne and in all hot country, the influence of the moon in hot country have forcible operation in the body of man and therefore, as the planet most prejudicial to his health, be to be shun, as also not to sleep in the open air or with any scuttle or window open whereby the one or the other may enter to hurt. for a person of credit, tell i that one night in a river of guyne, leave his window open in the side of his cabin, the moon shine upon his shoulder, leave he with such a extraordinary pain and furious burn in it. as in above twenty hour, he be like to run mad, but in fine, with force of medicine and cure, after long torment he be ease. some i have hear say, and other write, that there be a star which never separate itself from the moon, but a small distance which be, of all star, the most beneficial to man. for where this star enter with the moon, it make void her hurtful influence and where not, it be most perilous which, if it be so, be a notable secret of the divine providence and a special cause among infinite other to move we to continual thanksgiving for that he have so extraordinary compass and fence we from infinite misery, his most unworthy and ungrateful creature of these. land be two pile. the one of they lie out of the way of trade, more westerly and so little frequent. the other lie some fourscore league from the main and contain six in number, to wit saint jago, fuego, mayo, bonavisto and bravo they be. belong to the kingdom of portugal and inhabit by people of that nation and be of great trade by reason of the neighbourhood they have with guyne and bin, but the principal be the buy and sell of negro. they have store of sugar, salt, rice, cotton-wool and cotton-cloth, ambergris, cyvit, elephant tooth, brimstone, pummy, stone sponge and some gold, but little, and that from the main. saint jago be the head island and have one city and two town with their port. the city call saint jago. saint jago, whereof the island have his name, have a garrison and two fort situate in the bottom of a pleasant valley with a run stream of water pass through the midst of it. whether the rest of the land come for justice, be the seat of the, with his bishop. the other town be playa, some three league to the eastward of saint jago, place on high with a goodly bay whereof it have his name, and saint domingo, a small town within the land. they be on the souther part of the island and have be sack sundry time in 1582.. by manuel serades a. portugal with a fleet of frenchman in 1585.. they be both burn to the ground by the english sir francis drake be general, and in 1596. saint jago be take and sack by the english sir anthony shyrley be general, sack by manuel serades. st francis drake and sir anthony shyrley, the second island be fuego, fuego, so call for that day and night there burn in it a vulcan who flame in the night, be see twenty league off in the sea. it be by nature fortify in that sort as, but by one way be any access or entrance into it and there can go up above two man a breast. the bread which they spend in these land be bring from portugal and spain save. that which they make of rice or of mayes, which we call guynne-wheate. the best water be in the i will of bravo, bravo, on the west part of the island, where be a great river but foul anchor, as be in all these land. for the most part the fruit be few but substantial, as palmito, plantano, patato and coco nut. the palmito be like to the date tree, the palmito and, as i think, a kind of it, but wild. in all part of africa and america they be find, and in some part of europe and in diverse part different in africa and in the west indies. they be small that a man may cut they with a knife, and the lesser the better. but in brasill they be so great that with difficulty a man can fell they with a axe. and the great the better. one foot within the top be profitable, the rest be of no value and that which be to be eat be the pith, which in some be better, in some worse. the plantain be a tree find in most part of africa and america, the plantain, of which two leaf be sufficient to cover a man from top to toe. it bear fruit, but once and then dry away and out of his root sprout up other new in the top of the tree be his fruit, which grow in a great bunch, in the form and fashion of pudding in some more, in some. less. i have see in one bunch above four hundred plantane which have weigh above fourscore pound weight. they be of diverse proportion, some great, some lesser, some round, some square, some triangle, most ordinary of a span long with a thick skin that peel easy from the meat, which be either white or yellow and very tender like butter. but no conserve be better, nor of a more please taste, for i never have see any man to who they have breed mis-like or do hurt with eat much of they. as of other fruit, the best be those which ripen natural on the tree, but in most part they cut they off in branch and hang they up in their house and eat they as they. ripe, for the bird and vermin present in ripen on the tree be feed on they. the best that i have see be in brasill, in a island call placentia, which be small and round and green when they be ripe, whereas the other in ripen become yellow. those of the west indies and guynne be great and one of they sufficient to satisfy a man. the only fault they have be that they be windy. in some place they eat they in stead of bread, as in panama and other part of tierra firm. they grow and prosper best when their root be ever cover with water. they be excellent in conserve and good, sodden in different manner and dry on the tree, not inferior to suckett. the coco nut be a fruit of the fashion of a hassel nut, the and ^heir kind, but that it be as big as a ordinary bowl and some be great. it have two shell, the uttermost frame as it be of a multitude of thread, one lay upon another, with a green skin over-lapping they, which be soft and thick. the innermost be like to the shell of a hazel nut in all proportion, save that it be great and thick and some more black in the top of it be the form of a monkey face with two eye, his nose and a mouth. it contain in it both meat and drink the meat white as milk and like to that of the kernel of a nut and as good as almond blanch, and of great quantity. the water be clear as of the fountain and please in taste and somewhat answer that of the water distil of milk. some say it have a singular property in nature for conserve the smoothness of the skin and therefore in spain and portugal the curious dame do ordinary wash their face and neck with it. if the hole of the shell be keep close, they keep four or six month, good and more. but if it be open and the water keep in the shell, in few day it turn to vinegar, they grow. upon high tree which have no bough. only in the top they have a great cap of leaf and under they grow the fruit upon certain twig and some affirm that they bear not fruit before they be above forty year old. they be in all thing like to the palm tree and grow in many part of asia, africa and america. the shell of these nut be much esteem for drink cup and much cost and labour be bestow upon they in carve grave and garnish they with silver, gold and precious stone. in the kingdom of chile and in brosill be another kind of these which they call coquillo, as we may interpret, little and be as big as wal-nut but round and smooth and grow. in great cluster, the tree in form be all one and the meat in the nut better, but they have no water. another kind of great grow in the andes of peru which have not the delicate meat nor drink which the other have, but within be full of almond which be place as the grain in the pomegrannet, be three time big than those of europe and be much like they in taste in these land be cyvet-cat cyvet-catt which be also find in part of asia and africa. esteem for the civet they yield and carry about they in a cod in their hinder part, which be take from they by force in. they also be store of monkey, monkey and the best proportion that i. have see and parrot parrot, but of colour different to those of the west indies, for they be of a russet or gray colour, and great speaker, sect 14, with a fair and large wind. we continue our course till we come within five degree of the equinoctial line, where the wind take, we contrary, by the south-west, about the twenty of julie, but a fair gale of wind and a smooth sea, so that we may bear all a taunt and to advantage ourselves what we may. we stand to the east-ward, be able to lie southeast and by south. the next day, about nine of the clock, my company be gather together to serve god, which we accustom to do every morning and evening, it seem. unto i that the colour of the sea be different to that of the day past, and which be ordinary. where be deep water? and so call the captain and master of my ship, i tell they that to my seem the water be become very whitish and that it make show of shall water, whereunto they make answer that all the line in our ship can not fetch ground, for we can not be less than threescore and ten league off the coast, which all that keep reckon in the ship agree upon, and myself be of the same opinion, and so we apply ourselves to serve god. but all the time that the service endure, my heart can not be at rest, and still i think. the water begin to wax white and white. our prayer end. i command a lead and a line to be bring and have the lead in fourteen fathom. we have ground which put we all into a maze and send man into the top present, discover the land of guynne, some five league from we very low land. i command a piece to be shoot and lay by the lee till my other ship come up, which hail we? we demand of they how far they find themselves off the land, who answer some threescore and ten or fourscore league. when we tell they we have sound and find but fourteen fathom and that we be in sight of land, they begin to wonder. but have consult what? be best to be. do i cause my shalop to be man, which i tow at the stern of my ship continual, and send she and my pynace a head to sound and follow they with a easy sail till we come in seven and six fathom water and some two league from the shore, anchor in hope by the sea or by the land to find some refresh. the sea we find to be barren of fish and my boat can not discover any land place though a whole day they have row alongst the coast with great desire to set foot on shore. for that the sedge be exceed great and dangerous. which experience we set sail, notwithstanding the contrariety of the wind, sometime stand to. the westward sometime to the east-ward according to the shift of the wind. sect 15 here be to be. note that the error which we fall into in our account, note be such as all man fall into where be currant that set east or west and be not know for that. there be no certain rule yet practise for trial of the longitude as there be, of the latitude, though some curious, and experiment of our nation, with who i have have conference about this point, have show i two or three manner of way how to know it. this some year before be the loss of the edward cotton, the loss of the edward cotton bind for the coast of brasill which take with the wind. contrary, near the line, stand to the east-ward and make account to be fifty or sixty league off the coast with all her sail stand, come sudden a ground upon the shoal of madrebombat and so be cast away though the most part of their company save themselves upon raffe, but with the contagion of the country and bad entreaty which the negro give they, they die so that there return, not to their country above three or ^oure of they. but god almighty, deal more merciful with we in show we our error in the day and in time that we may remedy it. to he be evermore glory for all this currant from the line equinoctial to twenty degree northerly. have gr^at force and set next. of any thing, east, direct upon the shore, which we find by this mean, stand to the westward, the wind southerly. when we lie with our ship head west and by south, we gain in our heith more than if we have make our way good west, south-west. for that the currant, take we under the bow, but lie west or west and by north, we lose more in twelve hour. then the other way we can get in four and twenty, by which plain we see that the currant do set east next of any thing. whether this currant run ever one way or do alter and how, we can by no mean understand, but tract of time and observation will discover this, as it have do. of many other in sundry sea. the currant that set betwixt, newfoundland and spain run also east and west and long time, deceive many and make some to count the way long and other short, according as the passage be speedy or slow, not know that the furtherance or hindrance of the currant be cause of the speed or slow of the way. and in sea card i have see difference of above thirty league betwixt, the island tercera and the main and other have recount unto i that come from the india and look out for the land of azores. they have have sight of spain and some have look out for spain and have discover the land. the self same currant be in the levant sea. but run trade betwixt the maynes and changeable sometime to the east-ward, sometime to the westward. in brasill and the south sea the currant likewise be changeable, but it run ever alongst the coast, accompany the wind, and it be a infallible rule that twelve or twenty four hour before the wind altar, the currant begin to change. in the west indies only, the currant run continual one way and set alongst the coast from the equinoctial line towards the north. no man have yet find that these courrant keep any certain time or run so many day or month one way as another, as do the course of ebb and flow. well know in all sea, only near the shore they have small force, partly because of the reflux which the coast cause and partly for the ebb and slow which more or less be general in most sea. when the currant run north or south, it be easy discover by augment or diminish the height. but how to know the set of the currant from east to west in the main sea be difficult and as yet i have not know any man or read any author that have prescribe any certain mean or way to discover it. but experience teach that in the main sea, for the most part, it be variable and therefore the best and safe rule to prevent the danger which the uncertainty and ignorance hereof may cause be careful and continual watch, by day and night, and upon the east and west course, ever to be before the ship and to use the mean possible to know the error, by the rule which new author may teach: beat off and on, sometime to the westward, sometime to the east-ward, with a fair gale of wind, sect 16 be betwixt, three or four degree of the equinoctial line, my company, within a few day, begin to fall sick of a disease which seaman be wont to call the scurvy. the scurvy and seem to be a kind of dropsy and reign most in this climate of any that i have hear or read of in the world. though in all sea it be wont to help and increase the misery of man it possess. all those of which it take hold with a loathsome slothfulness, even to eat, they will be content to change their sleep and rest, which be the most pernicious enemy in this sickness. that be know. it bring with it a great desire to drink and cause a general swell of all part of the body, especial of the leg and gum, and many time the tooth fall out of the jaw without pain, the sign to know this disease in the beginning. be diverse. the sign by the swell of the gum, by dent of the flesh of the leg with a man finger, the pit remain without fill up in a good space. other show it with their laziness, other complain of the crick of the back, etc. all which be, for the most part, certain token of infection. the cause of this sickness? the cause some attribute to sloth, some to conceit, and diverse man speak diverse. that which i have observe be that our nation be more subject unto it than any other, because be breed in a temperate climate where the natural heat restrain, give strength to the stomach, sustain it with meat of good nourishment, and that in a wholesome air, whereas come into the hot country where that natural heat be disperse through the whole body, which be wont to be proper to the stomach and the meat for the most part preserve with salt and its substance thereby diminish and many time corrupt. great forth for digestion be now require then, in time past, but the stomach ^inding less virtue, to do his office in repart. to each member his due proportion in perfection, which either give it raw or remain with it indigested by his hardness or crudity, infeeble the body and make it unlusty and unfit for any thing. for the stomach be strong, though all part else be weak. there be ever a desire to feed and aptness to perform whatsoever can be require of a man, but though all other member be strong and sound, if the stomach be oppress or squeamish, all the body be unlusty and unfit for any thing and yield to nothing so ready as to slothfulness which be confirm by the common. answer to all question as: will you eat, will you sleep, will you walk, will you play? the answer be: i have no stomach, which be as much as to say no, not willing, thereby confirm that without a sound and whole stomach, nothing can be well accomplish, nor any sustenance well digest. the seethe of the meat in salt water. seethe of meat in salt water help to cause this infirmity which in long voyage can hardly be avoid. but if it may be, it be to be shun. for the water of the sea to man body be very unwholesome. the corruption of the victual, corruption of victual and especial of the bread, be very pernicious. the vapour and air of the sea also be nothing. profitable vapour of the sea, especial in these hot country, where be many calm, and be it not for the move of the sea by the force of wind, tide and currant, it will corrupt all the world. the experience i see in 1590.. lie with a fleet of her majesty ship about the land of the azores almost six month- azores, the great part of the time we be becalm- with which all the sea become so replenish with several sort of jelly and form of serpent, adder and snake, as seem wonderful, some green, some black, some yellow, some white, some of diverse colour, and many of they have life, and some, there be a yard and half and two yard long. which have i not. see, i can hardly have believe- and hereof be witness all the company of the ship which be then present, so that hardly a man can draw a buckett of water clear of some corruption in which voyage towards the end thereof. many of every ship, save of the nonpereli which be under my charge and have only one man sick in all the voyage, fall sick of this disease and begin to die apace. but that the speedy passage into our country be remedy to the craze and a preservative for those that be not touch. the best prevention for this disease, in my judgement, be to keep clean the ship. the remedy to be sprinkle she ordinary with vinegar or to burn tar and some sweet. savour, to feed upon as few salt meat in the hot country as may be, and especial to shun all kind of salt fish by diet and to reserve they for the cold climate and not to dress any meat with salt water, nor to suffer the company to wash their shirt, nor clothes in it, nor to sleep in their clothes when they be wet. for this cause, it be necessary require that provision be make of apparel for the company that they may have wherewith to shift themselves by shift. be a common calamity among the ordinary sort of mariner to spend their thrift on the shore and to bring to sea no more clothes than they have. back for the body of man be not. refresh with any thing, more then with shift, clean clothes, a great preservative of health in hot country. the second antidote be by labour to keep the company occupy in some bodily exercise of work, of agility, of pastime, of dance, of use of arm. these help much to banish this infirmity. three in the morning, at discharge of the watch by early, eat and drink. to give every man a bit of bread and a draught of drink, either beer or wine mingle with water, at the least the one half or a quantity mingle with beer that the pore of the body may be full when the vapour of the sea ascend up the morning. draught shall be ever of the best, and choice of that. in the ship. pure wine i hold to be more hurtful than the other, be profitable in this. other will be of a contrary opinion, but i think partial. if not, then leave i the remedy thereof to those physician and surgeon who have experience, and i wish that some learned man will write of it, for it be the plague of the sea and the spoil of mariner. doubtless it will be a meritorious work with god and man and most beneficial for our country. for in twenty year since that i have use the sea, i dare take upon i to give account of ten thousand man consume with this disease. that which i have see most fruitful for this sickness be sour orange and lemon. and a water which, among other, for my particular provision, i carry to the sea, call doctor stevens, his water by sour orange and lemon, by doctor stevens, water of which, for that his virtue be not, then well know unto i, i carry but little and it take end quick. but give health to those that use it. the oil of vitry be beneficial for this disease. by oil of vitry, take two drop of it and mingle in a draught of water with a little sugar. it take away the thirst and help to cleanse and comfort the stomach. but the principal of all be the air of the land for the sea, be natural for fish and the land for man by the air of the land, and the often a man can have his people to land, not hinder his voyage, the better it be and the profitable course that he can take to refresh. they, sect 17, have stand to the westward some hundred league and more. the wind continue with we contrary, and the sickness so fervent that every day there die more or less my company in general, begin to dismay, the company sick and dismay and to desire to return homeward, which i labour to hinder by good reason and persuasion, as that to the west indies we have not above. eight hundred league to the land of azores, little less, and before we come to the land of cape verde that we shall meet with the breze, for every night we may see the reach go contrary to the wind which we sail by, verify the old proverb among mariner that he have need of a long mast that will sail by the reach, and that the near land and speedy refresh we can look for be the coast of brasill and that stand towards it. with the wind we have, we shorten our way for the indies and that to put all the sick man together in one ship and to send she home be to make she their grave, for we can spare but few sound. man who be also subject to fall sick and the misery notwithstanding, remediless, with which they be convince and remain satisfy. so leave all to their choice. with the consideration of what i persuade, they resolve with i to continue our course till that. god be please to look upon we with his fatherly eye of mercy as we approach, near and near the coast of brasill, brasill. the wind begin to veer to the eastwarde and about the middle of october, to be large and good for we, and about the 18. of october, we be thwart of cape saint augustine, cape s augustine, which lie in six degree to the southwards of the line, and the 21. in the height of farnambuca, but some fourscore league. from the coast, the twenty four in the height of bayea santos, near the end of october. betwixt, 17. and 18. degree, we be in 16. fathom, sound of the great shoal which lie alongst the coast, betwixt, the bay of santos santos and the port of santos vitoria, vitoria which be very perilous, but the divine providence have ordain great flock of small bird like snytes to live upon the rock and break land of these shoal and be meet with ordinary twenty league before a man come in danger of they. it shall not be amiss here to recount the accident which befall we during this contrary wind and the curiosity to be observe in all this time, day and night, we have continual a fair. gale of wind and a smooth sea without any alteration. one day the carpenter have calk the deck of our ship. danger of fire which the sun with his extreme heat have open crave. licence to heat a little pitch in the cookroom by heat of pitch, which i will not consent unto by any mean, for that my cockroom be under the deck. know the danger, until the master undertake that no danger shall come thereof. but he recommend the charge to another who have a better name than experience. he suffer the pitch to rise and to run into the fire which cause so furious a flame. as amaze he and force all to fly his heat. one of my company with a double pair of glove, take off the pitch-pot, but the fire force he to let slip his holdfast before he can set it on the hearth and so overturn it. and as the pitch begin to run, so the fire to enlarge itself that in a moment a great part of the ship be on a light fire. i be in my cabin, present. imagine what the matter be, and for all the have i can make before i come, the fire be above the deck for remedy, whereof i command all my company to cast their ruggegowne into the sea with rope fasten unto they. these i have provide for my people to watch in, for in many hot country the night be fresh and cold and divide one gown to two man, a starboard and a larboard man, so that he which watch have ever the gown, for they which watch not be either in their cabin or under the deck, and so need they not the gown. be well soak every man that can take one and assault the fire, and although some be singe, other scald and many burn, god be please that the fire be quench, which i think impossible, and doubtless i never see myself in great peril in all the day of my life. let all man take example by we not to suffer in any case. pitch to be heat in the ship, except it be with a shot heat in the fire which can breed danger, nor to permit fire to be kindle, but upon mere necessity, for the inconvenience thereof be for the most part remediless with drink of tobacco. it be say by take tobacco that the roebuck be burn in the range of dartmouth. the primrose of london be fire with a candle at tilbery-hope and nothing save but her keel and another ship bind for barbary at wapping, the jesus of lubeck have her gunner-roome set on fire with a match and have be burn without redemption. if that my father, sir john hawkins, knight than general in, she have not command her slopper to be stop and the man to come to the pump, whereof she have two which go with chain and ply, they in a moment there be three or four inch of water upon the deck which with scoop, swabble and platter they throw upon the fire and so quench it and deliver both ship and man out of no small danger. great care be to be have also in cleave of wood, in hoop or scutle of cask, by hoop and scutle of cask, and in any business where violence be to be, use with instrument of iron, steele or stone, and especial in open of powder. these be not to be use but mallet of wood for many mischance happen beyond all expectation. i have be credible inform by diverse person that come out of the indies with scutle, a butt of water. the water have take fire and flame up and put all in hazard. and a servant of i, thomas grace, tell i that in the ship wherein he come out of the indies, 1600. there happen the like and that if with mantle they have not smother the fire, they have be all burn with a pipe of water which in scutle take fire. master john hazlelocke report that in the arsenal of venice happen the like by nature of water. he be present. for i own part, i be of opinion that some water have this property and especial, such as have their passage by mine of brimstone or other mineral which, as all man know, give extraordinary property unto the water by which they run. or it may be that the water be in wine cask and keep close may retain a extraordinary property of the wine, yea. i have drink fountain and river water many time which have have a savour as that of brimstone. three league from bayon in france, i have prove of a fountain that have this savour and be medicinable for many disease in the south sea, in a river some five league from cape saint francisco, in one degree and a half to the northwards of the line in the bay of atacames, be a river of fresh water which have the like savour of this. i shall have occasion to speak in another place. treat of the diverse property of fountain and river, and therefore to our purpose, sect 18, we have no small cause to give god thanks and praise for our deliverance by swear. and so, all our ship once come together, we magnify his gloririous name for his mercy towards we and take a occasion hereby to banish swear out of our ship, which, among the common sort of mariner and seafaring man, be too ordinary abuse. so, with a general consent of all our company, it be ordain that in every ship there shall be a palmer or which shall be in the keep of he who be take with a oath, and that he who have the palmer shall give to every other that he take swear. in the palm of the hand, a palmada with it and the and whosoever at the time of evening or morning prayer be find to have the palmer shall have three blow give he by the captain or master, and that he shall be still bind to free himself by take another or else to run in danger of continue the penalty which execute few day. reform the vice so that in three day together be not one oath hear to be swear. this bring both ferula and swear out of use and certain in vice custom be the principal sustenance, and for their reformation it little avail to give good counsel or to make good law and ordenance, except they be execute. sect 19 in this time. of contrary wind, those of my company which be in health, recreate themselves with fish and behold the hunt and hawk of the sea and the battle betwixt the whale and his enemy, which true be of no small pleasure. and therefore, for the curious, i will spend some time in declaration of they ordinary such ship as navigate between the tropique, be accompany with three sort of fish: the dolphin, which the spaniard call dozado, the bonito or spanish makerell, and the shark, alias tiberune. the dolphin, i hold to be one of the swift fish in the sea. the dolphin, he be like unto a bream, but that he be long and thin and his scale very small. he be of the colour of the raynbow. and his head different to other fish, for from his mouth half a span it go straight upright as the head of a wherry or the cut-water of a ship. he be very good meat if he be in season, but the best part of he be his head, which be great. they be some big, some lesser. the great that i have see may be some four foot long. i hold it not without some ground that the ancient philosopher write that they be enamour of a man, for in meeting with ship they accompany, they till they approach to cold climate. this i have note diverse. time for disembark out of the west indies 1583.. within three or four day after we meet, a scole of. they which leave we not till we come to the land of azores, near a thousand league. at other time i have note the like. but some may say that in the sea be many scoles of this kind of fish, and how can a man know if they be the same? who may be thus satisfy that every day in the morning, which be the time that they approach near the ship, we shall see four, five and more, which have as it be our ^are-marke, one hurt upon the back, another near the tail, another about the fin, which be sufficient proof that they be the same. for if those which have receive so bad entertainment of we will not forsake we much less those which we have not hurt yet, that which make they most in love with, ship and man, be the scrap and refresh they gather from they the bonito. the bonito, or spanish makerell, be altogether like unto a makerell, but that it be somewhat more grow, he be reasonable food but dry than a makerell. of they there be two sort, the one be this which i have describe, the other so great as hardly one man can lift he at such time as we have take of these one suffice for a meal for all my company. these, from the fin of the tail forward, have upon the chine. seven small yellow hillock close one to another. the dolphin and bonito be take with certain instrument of iron, which we call vysgeis, in form of a e^le-speare, but that the blade be round and the point like unto the head of a broad arrow. these be fasten to long staff of ten or twelve foot long with line tie unto they and so shoot to the fish from the beakhead, the poop or other part of the ship. as occasion be, minister, they be also catch with hook and lynes. the hook be bait with a red cloth or with a white cloth, make into the form of a fish and sow upon the hook the shark or tiberune. the shark be a fish like unto those. which we call dogge-fish, but that he be far great. i have see of they eight or nine foot long, his head be flat and broad and his mouth in the middle underneath as that of the seat and he can bite of the bait before he but by make a half turn and then he help himself with his tail, which serve he in stead of a rudder. his skin be rough, like to the fish which we call a rough hound, and russet with radish spot, save that under the belly he be all white. he be much hate of seafaring man who have a certain foolish superstition with they and say that the ship have seldom good success. that be much accompany with they. it. be the most ravenous fish know in the sea, for he swallow all that he find in the puch of. they have be sound hat, cap, shoe, shirt, leg and arm of man, end of rope and many other thing whatsoever be hang by the ship side. he sheer it as though it be with a razor, for he have three row of tooth on either side, as sharp as nail. some say they be good for pick-tooth. it have chance that a younker cast himselve into the sea to swim. have have his leg bite off above the knee by one of they and i have be inform that in the tiger when sir richard greenfild go to people, virginia, a shark cut off the leg of. one of the company sit in the chain and wash himself. they spawn not as the great part of fish do, but whelp as the dog or wolf and for many day after that she have whelp every night and towards any storm or any danger which may threaten they, hurt the dam, receive her whelp in at her mouth and preserve they till they be able to shift for themselves. i have see they go in and out, be more than a foot and half long and after take the dam we have find her young one in her belly. every day my company take more or less of they, not for that they do eat of they, for they be not hold wholesome. although the spaniard, as i have see, do eat they, but to recreate themselves and in revenge of the injury receive by they, for they live long and suffer much after they be take before they die. at the tayl^ of one they tie a great log of wood, at another a empty batizia. well, stop, one they yoke like a hog, from another they pluck out his ey^s and so throw they into the sea. in catch two together, they bind they tail to tail, and so set they a swim, another with his belly slit and his bowel hang out, which his fellow will have every one a snatch at. with other infinite invention: to entertain the time and to avenge themselves. for that they deprive. they of swim and feed on their flesh, be dead. they be take with harp, iron and with great hook, make of purpose with swyvel and chain, for no line nor small rope can hold they which they share not asunder. there do accompany this fish diverse little fish which be callet, pilat fish and be ever upon his fin, his head or his back and feed of the scrap and superfluity of his prey. they be in form of a trought and streke, like a makerell, but that the streke be white and black, and the black great than the white. the manner of hunt and hawk represent that which we reasonable creature use, save only in the dispose of the game. for by our industry and ability, the hound and hawk be bring to that obedience that whatsoever they seize be for their master, but here it be otherwise for the game, be for he that seize it. the dolphin and bonito be the hound, and the alcatrace, the hawk and the fly fish, the game. fly fish, who wonderful make, magnify the creator, who for their safety and help have give they extraordinary manner of fin which serve in stead of wing, like those of the bat, or rearmouse of such a delicate skin interlace with small bone, so curious as may well cause admiration in the. beholder. they be like unto pilchard in colour and make save that they be somewhat round and for the most part big. they fly best with a side wind, but long than their wing be wet they can sustain the weight of their body, and so the great flight that i have see they make have not be above a quarter of a mile. they common go in scoles and serve for food for the great fish or for the fowl. the dolphin and bonito do continual hunt after they and the alcatrace lie soar in the air to see when they spring or take their flight. and ordinary he that escape the mouth of the dolphin or bonito, help himself by his wing, fall prisoner into the hand of the alcatrace and help to fill his gorge. the alcatrace be a sea-fowle alcatrace, different to all that i have see either on the land or in the sea. his head like unto the head of a gull, but his bill like unto a snytes bill, somewhat short and in all place alike. he be almost like to a heronshaw: his leg a good span long, his wing very long and sharp, towards the point, with a long tail. like to a pheasant, but with three or four feather only, and these narrow. he be all black, of the colour of a crow and of little flesh for he be almost all skin and bone. he soar the high of any fowl that i have see and i have not hear of any that have see. they rest in the sea now of the fight betwixt the whale and his contrary, the fight of the whale, which be the sword fish and the thresher, the whale be of the great fish in the sea. and to count but the truth, unless daily experience do witness the relation, it may seem incredible. he be a huge, unwildlie fish, and to those which have not see of they it may seem strange that other fish shall master he, but certain it be that many time the thresher and sword fish meet, he joint do make a end of he the sword fish. be not great with the swordfish, but strong make, and in the top of his chine, as a man may say, betwixt the neck and shoulder, he have a manner of sword, in substance like unto a bone of four or five inch broad and above three foot long, full of prickle of either side. it be but thin, for the great that i have see have not be above a finger thick. the thresher be a great fish. and thresher, whos^ tail be very broad and thick and very weighty. they fight in this manner: the sword fish place himself under the belly of the whale and the thresher upon the rhyme of the water and with his tail thresh upon the head of the whale till he force he to give way, which the sword fish perceive, receive he upon his sword and wound he in the belly, force he to mount up again beside that. he can abide long under water but must of force rise up to breath. and when in such manner they torment he that the sight be sometime hear above three league distance, and i dare affirm that i have hear the blow of the thresher two league off as the report of a piece of ordinance. the whale roar be hear much far. it also happen sundry time that a great part of the water of the sea round about they, with the blood of the whale, change his colour. the best remedy the whale have in this extremity to help himself be to get he to land, which he procure as soon as he discoverth his adversary, and get the shore. there can fight but one with he, and for either of they, hand to hand, he be too good the. whale be a fish not good to be eat. he be almost all fat but esteem for his train and many go to the newfoundland, greene-land and other part only to fish for they which be in this manner. when they which seek the whale discover he they compass, he round about with pynace or shalops the take of the whale. in the head of every boat be place a man with a harp iron and a long line, the one end of it fasten to the harp iron and the other end to the head of the boat in which it lie fine coil and for that he can keep long under water. he show which way he go when rise near any of the boat within. reach he that be near dart his harp iron at he, the whale, find himself to be wound, swim to the bottom and draw the pynace after he, which the fisher man present forsake, cast themselves into the sea for that many time he draw the boat under water. those that be next procure to take they up for this cause. all such as go for that kind of fish be experiment in swim. when one harp iron be fasten in the whale, it be easy discern which way he direct his course, and so ere long they fasten another and another in he. when he have three or four boat drag after he with their weight, his bleed and fury. he become so over-mastred that the rest of the pynace, with their presence and terror, drive he to the place where they will have he nature, instigate he to covet the shore, be once hurt, there be little need to force he to land. once on the shore, they present, cut great piece of he and in great cauldron, see they the uppermost in the cauldron, be the fat which they skim off and put it into hogshead and pipe this, be that they call whale oil or train oil, account the best sort of train oil. it be hard to be believe what quantity be gather of one whale of. the tongue. i have be inform have many pipe be fill the fin be also esteem for many and sundry use as be his spawn for diverse purpose. this we corrupt call parmacittie, of the latin word, and the precious ambergris some think also to be find in his bowel, ambergris or void by he, but not in all sea. yea, they maintain for certain that the same be engender by eat a herb which grow in the sea. this herb be not in all sea, say they, and therefore where it want the whale give not this fruit. in the coast of the east, indies in many part be great quantity. in the coast of guyne, of barbary, of the florida, in the land of cape verde. and the canary ambergris have be many time find, and sometime on the coast of spain and england, whereupon it be presume that all th^se sea have not the herb grow in they the cause why the whale shall eat this herb? i have not hear nor read. it may be surmise that it be as that of the becunia and other beast which breed the beazer stone, the beazar stone, who feed in the valley and mountain where be many venomous serpent and herb. when they find themselves touch with any poison, forthwith they run for remedy to a herb which the spaniard call, that be to say, contrary to poison which have eat. they be present cure, but the substance of the herb convert itself into. a medicinable stone. so it may be that the whale feed of many sort of fish, and some of they, as be know, venomous. when he find himself touch with this herb, he cure himself and not be able to digest it, nature convert it into this substance, provoke it out or die with it in his belly and be light the sea, bring it to the coast. all these be imagination, yet instrument to move we to the glorify of the great and universal creator of all who secret wisdom and wonderful work be incomprehensible but the more approve generation of the amber grease. amber grease and which carry likely probability, be that it be a liquor which issue out of certain fountain in sundry sea and be of a light and thick substance, participate of the air, sudden become hard, as the yellow amber of which they make bead, which be also a liquor of a fountain in the german sea. in the bottom it be soft and white and partake of the air become hard and stony. also the coral in the sea be soft but come into the air become a stone. those who be of this former opinion think the reason why the amber grease be sometime find in the whale to be for that he swallow it, as other thing which he find swim upon the water. and not able digest it. it remain with he till his death. another manner of fish and catch the whale. i can omit use by the indian in florida, by the indian, worthy to be consider in as much as the barbarous people have find out, so great a secret by the industry and diligence of one man to kill so great and huge a monster. it be in this manner. the indian discover a whale, procure two round billet of wood, sharpen both at one end and so bind they together with a cord, cast himself with they into the sea and swim towards the whale. if he come to he, the whale escape not, for he place himself upon his neck and although the whale go to the bottom, he must of ^orce rise present to breath, for which nature have give he two great hole in the top of his head, by which every time that he breathe he spout out a great quantity of water. the indian forsake not his hold but rise with he and thrust in a log into one of his spowters and with the other knock it in so fast that by no mean the whale can get it out that fasten. at another opportunity he thrust in the second log into the other spowter and with all the force he can keep it in the whale. not be able to breath, swim present ashore and the indian, a cockhorse upon he, which his fellow discover approach to help he and to make a end of he it serve they for their food. many day after, since the spaniard have teach they the estimation of amber grease, they seek, curious for it, sell it to they and other for such thing as they best fancy and most esteem, which be, as i have be inform, all sort of edge-tool, copper, glass, glasse-bead, red cap, shirt and pedlery ware. upon this subject, diverse spaniard have discourse unto i, who have be eye witness thereof, declare they to be valorous, venturous and industrious, otherwise they dare not undertake a enterprise so difficult and full of danger. sect. 20 from the tropic of cancer to three or four degree of the equinoctial. the breze, which be the north-east wind, do reign in our ocean sea the most part of the year, except it be near the shore and then the wind be variable in three or four degree of either side the line. the wind hang southerly in the month of july, august, september and october. all the rest of the year from the to the land of azores the breze reign continual and some year in the other month also, or calm. but he that purpose to cross the line from the north-ward to the southward. time to pass the line from the north-ward to the southward, the best and sure passage be in the. month of january, february and march, in the month of september, october and november be also good passage, but not to sure, as in the former sect 21 betwixt, nineteen and twenty degree to the southward of the line the wind take we contrary, which, together with the sickness of my people, make i to seek the shore. and about the end of october, we have sight of the land which, presenlty by our height and the make of it, discover itself to be the port of santos senora de victoria and be easy to be know for it have a great high hill over the port which, howsoever a man come with the land, rise like a bell and come near the shore present be discover a white tower or fort which stand upon the top of a hill over the harbour and upon the seamost land, it be the first land a man must compass before he enter the port. come within two league of the shore. we anchor and the captain and master of my other ship be come aboard. it be think. convenient the weakness of our man consider, for we have not. in our three ship, twenty four man sound and the wind uncertain. when it may change, we think with policy to procure that which we can not by force, and so to offer traffic to the people of the shore by that mean, to prove if we can attain some refresh for our sick company. in execution, whereof i write a letter to the governor in latin and send he with it a piece of crimson velvet, a bolt of fine holland with diverse other thing as a present, and with it the captain of my ship who speak a little break spanish. give the governor to understand that i be bind to the east indies to traffic in those part and that contrary wind have force i upon that coast. if that he be please to like of it for the commodity the country yield in abundance, i will exchange that which they want with these instruction: my captain, depart about nine of the clock in the morning, carry a flag of truce in the head of the boat and sixteen man, well arm and provide guide by one of my company which two year before have be captain in that place and so be a reasonable pilot. enter the port within a quarter of a mile, be a small village and three league high up be the chief town. where they have two fort, one on either side of the harbour and within they ride the ship which come thither to discharge or load. in the small village be ever a garrison of a hundred soldier, whereof part assist there continual, and in the white tower upon the top of the hill which command it. here my captain have good entertainment and those of the shore receive his message and letter, dispatch it, present to the governor, who be some three league off in another place. at least they bear we so in hand. in the time that they expect the post, my captain, with one other, entertain himself with the soldier, a shore who, after the common custom of their profession, except when they be, hesonio. seek to pleasure he and find that he crave. but orange, lemon, and matter of small moment for refresh for his general, they suffer the woman and child to bring he what he will, which he gratify with double pistolet that i have give he for that purpose. so get he we, two or three hundred orange and lemon and some few hen, all that day and night, and the next day, till nine of the clock, we wait the return of our boat, which not appear, breed in i some suspicion, and for my satisfaction, i man, a light horseman which i have, and the fancy, the best i can, show strength where be weakness and infirmity, and so set sail towards the port, our gunner take. upon he to be pilot, for that he have be there some year before. thus, with they we enter the harbour. my captain have notice of our be within the bar, come aboard with the boat, which be no small joy to i and more to see. he bring we store of orange and lemon, which be that we principal seek for as the remedy of our disease. company he make relation of that have pass and how they expect present answer from the governor. we anchor right against the village and within two hour by a flag of truce which they on the shore show ^s. we understand that the messenger be come our boat, go for the answer of the governor who say he be sorry. that he can not accomplish our desire be so reasonable and good for that, in consideration of the war betwixt spain and england, he have express order from his king not to suffer any english, to trade within his jurisdiction, no. nor to land or to take any refresh upon the shore and therefore crave pardon, and that we shall take this for a resolute answer, and further require we to depart the port within three day, which he say he give we for our courteous manner of proceed. if any of my people from that time forward shall approach to the shore, that he will do his best to hinder and annoy they. with this answer, we resolve to depart and before it come, with the first. fair wind we determine to be pack, but the wind suffer we not, all that night nor the next day, in which time i live in a great perplexity. for that i know our own weakness and what they may do unto we, if that they have know so much. for any man that put himself into the enemy port have need of argus eye and the wind in a bag especial, where the enemy be strong and the tide of any force, for with either ebb or flood, those who be on the shore may thrust upon he invention of fire and with swim or other devise may cut his cable, a common practice in all hot country. the like may be effect with raffes cannoas boat. or pynace to annoy and assault he, and if this have be practise against we or take effect. our ship must of force have yield themselves, for they have no other people in they but sick man. but many time opinion and fear preserve the ship and not the people in they. wherefore it be the part of a provident governor to consider well the danger that may befall he for prevention of annoyance etc in harbour before he put himself into such place. so shall he ever be provide for prevention in saint john de vlua in the new-spaine, when the spaniard dishonour their nation with that foul act of perjury and breach of faith. give to my father, sir john hawkins, notorious to the whole world. the spaniard fire two great ship with intention to burn my father admiral, which he prevent by tow they with his boat. another way, the great armado of spain send to conquer england 1588.. be with that self same industry, overthrow for the set on ^ire of six or seven ship, whereof two be i, and let they drive with the flood force. they to cut their cable and to put to sea to seek a new way to spain in which the great part of their best ship and man be lose and perish. for that my people shall not b^ dismay. i dispatch, present my light-horsman with only four man and part of the refresh, advise they that with the first calm or slent of wind. they shall come off. the next night, the wind come off the shore, we set sail and with our boat and bark found as we go, it flow upon the bar not above four foot water and once in four and twenty hour, as in some part of the west indies, at full sea, there be not upon the bar above 17. or 18. foot water. the harbour run to the southwestward. he that will come into it be to open the harbour mouth a good quarter of a league before he bear with it and be bold. of the w side, for of the easterland, lie a great ledge of rock, for the most part under water, which sometime break not but with small ship, a man. may go betwixt. they, and the point, the virtue of orange, come aboard of our ship. there be great joy among my company and many, with the sight of the orange and lemon, seem to recover heart. this be a wonderful secret of the power and wisdom of god that have hidde^ so great and unknown virtue in this fruit to be a certain remedy for this infirmity i present. cause they all to be repart among our sick man, which be so many that there come not above three or four to a share. but god be please to send we a prosperous wind the next day, so much to our comfort that not any one die before we come to the land where we pretend to refresh ourselves. and although our fresh water have fail, we many day before we see the shore, by reason of our long navigation without touch any land and the excessive drink of the ^icke and disease which can not be excuse. yet with a invention i have in my ship- distil of salt water. i easy draw out of the water of the sea sufficient quantity of fresh water to sustain my people, with little expense of fuel, for with four billet i still a hogshead of water and therewith dress the meat for the sick and whole. the water so distil, we find to be wholesome and nourish. sect 22: the coast from santos to cape frio lie west and by south southerly. so we direct our course west, south-west. the night come on and direction give to our other ship. we set the watch, have a fair, fresh gale of wind and large myself with the master of our ship, have watch the night past. think now to give nature that which she have be deprive of, and so recommend the care of steeridge to one of his mate. unskilfulness of the master, mate who, with the like, travel past, be drowsy, or with the confidence which he have of he at the helm, have not that watchful care which be require. he at the helm, steer west and west and by south, and bring we in a little time close upon the shore. doubtless he have cast we all away. have not god extraordinary, deliver we for the master be in his dead sleep, be sudden awake, and with such a fright providence of god and the care of the master that he can not be in quiet, whereupon wake his youth. which ordinary sleep in his cabin by he, ask he how the watch go on, who answer that it can not be above a hour. since he lay himself to rest, he reply that his heart be so unquiet that he can not by any mean sleep, and so take his gown, come forth upon the deck and present, discover the land hard by we, and for that it be sandy and low. those who have their eye continual fix on it be dazzle with the reflection of the star, be a fair night, and so be hinder from the true discovery thereof. but he come out of the dark, have his sight more forcible to discern the difference of the sea and the shore, so that forthwith, he command, he at the helm, to put it close. a starbourd and tack our ship. we edge off and sound, find scant, three fathom water, whereby we see, evident the miraculous mercy of our god that if he have not watch over we as he do, continual over he, doubtless we have perish without remedy. to who be all glory and praise everlasting world without end. immediate, we shoot off a piece to give warning to our other ship who have keep their direct course, and far to wind-ward and sea-ward, because we carry no light, for that we be within sight. of the shore can not hear the report and the next morning be out of sight. sect 23: in this point of steeridge, care of steeridge, the spaniard and portingall do exceed all that i have see. i mean for their care, which be chief in navigation, and i wish, in this and in all their work of discipline and reformation, we shall follow their example, as also those of any other nation. in every ship of moment, upon the half deck or quarter deck, they have a chair or seat out of which, whilst they navigate, exquisite, in the spaniard and portingall, the pilot or his adiutant, which be the same officer which in our ship we term the master and his mate, never depart day, nor. night from the sight of the compass and have another before they whereby they see what they do and be ever witness of the good or bad steeridge of all man that take the helm. this i have see: neglect in our best ship. yet nothing more necessary to be. reform for a good helme-man may be overcome with a imagination, and so mistake one point for another, or the compass may err which by another be discern the inconvenience which hereof may ensue. all experiment seaman may easy conceive, and by we take warning to avoid the like sect 24. the next day, about ten of the clock, we be thwart of cape blanco. cape blanco which be low sandy land and perilous for four league into. the sea thwart it lie bank of sand which have little water on they. on a sudden we find ourselves among they in less than three fathom water, but with our boat and shalope we go sound and so get clear of they. the next day follow. we discover the land where we purpose to refresh ourselves. they be two and some call they saint james, his land, and other saint annes, saint james land, alias saint annes. they lie in two and twenty degree and a half to the southward of the line and towards the evening be the five of november, we anchor betwixt, they and the main, in six fathom water where we find our other ship. all which be well, moor, we present begin. to set up tent and booth for our sick man, to carry they a shore and to use our best diligence to cure they, for which intent our three surgeon, with their servant and adherent, have two boat to wait continual upon they to fetch whatsoever be needful from the ship to procure refresh and to fish either with net or hook and lynes. of these implement we have in abundance and it yield we some refresh for the first day. the most of those which have health occupy themselves in romege. our ship in bring a shore of empty cask in fill of they and in fell and cut of wood which be many work and few hand go slow forward near these land be two great. rock or small land adjoin in they. we find great store of young gannett in their nest, gannet which we reserve for the sick and be. boil with pickle, pork, well water and mingle with oatmeal, make reasonable pottage and be good refresh and sustenance for they. this provision fail we not till our departure from they. upon one of these rock also we find great store of the herb purslane. purslane which boil and make into salad with oil and vinegar, refresh the sick stomach and give appetite. with the air of the shore and good cherish, many recover speedy, some die away quick and other continue at a stand. we find here some store of fruit, a kind of cherry, cherry that grow upon a tree. like a plum-tree, red of colour with a stone in it, but different in make to we for it be not altogether round and dent about. they have a please taste. in one of the land we find palmito tree, great and high and in the top a certain fruit like, but no big than a walnut. we find also a fruit grow upon tree in cod, like bean. both in the cod and the fruit some of my company prove of they and they cause vomit and purge purgative as any medicine take out of the apothecary shop according to the quantity receive. they have hudd as our bean, which shall off the kernel, part itself in two and in the middle be a thin skin like. that of a onion, say to be hurtful and to cause exceed vomit and therefore to be cast away. monardus write of the nature and property of this fruit as of other of the indies, for that it be find in other part. also call they havas, the use of havas, and say that they be to be prepare by peel. they first and then take away the skin in the middle and after beat into powder to take the quantity of five or six, either with wine or sugar. thus they be good against fever and to purge gross humour against the colic and pain of the joint. in take they a man may not sleep but be to use the diet usual, as in a day. of purge. one other fruit we find very pleasant in taste, in fashion of a artechoque, but less on the outside, of colour red within white, and compass about with prickle. our people call they prick-peare or prick-peare, no conserve be better. they grow upon the leaf of a certain root that be like unto that which we call and many be wont to hang they up in their house, but their leaf be long and narrow and full of prick on either side. the fruit grow upon the side of the leaf and be one of the best fruit that i have eat in the indies in ripen present the bird or vermin be feed on they. a general rule to know what fruit be wholesome and good in the indies and other part. a good note to take or refuse unknown fruit find they to be eat of the beast or fowl a man may bold eat of they. the water of these land be not good, the one for be a stand water and full of venomous worm and serpent which be near a butt-shot from the sea shore where we find a great tree fall and in the root of it the name of sundry portingall, frenchman and other, and among they abraham cock, with the time of their be in this island. the other though a run water, yet pass by the root of certain tree which have a smell as that of garlic, take a certain contagious send of they contagious water. here. two of our man die with swell of their belly. the accident we can not attribute to any other cause, then to this suspicious water. it be little and fall into the sand and soak through it into the sea, and therefore we make a well of a pipe and place it under the rock from which it fall and out of it fill our cask. but we can not fill above two ton in a night and a day, sect 25. so, after our people begin to gather their strength, we man our boat and go over to the main. where present, we find a great ryver of fresh and sweet water and a mighty marish country which, in the winter, seem to be continual overflown with this river and other which fall from the mountainous country adjacent. we row some league up the ryver and find that the further up we go, the deep be the river, but no fruit more than she sweat of our body for the labour of our hand. at our return we load our boat with water and afterwards from hence we make our store. sect 26. the sickness have waste more than the one half of my people be, and loss of man. we determine to take out the victual of the hawk and to burn she, which we put in execution and be occupy in this work. we see a ship turn to windwards to succour herself of the land but have descry we put off to sea-ward two day after the wind change. we see she again run alongst the coast and the dainty not be in case to go after she. for many reason we man the fancy and send she after she. who, about the set of the sun, ^etched she up and speak with she when find she to be a great flyboat of at least three. or four hundred ton with 18. piece of artillery will have return. but the wind fresh in, put she to leeward and stand in to succour herself of the land. have sight of another small bark which after a short chase she take, but have nothing of moment in she for that. she have be upon the great shoal of abreoios in 18. degree and there throw all they have by the board to save their life. this and the other chase be the cause that the fancy can not beat it up in many day. but before we have put all in a readiness, the wind change she come unto we and make relation of that which have past and how they have give the small bark. to the portingall and bring with they only her pilot and a merchant call pedro of potosi, sect 27. in this coast, the portingall by industry of the indian, industry of the indian, have wrought many feat. at cape frio they take a great french ship. in the night, the most of her company be on the shore with cannoas. they surprise the french which they have in this coast, so great that they carry seventy and eighty man in one of they, and in isla grand i see one that be above threescore foot long of one tree, as be all that i have see in brasill, with provision in they for twenty or thirty day at the island of sansebastian. sansebastian, near saint vincent the indian. kill about eighty of master candish his man, kill the english and take his boat which be the overthrow of his voyage. there come not any ship upon this coast whereof these cannoas give not notice, present to every place. and we be certify in isla grand that they have send a indian from the river of jenero through all the mountain and marsh to take a view of we and discover we and according make a relation of our ship, boat and the number of man which we may have. but to prevent the like danger that may come upon we be careless and negligent. i determine one night in the dark and quiet of it, to see what watch our company keep on the shore man. our light-horsman and boat, arm they with bow and targett and get a shore some good distance from the place where be our booth, and seek to come upon they, undiscovered. we use all our best endeavour to take they at unaware. yet come within forty pace we be, discover the whole and the sick come forth to oppose themselves against we, which we see, give they the hubbub after the manner of the indian, and assault they and they we. but be a close dark night, they can not discern. we present upon the hubbub from our ship, the gunner shoot a piece of ordinance over our head according to the order give he, and thereof we take occasion to retire unto our boat and within a little space come to the booth and land place, as though we come from our ship to aid they. they begin to recount unto we how that, at the w point of the island, the event of good watch, out of certain cannoas have land a multitude of indian which, with a great outcry, come upon th^m and assault they fierce, but find better resistance than they look for and see themselves discover by the ship, take themselves to their heel and return to their cannoas in which they embark themselves. and depart. one affirm, he see the cannoas. another, their long hair a three, their bow a four- that it can not be, but that some of they have their payment. and it be worth the sight to behold. those which have not move out of their bed in many month unless by the help of other, get some a bow-shoot off into the wood, other into the top of tree, and those which have any strength join together to fight for their life. in fine, the booth and tent be, leave desolate to colour our business the better, after we have spend some hour in, seek out and join the company together in comfort, animate and commend they. i leave they a extraordinary guard for that night. and so depart to our ship with such a opinion of the assault give by the indian that many so possess through all the voyage, will not be persuade. to the contrary, which impression wrought such effect in most of my company that in all place where the indian may annoy we, they be after most careful and vigilant as be convenient. in these land it heigh and fall some five or six foot water, and but once in two and twenty hour, as in all this coast and in many part of the west indies, as also in the coast of perew and chely, save where be great bay or indraught, and there the tide keep their ordinary course of twice in four and twenty hour in. the lesser of these land be a cave for a small ship to ride in, land-lockt and she may moor herself to the tree of either side. this we call palmito island. palmito island for the abundance it have of the great sort of palmito tree. the other have none at all. a man may go betwixt the land with his ship, but the better course be out. at one end in these land be many scorpion, snake and adder with other venomous vermin. they have parott and a certain kind of foul like unto pheasant, somewhat big and seem to be of their nature. here we spend above a month in cure of our sick man supply, our want of wood and water and in other necessary work, and the ten of december, all thing put in order. we set sail for cape frio, have only six man sick with purpose there to set ashore our two prisoner before name and anchor under the cape. we send our boat a shore, but they can not find any convenient place to land they in and so return. the wind be southerly and not good to go on our voyage. we succour ourselves within isla which lie some dozen or fourteen league from the cape, betwixt the west and by south and west, south-west, the rather to set our prisoner a shore in the. mid way, betwixt the cape and this island, lie the river jenero. jenero, a very good harbour, fortify with a garrison and a place. well, people, the isla grand be some eight or ten league long and cause a goodly harbour for ship. it be full of great sandy bay and in the most of they be store of good water. within this island be many other small land which cause diverse sound and creek, and among these little land, little island, one, for the pleasant situation and fertility thereof, call placentia. this be people, all the rest desert. on this island, our prisoner desire to be put ashore and promise to send we some refresh, whereto we condescend and send they a shore with two boat. well, man and arm, who sound few inhabitant in the island for our people, see, not above four or five house, notwithstanding our boat return load with plantyne, pinias, potato, sugarcane and some hen, among which they bring a kind of little plantyne green and round, which be the best of any that i have see. with our people come a portugal who say that the island be he. he seem to be a mistecho, who be those that be of a spanish and a indian brood, poor apparel and miserable. we feast he and give he some trifle and he, according to his ability, answer our courtesy with such as he have the wind continue. contrary, we empty all the water we can come by which we have, fill in saint james, his island, and fill our cask with the water of this isla isl^ it be a wilderness, cover with tree and shrub so thick as it have no passage through except a man, make it by force, and it be strange to hear the howl and cry of wild beast in these wood, day and night, which we can not come at to see by any mean, some like lion, other like bear, other like hog, and of such and so many diversity as be admirable. here our net profit we much, for in the sandy bay they take, we store of fish upon the shore, at full sea-mark we find. in many place, certain shell, like those of mother of pearl, shell of mother of pearl, which be bring out of the east indies to make stand cup, call caracoles of so great curiosity as may move all the beholder to magnify the maker of they, and be it not for the brittleness of they, by reason of their exceed thinness, doubtless they be to be esteem far above the other for more excellent workmanship. i have not see in shell. the 18. of december, we set sail the wind at north-east and direct our course for the strait of magalianes. the twenty two of this month, at the go too of the sun, we descry a portugal ship and give her chase and come within hail of. she. she render herself without any resistance. she be of a hundred tun bind for angola to load negro to be carry and sell in the river of plate. it be a trade of great profit and much use for that the negro be carry from the head of the river of plate to patosi to labour in the mine. it be a bad negro price of negro who be not worth there five or six hundred piece, every piece of ten rial which they receive in ryal of plate, for there be no other merchandise in those part. some have tell i that of late they have find out the trade and benefit of cochanillia. but the river suffer, not vessel of burden, for if they draw above eight or seven foot water they can go further. then the mouth of the river and the first habitation be above a hundred and twenty league up, whereunto many bark trade yearly and carry all kind of merchandise, serve for patosi and paraquay. the money which be thence return be distribute in all the coast of brasill. the load of this ship be meal of cassavi, meal which the portugese call furina de paw. it serve for merchandise in angola, for the portugese food in the ship and to nourish the negro which they shall carry to the river of plate. this meal be make of a certain root which the indian call yuca much. like unto potato, of it be two kind: the one sweet and good to be, eat either roast or sod as potato, and the other of which they make their bread call cassavi, deadly poison if the liquor or juice be not thorough, press out. so prepare it be the bread of brasill and many part of the indies which they make in this manner. the prepare thereof for ^ood. first they pare the root and then upon a rough stone they grate it as small we they can, and after that it be grate small, they put it into a bag or poke and betwixt two stone with great weight. they press out the juice or poison and after keep it in some bag till it have no juice nor moisture leave. of this they make two sort of bread, the one fine and the other courser, but bake they after one manner: they place a great, broad, smooth stone upon other four which serve in steed of a trevet and make a quick fire under it, and so straw the flower or meal a foot long and half a foot broad. to make it to incorporate. they sprinkle now and then a little water and then another row of meal and another sprinkle till it be to their mind. that which be to be spend present. they make a finger thick and sometime more thick, but that which they make for store be not above half a finger thick but so hard that if it fall on the ground it will not break easy. be new, bake it, be reasonable, good, but after few day it be not to be eat, except it be soak in water in some part. they suffer the meal to become fen^ed before they make it into bread and hold it for the best, say that it give a better taste. but i be not of that opinion. in other part, they mingle it with a fruit call agnanepe, which be round and be ripe, be gray and as big as a hazel n^t and grow in a cod like pease. but that it be all curious wrought. first they parch they upon a stone and after beat they into powder and then mingle they with the fine flower of cassavi and bake they into bread. these be their spice-cake, which they call xanxaw. the agnanapes be pleasant. agnanapes give the bread a yellowish colour and a aromatical savour in taste. the fine. of this bread be well, bake keep long time, three or four year in brasill, since the portingall teach the indian the use of sugar, they eat this meal, mingle with remel of sugar or malass, and in this manner the portingall themselves feed of it. but we find a better manner of dress this farina in: make pancake and fry they with butter or oil and sometime with mant^ca de when strew a little sugar upon they. it be meat that our company desire above any that be in the ship and for beverage. the indian also accustom to make their drink of this meal, and in three several manner: first be chew it in their mouth and after mingle it with water, after a loathsome manner. yet the common drink that they have and that hold best, which be chew by a old woman. the second manner of their drink be bake it till it be half burn, than they beat it into powder, and when they will drink they mingle a small quantity of it with water which give a reasonable good taste. the three and best be bake it as aforesaid and when it be beat into powder to seethe it in water. after that it be well boil. they let it stand some three or four day and then drink it, so it be much like the ale which be use in england and of that colour and taste. the indian be very curious in plant and manure of this yuca. the manner of plant, juca it be a little shrubb and carry branch like hazel wand be grow as big as a man finger. they break they off in the midst and so prick they into the ground. it need no other art or husbandry for out of each branch grow two, three or four root, some big, some lesser, but first they burn and manure the ground, the which labour and whatsoever else be requisite. the man do not so much as help with a finger, but all lie upon their poor woman with the labour of the woman, who be worse than slave, for they labour the ground, they plant, they dig and delve, they bake, they brew and dress their meat, fetch their water and do all drudgery whatsoever. yea, though they nurse a child, they be not exempt from any labour. their child they carry in a wallet about their neck, ordinary under one arm, because it may suck when it will. the man have care for nothing but for their cannoas to pass from place to place, and of their bow and arrow to hunt, and their arm for the war, which be a sword of heavy black wood. some four finger broad, a inch thick and a ell long, something broad towards the roppe, then at the handle they call it macana and it be carve and wrought with inlaid work. very curious, but his edge be blunt. if any kill any game in hunt he bring it not with he, but from the next tree to the game. he break a bough for the tree in the indies have leaf for the most part all the year and all the way as he go strew little piece of it here and there and come home give a piece to his woman and so send she for it. if they go to the war or in any journey where it be necessary to carry provision or merchandise, the woman serve to carry all and the man never succour nor ease they, wherein they show great barbarism then, in any thing, in my opinion that i have note among they, except in eat one another in brasill and in the west indies. polygamy of the indian, their attire: the indian may have as many wife as he can. get, either buy or give by her friend. the man and woman for the most part go naked and those which have come to know their shame cover only their privy part with a piece of cloth. the rest of their body be naked. their house resemble great barn cover over or thatch with plantyne leaf which reach to the ground and at either end be the door. in one house be sometime ten or twenty household, their manne^ of house. they have little household stuff beside their bed which they call hamacas and be make of cotton and stain with diverse colour and work. some i have see white of great curiosity. they be as a sheet lace at both end and at either of they long. strappe with which they fasten they to two post as high as a man middle, and so sit, rock themselves in they. sometime they use they for seat and sometime to sleep in at their pleasure and sleep in one of they. i have see sleep the man, his wife and a child, sect 28. we take out of this prize for our provision, some good quantity of this meal and the sugar. she have be not above three or four chest. after three day we give the ship to the portingall and to they liberty in she be a portugal knight which go for governor of angola of the habit of christ, with fifty soldier and arm for a hundred and fifty with his wife and daughter. he be old and complain that after many year service for his king, with sundry mishap, he be bring to that poor estate. as for the relief of his wife, his daughter and himself, he have no other substance but that he have in the ship. it move compassion so as nothing of he be diminish, which, though to we be of no great moment in angola, it be worth good crown only we disarm they all and let they depart, say that they will return to saint vincent. we continue our course for the strait. my people, much animate with this unlooked for refresh, and praise god for his bounty, providence and grace extend towards we here. it will not be out of the way to speak. a word of the particularity of the country. sect 29, brasill, be account to be that part of america. the description of brasill, which lie towards our north sea, betwixt the river of the amazon, near the line to the norwards, until a man come to the river of plate in 36. degree to the southward of the line, this coast general lie next of any thing south and by west. it be a temperate country, though in some part it exceed in heat. it be full of good succour for ship and plentiful for river and fresh water. it be havens. the principal habitation be farnambuca, the bay, santos santos, the river jenero, saint vincent and placentia. every of they provide of a good port. the wind. be variable, but for the most part trade alongst the coast. the commodity this country yield, its commodity, be the wood, call brasill, whereof the best be that of farnambuc. so also call be use in most rich colour, good cotton-wool, great store of sugar, balsamom and liquid amber. they have want of all manner of cloth, linen and woollen, its want of iron and edge-tool, of copper and, principal in some place, of wax, of wine, of oil and meal for the country bear no corn, and of all manner of haberdashery-ware for the indian, the beast that natural breed in this country, be tiger, lion, hog, dog, dear monkey, mycos and coney, the bestial thereof, like unto rat but big and of a tawny colour, armadilloe. alagartoes and store of venomous worm and serpent as scorpion adder, which they call vinoras, and of they, one kind which the divine providence have create with a bell upon his head that wheresoever he go, the sound of it may be hear, and so the serpent shun for his sting be without remedy. this they call the vynora, with the bell of they there be many and great store of snake. some of that greatness as to write the truth may seem fabulous. another worm there be in this country, the discommodity which kill many of the first inhabitant before god be please to discover a remedy for it. unto a religious person, it be like a maggot, but more slender and long and of a green. colour with a red head. this worm creep in at the hinder part where be the evacuation of our superstuity, and there as it be, glue himself to the gut, there feed of the blood and humour, and become so great that stop the natural passage. he force the principal wheel of the clock of our body to stand still and with it the account of the hour of life to take end with most cruel torment and pain, which be such that he who have be thorough punish with the colic can quick decipher or demonstrate the antidote for this pernicious worm be garlic, and this be discover by a physician to a religious person. sect 30, betwixt, 26. and 27. degree. near the coast lie a island- the portingall call it santa catalina- which be a reasonable harbour and have good refresh of wood, water and fruit. it be desolate and serve for those who trade from brasill to the river of plate or from the river to brasill as a inn or bait place in our navigation towards the strait, by our observation we find that our compass vary a point and better to the eastward variation of the compass, and for that diverse have write curious and large of the variation thereof. i refer they that desire the understanding of it, to the discourse of master william aborrawh and other, for it be a secret who cause well understand, be of great moment in all navigation in. the height of the river of plate, we be some fifty league off the coast. a storm, take we southerly, which endure forty eight hour in the first day. about the go down of the sun, robert tharlton, master of the fancy, bear up before the wind without give we any token or sign that she be in distress. we see she to continue her course. bear up after she and the night come on. we carry our light but she never answer. we for they keep their course direct for england, which be the overthrow of the voyage, the overthrow of the voyage as well. for that we have no pynace to go before we to discover any danger, to seek out road and anchor to help. our water and refresh, as also for the victual necessary and man which they carry away with, they which, though they be not many yet, with their help in our fight, we have. take the vide-admiral, the first time she bourd with we, as shall be hereafter manifest. for once we clear her deck and have we be able to have spare but a dozen man. doubtless we have do with she what we will, for she have no close fight. the cause, moreover, if she have be with i. i have not be discover upon the coast of perew. but i be worthy to be deceive that trust my ship in the hand of a hypocrite and a man which have leave his general before in the like occasion and in the self same place. infidelity for be with master thomas candish, master of a small ship, in the voyage wherein he die, this captain be aboard the admiral in the night time, forsake his fleet, his general and captain and return home. this bad custom be too too much use among seaman and worthy to be severe punish for doubtless the not punish of those offender have be the prime cause of many lamentable event, loss and overthrow, to the dishonour of our nation and frustrate of many good and honourable enterprise. in this point of discipline the spaniard do far surpass we discipline of the spanish for whosoever forsake his fleet or commander, be not only severe punish but deprive also of all charge or government for ever after this in our country be many time neglect for that there be none to follow the cause. the principal be either dead with grief or drown in the gulf of poverty and so not able to wade through with the burden of that suit which, in spain, be prosecute by the king, attorney or fiscal or at least a judge appoint for determine that cause. purposely, yea, i can attribute the good success the spaniard have have in his voyage and peopling the only cause of their prosperity to any extraordinary virtue. more in he then in any other man be not discipline, patience and justice far superior, for in valour, experience and travel he surpass we not in ship preparation and plenty of victual he come not near we in pay and reward our people. no nation do go beyond we, but god who. be a just and bountiful rewarder, regard obedience far above sacrifice, doubtless in recompense of their endurance, resolution and subjection to commandment, bestow upon they the blessing due unto it. and this not for that the spaniard be of a more tractable disposition or more docible nature than we, but that justice halt with we. and so the old proverb be verify: pity mar the whole city. thus come we to be deprive of the sweet fruit which the rod of discipline bring with it represent unto we, in ancient verse which, as a relic of experience, i have hear in my youth, record by a wise man and a great captain: thus the rod by power, divine and earthly regal law, make good man live in peace. and bad to stand in awe for with a severe stroke. the bad correct be which make the good to joy. such justice, for to see the rod of discipline breed fear in every part. reward by due desert do joy and glad the heart. the cunning of runaway, these absenting and escape be, make most time only to pilfer and steal as well by take of some prize when they be alone and without command to hinder or order their bad proceed as to appropriate that which be in their entrust ship. cast the fault, if they be call to account, upon some poor and unknown mariner who they suffer with a little pillage to absent themselves, the cunningly to colour their great disorder and robbery for. doubtless, if he will, he may have come unto we with great facility and ignoble captain, because within sixteen hour the storm cease and the wind come fair, which bring we to the strait and dure many day after with we at north-east. this be good for they, though naught for we. if he have perish any mast or yard, spring any leak, want victual or instrument for find we, or have have any other impediment of importance. he may have have some colour to cloak his lewdness, but his mast and yard be sound, his ship staunch and load with, for two year at the least, and have order from place to place where to find we. his intention be easy see to be bad and his fault, such as worthy deserve to be. make exemplary unto other which he manifest at his return by his manner of proceed. make a spoil of the prize he take in the way homeward. verify at their return, as also of that which be in the ship. put it into a port fit for his purpose, where he may have time and commodity to do what he will. we make account that they have be swallow up of the sea, for we never suspect that any thing can make they forsake we, so we much lament they the storm cease and be out of all hope. we set sail and go on our course during this storm. certain great fowl, as big as swan bird, like swan soar, above we and the wind calm, settle themselves in the sea and feed upon the sweep of our ship which i perceive and desirous to see of they because they seem far great than in truth they be. i cause a hook and line to be bring. i catch with lin^ and hook and with a piece of a pilchard i bait the hook and a foot from it tie a piece of cork that it may not sink deep and throw it into the sea which our ship drive with the sea in a little time, be a good space from we and one of the fowl be hungry present, seize upon it and the hook. in his upper beak. it be like to a falcon bill, but that the point be more crooked in that manner, as by no mean he can clear himself, except that the line break or the hook right pluck he towards the ship. with the wave of his wing, he ease the weight of his body and be bring to the stern of our ship. two of our company go down by the ladder of the poop and seize on his neck and wing, but such be the blow he give they with his pinnion, as both leave their handfast, be beat black and blue. we cast a snare about his neck and so tryce he into the ship by the same manner of fish we catch. so many of they prove good refreshment as refresh and recreate all my people for that day. their body be great but of little flesh and tender in taste, answerable to the food whereon they feed. they be of two colour, some white, some gray. they have three joint in each wing, and from the point of one wing to the point of the other both stretch out, be above two fathom. the wind continue good with we till we come to 49. degree and 30. minute, where it take we westerly be, as we make our account, some fifty league from the shore, betwixt 49. and 48. degree, be port saint julian, a good harbour and in which a man may grave his ship, though she draw. fifteen or sixteen foot water. but care be to be have of the people call pentagones. care of the pentagones. they be treacherous and of great stature, so the most give they the name of giant. the second of february, about nine of the clock in the morning, we descry land which bare south-west of we, which we look not for so timely, and come near and near unto it by the lie. we can not conjecture what land it shall be, for we be next of any thing in 48. degree, and no platt nor sea-card which we have make mention of any land which lie in that manner, near about that height. in fine, we bring our larbord tack aboard and stand to the northeastwarde all. that day and night, and the wind continue westerly and a fair gale, we continue our course alongst the coast. the day and night follow, in which time we make account. we discover well, near threescore league off the coast. it be bold and make small show of danger. the land be a goodly champion country and people. we see many fire but can not come to speak with the people. a description of the unknown land for the time of the year: be far spend to shoot the strait and the want of our pynace. disable we for find a port or road, not be discretion with a ship of charge and in a unknown coast. a caveat for come sudden too near a unknown land, to come near the shore before it be sound, which be cause, together with the change of the wind, good for we to pass the straight that hinder the further discovery of this land with its secret. this i have sorrow for many time, since for that it have likelihood to be a excellent country. it have great river of fresh water for the out-shoot of. they colour the sea in many place as we run alongst it. it be not mountainous but much of the disposition of england and as temperate the thing we note principal on the coast be. these follow: the westermost point of the land with which we first fall, be the end of. the land to the westward. as we find afterward, if a man bring this point south-west, it rise in three mount or round hillock. bring it more westerly, they shoot themselves all into one. and bring it easterly, it rise in two hillock. this we call poyn^ tremountaine, point tremountaine, some twelve or fourteen league from this point to the eastwarde, fair. by the shore lie a low, flat island of some two league long. we name it fair island, pair island ^or it be all over as green and smooth as any meadow in the spring of the year. some three or four league easterly from this island be a goodly open as of a great river or a arm of the sea with a goodly low. country adjacent and eight or ten league from this open, some three league from the shore, lie a big rock which at the first we have think to be a ship under all her sail but after, as we come near it, discover itself to be a rock which we call condite-head. head for that, howsoever a man come with it, it be like to the head about the city of london. all this coast, so far as we discover, lie next of any thing, east and by north and west and by south. the land for that it be discover in the reign of queen elizabeth, my sovereign lady and mistress and a maiden queen, and at my cost and adventure, in a perpetual memory of her. chastity and remembrance of my endeavour, i give it the name of hawkins, maiden-land, hawkins-maid^n-land. before a man fall with this land some twenty or thirty league, he shall meet with bed of oreweed, drive to and fro in that sea with white flower, grow upon they bed of oreweed with white flower, and sometime far off, which be a good show and sign, the land be near, whereof the westermost part lie some threescore league from the near land of america. with our fair and large wind, we shape our course for the strait, our come to the strait and the ten of february we have sight of land, and it be the head land of the strait to the north-ward, which agree with our height wherein we find ourselves to be, which be in thirty two degree and forty minute. within a few hour we have the mouth of the strait open, which lie in 52. degree and 50. minute. it rise like the north foreland in kent and be much like the land of margates. it be not good to borrow near the shore but to give it a fair birth. within a few hour we enter the mouth of the strait, which be some six league. broad and lie in 52. degree and 50. minute, double the point on the starboard, which be also flat- of a good birth. we open a fair bay in which we may descry the hull of a ship beat upon the beach. it be of the spanish fleet that go to inhabit there in 1582.. under the charge of pedro sarmiento, who, at his return, be take prisoner and bring into england in this bay, the spaniard make their principal habitation and call it the city of saint philip, pedro, sarmi^nto, bu^ld^th, san-philip, and leave it people. but the cold barrenness of the country and the malice of the indian wi^h who they bad agree, make speedy end of they as also of those who they leave in. the middle of the strait, three league, from cape froward to the east-ward, in another habitation. we continue our course alongst this reach, for all the strait be as a river alter his course sometime upon one point, sometime upon another, which be some eight league long and lie west. northwest from this we enter into a goodly bay which run up into the land northerly many league, and at first entrance a man may see no other thing, but as it be a main sea, from the end of this first reach you must direct your course west, south-west, and some fourteen or fifteen league lie one of the narrow place of all the strait. this lead unto another reach that lie west and by north, some six league. here in the middle of the reach, the wind take we by the northwest and so we be force to anchor some two or three day, in which time we go a shore with our boat and find near the middle of this reach, on the starboard side, a reasonable, good place to ground and trim a small ship where it high some nine or ten foot water. here we see certain hog, but they be so far from we that we can not discern if they be of those of the country or bring by the spaniard. these be all the beast which we see in all the time we be in the strait. in two tide we turn through this reach and so recover the land of pengwin. they lie from this reach four league south-west and by west, till you come to this place. note, care be to be take of not come too near to any point of the land, for be for the most part sandy they have, shold off they and be somewhat what dangerous the land of pengwin. these land have be set forth by some to be three. we can discover but two, and they be no more except that part of the main which lie over against. they be a island which carry little likelihood, and i can determine it. a man may sail betwixt, the two land, or betwixt they and the land on the larboard side, from which land to the big island, be as it be a bridge or ledge, on which be four or five fathom water, and to he that come near it, not know thereof, may just cause fear, for it show to be shall water with his rypling like unto a race. betwixt, the former reach and these land run up a goodly bay into the country. to the north-ward it cause a great indraught and above these land run a great tide from the mouth of the strait to these land, the land on the larboord-side be. low land and sandy for the most part and without doubt land for it have many open into the sea and forcible indraught by they, and that on the starboard side be all high mountainous land from end to end but no wood on either side. before we pass these land under the lee of the big island we anchor the wind be at north-east, with intent to refresh ourselves with the fowl of these land. they be of diverse sort and in great plenty, good provision in the strait as pengwin, wild duck, gull and gannet. of the principal we purpose to make provision, and those be the pengwin which in welsh, as i have be inform, signify a white head, from which derivation and many other. welsh denomination give by the indian or their predecessor. some do infer that america be first people with welsh-man and motezanna. king, or rather emperor of mexico do recount unto the spaniard at their first come, that his ancestor come from a far country and be white people, which confer- which a ancient chronicle that i have read many year since may be conjecture- to be a prince of wales who, many hundred year since, with certain ship, sail to the westward with intent to make new discovery. he be never after hear of the pengwin, the description of the pengwin be in all proportion like unto a goose and have no feather but a certain down upon all part of his body and therefore can fly. but avail himself in all occasion with his foot run as fast as most man. he live in the sea and on the land, feed on fish in the sea and as a goose on the shore upon grass. they harbour themselves under the ground in burrow as the coney, and in they hatch their young. all part of the island where they haunt be undermine, save only one valley which, it seem, they reserve for their food, for it be as green as any meadow in the month of april, with a most fine short grass. the flesh of these pengwin be much of the savour of a certain fowl. take in the land of lundey and silley, which we call puffin, by the taste it be. easy discern that they feed on fish. they be very fat and in dress must be flay as the they be reasonable meat roast bake or sodden, but best roast we salt some dozen or 16.. hogshead, which serve we while they last in steed of powder beef. the hunt of they, as we may well term it, be a great recreation to my company and worth the sight hunt the pengwin for in determine to catch they necessary be require good store of people, every one with a cudgel in his hand to compass they round about to bring they as it be, into a ring. if they chance to break out, then be the sport for the ground, be undermine at, unaware it fail. and as they run after they, one fall here, another, there another offering to strike at one, lift up his hand, sink up to the arm pit in the earth, another leap to avoid one hole, fall into another, and after the first slaughter in see we on the shore. they shun we and procure to recover the sea. yea, many time see themselves persecute. they will tumble down from such high rock and mountain as it seem impossible to escape with life. yet as soon as they come to the beach present, we shall see they run into the sea as though they have no hurt. where one go, the other follow like sheep after the bel-wether. but in get they, once within the ring, close together. few escape, save such as by chance, hide themselves in the borrow and ordinary there be no drove which yield we not a thousand and more. the manner of kill. they which the hunter use, be in a cluster together, be with their cudgel to knock they on the head, for though a man, give they many blow on the body, they di^d not beside the flesh bruise. be not good. to keep the massacre end present, they cut off their head. that. they may bleed well, such as we determine to keep for store. the keep for store we save in this manner: first we split they and then wash they well in sea water than salt. they have lie some six hour in salt. we put they in press eight hour and the blood be soak out. we salt they again in our other cask, as be the custom to salt beef. after this manner they continue good some two month and serve we in stead of beef, the gull and gannet. the gull be not in so great quantity yet we want not young gull to eat all the time of our stay about these land. it be one of the delicate foode that i have eat in. all my life the duck be different to we duck and nothing so good meat. yet they may serve for necessity. they be many and have a part of the island to themselves, several which be the high hill and more than a musket shoot over. in all the day of my life i have not see great art and curiosity in creature. void of reason then in the place and make of their nest all the hill. be so full of they that the great mathematician of the world can not devise how to place one more than there be upon the hill, leave only one pathway for a foul to pass. betwixt. the hill be all level, as if it have be smooth by art. the ne^tes make only of earth and seem to be of the self same mould, for the nest and the soil be all, one which, with water that they bring in their beakes, they make into clay or a certain daub, and after fashion they round as with a compass. in the bottom they contain the measure of a foot, in the height, about eight inch, and in the top the same quantity. over there they be hollow in somewhat deep, wherein they lie their egg without other prevention, and i be of opinion that the sun help they to hatch their young. their nest be for many year and of one proportion. not one exceed another in bigness, in height nor circumference, and in proportionable distance one. from another. in all this hill, nor in any of their nest be to be, find a blade of grass, a straw, a stick, a feather, a moat, no, nor the fill o^ any ^owle, but all the nest and passage betwixt. they be so smooth and clean as if they have be new sweep and wash, all which be motive to praise and magnify the universal creator who so wonderful manifest his wisdom, bounty and providence in all his creature and especial for his particular love to ingrateful mankind for who contemplation and service he have make they all sect 31. one day have. end our hunt of pengwin, one of our mariner walk about the island, discover a great company of seal or sea-wolue so call. for that they be in the sea of seal or sea-wolue as the wolf on the land, advise we that he leave. they sleep with their belly roast against the sun. we provide ourselves with staff and other weapon and seek to steal upon they at unaware, to surprise some of they, and come down the side of a hill we be not discover till we be close upon they, notwithstanding their sentinel, before we can approach with a great howl, wake they. we get betwixt the sea and some of they, but they shun we not, for they come direct upon we and though we deal here and there a blow, yet not a man that withstand. they escape the overthrow. they reckon not of a musket. shoot a sword, pierce not their skin, and to give a blow with a staff, be as to smite upon a stone, only in give the blow upon his snout present, he fall down dead. after they have recover the water they do, as it be, scorn we, defy we, and dance before we until we have shoot some musket, shoot through they, and so they appear no more. this fish be like unto a calf, with four leg but not above a span long. his skin be hairy like a calf, but these be different to all that ever i have see. yet i have see of they in many part, for these be great and in their former part, like unto lion with shag hair and mostache. they live in the sea and come to sleep on the land and they ever have one that watch who advise they of any accident. they be beneficial to man in their skin for many purpose, in their mostache for pick-tooth and in their fat to make train-oil. this may suffice for the seal, for that he be well know sect 32. one day our boat be load with pengwin and come aboard devise in sudden accident, a sudden storm, take they which, together with the fury of the tide, put they in such great danger that, although they throw all their load into the sea, yet be they force to go before the wind and sea to save their life, which we see and consider that our welfare depend upon their safety, be impossible to weigh our anchor, fasten a empty barrel, well, pitch to the end of our cable in stead of a boy and let it slip, set sail to succour our boat which, in short space, w^e recover and after return to the place where we rid, before the storm cease, we use our diligence by all mean to seek our cable and anchor, but the tide be forcible and the weed, as in many part of the strait, so long that ride in fourteen fathom water. many time they stream three and four fathom upon the rhyme of the water. these do so enrol our cable that we can never set eye of our boy and to sweep for he be, but lose labour because of the weed which put we out of hope to recover it. and so our forcible business be end. leave instruction for the fancy, our pynace, according to appointment. where to find we? we inrole they in many fold of paper, put they into a barrel of a old musket and stop it in such manner as no. wet can enter, then place it a end upon one of the high hill and the most frequent of all the island. we embark ourselves and set sail with the wind at northwest, which can serve we, but to the end of that reach some dozen league long and some three or four league broad. it lie. next of any thing, till you come to cape agreda, south-west, from this cape to cape froward, the coast lie west, south-west, some four league, betwixt. they be the second people of the spaniard, the second people of the spaniard and this cape lie in fifty five degree and better. thwart cape froward, the wind large with we, and we continue our course towards the island of elizabeth, which lie from cape froward some fourteen league west and by south. this reach be four or five league broad and in it be many channel or open into the sea. for all the land on the souther part of the strait be land and break land, and from the begin of this reach to the end of. the strait. high mountainous land on both side in most part cover with snow all the year long. betwixt the island elizabeth and the main be the narrow passage of all the strait. it may be some two musket shoot from side to side, from this straight to elizabeth bay. elizabeth bay be some four league and the course lie northwest and by west. this bay be all sandy and clean ground on the easter part. but before you come at it there lie a point of the shore, a good birth off, which be dangerous. and in this reach, as in many part of the strait, run a quick and forcible tide in the bay. it high eight or nine foot water. the norther part of the bay have foul ground and rock under water and therefore it be not wholesome, borrow of the main one of master thomas candish. his pynace, as i have be inform, come aground upon one of they and he be in hazard to have leave she there. from elizabeth bay to the river of jeronimo be some five league. the river of jeronimo, the course lie west and by north and west. here the wind scant and force we to seek a place to anchor in our boat, go alongst the shore, find a reasonable harbour which be right against that which they call river jeronimo, but it be another channel by which a man may disemboake the straight, as by the other which be accustom, for with a storm which take we, one night, sudden we be force into that open, unwitting, but in the morning see our error and the wind large, with two or three bourd, we turn out into the old channel, not dare, for want of our pynace, to attempt any new discovery. this harbour we call blanch bay. blanch bay for that it be find by william blanch, one of our master mate here. have moor our ship, we begin to make our provision of wood and water, whereof be plenty in this bay and in all other place, from pengwin land till within a dozen league of the mouth of the strait. now find our deck open, with the long lie under the line and on the coast of brasill. the sun have be in our zenith many time. we calk our ship within board and without above the deck, and such be the diligence we use that at four day end we have above threescore pipe of water and twenty boat of wood stow in our ship. no man be idle nor otherwise busy, but in necessary work, some in fell and cleave of wood, some in carry of water. some in rummage, some in wash, other in bake, one in heat of pitch, another in gather of mussells. no man be exempt, but know at evening whereunto he be to betake himself the morning. follow. objection of waist. some man may ask i how we come to have so many empty cask in less than two month, for it seem much that so few man in such short time and in so long a voyage shall waste so much. whereto i answer? answer that it come not of excessive expense, for in health we never exceed our ordinary, but of a mischance which befall we unknown in the island of saint james or saint anne in the coast of brasill, where we refresh ourselves and, according to the custom, lay our cask a shore to trim it and after to fill it. the place be commodious for we, but with the water a certain worm, call broma by the spaniard and by we, arters enter also, which eat it so full of hole that all the water soak out and make much of our cask of small use. this we remedy the best we can and discover it long before we come to this place. hereof let other take warning. warn against worm in no place to have cask on the shore where it may be. avoid for it be one of the provision which be with great care to be preserve in long voyage and hard to be supply. these arters, or broma, in all hot country, enter into the plank of ship and especial where be river of fresh water. for the common opinion be that they be breed in fresh water and with the current of the river be bring into the sea. but experience teach that they breed in the great sea in all hot climate, especial near the equinoctial line. for lie so long under and near the line and tow a shalop at our stern. come to cleanse she in brasil we find she all under water cover, with these worm as big as the little finger of a man, on the outside of the plank, not full cover but half the thickness of their body, like to a jelly wrought into the plank as with a gowdge. and natural reason in my judgement confirm this, for creature bread and nourish in the sea come into fresh water, die as those actual breed in pond or fresh river, die present if they come into salt water. but some man may say this fail in some fish and beast, which i must confess to be true. but these either be part terrestrial and part aquatile, as the mermaid, sea-horse and other of that kind, or have their breed in the fresh and growth or continual nourishment in the salt water, as the salmond and other of that kind. in little time, if the ship be not sheathe- sheathing of ship- they put all in hazard, for they enter in no big than a small spanish needle and by little and little their hole become ordinary, great than a man finger. the thick the plank be, the great he grow. yea, i have see many ship so eat that the most of their plank under water have be like honey comb and especial those betwixt wind and water, if they have not be sheathe it. have be impossible that they can have swim, the enter of they be hardly to be discern, the most of they be small as the head of a pin, which all such as purpose long voyage be to prevent by sheathe their ship. and for that i have see diverse manner of sheathe. for the ignorant i will set they down which by experience i have find best in spain and portugal. in spain and portugal some sheath their ship with lead which, beside the cost and weight, although they use the thin sheet-lead that i have see in any place yet it be nothing durable but subject to many casualty. another manner be use with double plank, with double plank as thick without as within after the. manner of fur which be little better than that with lead, for beside his weight it dure little because the worm in small time pass through the one and the other. a three manner of sheathe have be use among some, with fine canvas, with canvas which be of small continuance and so not to be regard the four. prevention which now be most account of with burn plank, be to burn the utter plank till it come to be in every place like a coal and after to pitch it. this be not bad. in china, as i have be inform, they use a certain betake or varnish. in china, with varnish in manner of a artificial pitch wherewith they trim the outside of their ship. it. be say to be durable and of that virtue, as neither worm nor water pierce it, neither have the sun power against it. some have devise a certain pitch, mingle with glass and other ingredient, beat into powder with which, if the ship be pitch, it be, say, the worm that touch it die. but i have not hear that it have be useful, but the most approve of all be the manner of sheathe use now adays in england, in england with thin bourd, half inch thick. the thin the better, and elm better than oak, for it, ryve not. it endure better under water and yield better to the ship side. the invention of the material, incorporate betwixt, the plank and the sheathe. be that indeed. which avail, for without it many plank be not sufficient to hinder the entrance of this worm. this manner be thus: before the sheathe board be nail on best manner of sheathe, upon the inner side of it they smear it over with tar half a finger thick and upon the tar another half finger thick of hair such as the whitelymer use, and so nail it on the nail not above a span distance one from another. the thick they be drive the better. some hold opinion that the tar kill the worm, other that the worm pass the sheathe and seek a way through the hair and the tar so involve he that he be choke therewith, which i think be most probable. this manner of sheathe be invent by my father and experience have teach it to be the best and of least cost. sect 33. such be the diligence we use for our dispatch to shoot the strait that at four day end we have our water and wood stow in our ship, all our copper-worke finish and our ship calk from post to stem. the first day in the morning the wind be fair. we bring ourselves into the channel and sail towards the mouth of the strait, praise god and begin our course with little wind. we descry a fire upon the shore make by the indian for a sign to call. we which see i cause a boat to be man'de and we row ashore to see what their meaning be and approach near the shore, we see a cannoa make fast under a rock with a with most artificial make with the rind of tree and sow together with the sin of whale at both end sharp and turn up with a green bough in ^ither end and rib for strengthen it. after a little while we may discern, on the fall of the mountain which be ^ull of tree and shrub, two or three indian naked which come out of certain cave or coat. they speak unto we and make diverse sign, now point to the harbour out of which we be come and then to the mouth of the strait. but we understand nothing of their meaning yet. leave they. we, with many imagination, suspect it may be to advise we of our pynace or some other thing of moment, but for that they be under covert and may work we some treachery for all the people of the strait and the land near they. use all the villainy they can towards white people. take they for spaniard in revenge of the deceit that nation have use towards they upon sundry occasion, as also for that by our stay we can reap nothing but hindrance of our navigation. we haste to. our ship and sail on our course from blanch bay to long reach, long reach which be some four league, the course lie west, south-west, enter into the long reach, which be the last of the strait, and long for it be, some thirty two league, and the course lie next of any thing northwest. before the set of the sun we have the mouth of the strait open and be in great hope the next day to be in the south sea. but about seven of the clock that night we see a great cloud rise out of the north-east which begin to cast forth great flash of lightning and sudden sail with a fresh gale of wind. at north-east, another more forcible, take we astaye, which put we in danger for all our sail, be a. it have like to have overset our ship before we can take in our sail and therefore, in all such semblance, it be great wisdom to carry a short sail or to take in all sail. here we find what the indian forewarn we of note, for they have great insight in the change of weather and beside have secret deal with the prince of darkness who many time declare unto they thing to come by this mean and other witchcraft which he teach they, he possess they and cause they to do what please he. within half a hour it begin to thunder and rain, with so much. wind as we be, force to lie a hull, and so dark that we see nothing. but when the lightning come, this be one of the narrow reache^ of all the strait we be force every glass to open, a little of our foresail to cast about our ship head. any man may conceive, if the night seem long unto we, what desire we have to see the day in fine phoebus with his beautiful face, lighten our hemisphere and rejoice our heart. have drive above twenty four league in twelve hour, lie a hull whereby, be to be imagine the force of the wind and current, we set our foresail and return to our former harbour, from whence, within three or four day, we set sail again. with a fair wind, which continue with we till we come within a league of the mouth of the straight here the ^inde take we again contrary and force we to return again to our former port where be ready to anchor the wind scant with we in such manner as we be force to make a board, in which time the wind and tide put we so far to lee-ward that we can by no mean seize it. so we determine to go to elizabeth bay, but before we come at it the night overtake we and this reach be dangerous and narrow. we dare neither hull nor try or turn to, and again with a short sail and therefore bare alongst in the midst of the channel till we be come into the broad reach, then lay a hull till the morning when we set sail and run alongst the coast, seek with our boat some place to anchor. in some four league to the westward of cape froward we find a goodly bay which we name english bay- english bay where anchor we present. go a shore and find a goodly river of fresh water and a old cannoa break to piece and some two or three of the house of the indian with piece of seal stink ripe. these house be make in fashion of a oven. seven. or eight foot broad with bough of tree and cover with other bough as our summer house, and doubtless do serve they, but for the summer time when they come to fish and profit themselves of the sea, for they retire themselves in the winter into the country where it be more temperate and yield better sustenance. for on the main of the strait we neither see beast nor foul sea, foul except and a kind of blackbird and two hog towards the beginning of the strait. here our ship be well moor, we begin to supply our wood and water that we have spend, which be a day work and the wind during many day. contrary, i endeavour to keep my people occupy, to divert they from the imagination which some have conceive sloth cause of imagination that it behoove. we shall return to brasill and winter there, and so shoot the strait in the spring of the year. so one day we row up the river with our boat and light horseman to discover it and the inland where have spend a good part of the day, and find shall water and many tree fall, thwart it and little fruit of our labour nor any thing worth the note. we return another day. we train our people ashore be a goodly sandy bay. another we have a hurl of bachelor against marry man. this day we be busy in wrestle the other. in shoot. so we be never idle. neither thought we the time long sect 34. after we have pass here some seven or eight day, one evening with a flaw from the shore, our ship drive off into the channel and before we can get up our anchor and set our sail we be drive so far to lee-ward that we can not recover into the bay. and night come on with a short sail. we beat off and on till the morning. at the break of the day, confer with the captain and master of my ship what be best to be, do we resolve to seek out tobias cove? tobias cove, which lie over against cape fryo on the southern part of the strait, because in all the reach of the strait, for the most part the wind blow trade and therefore little profit to be make. by turn to windeward and from the land of the pengwin to the end of the strait towards the south sea, there be no anchor in the channel and if we shall be put to lee-ward of this cove we have no succour till we come to the land of pengwin, and some of our company, which have be with master thomas candish in the voyage in which he die and in the same cove many week, undertake to be our pilot thither, whereupon we bear up, be some two. league thither, have so much wind as we can scarce, lie by it with our course and bonnet of each, but bear up. before the wind, we put out our topsail and spritsayle, and within a little while the wind begin to fail, we, and immediate our ship, give a mighty blow upon a rock, set of the ship upon a rock and stick fast upon it, and have we have but the four part of the wind which we have in all the night past. but a moment before we strike the rock, our ship, doubtless with the blow, have break herself all to piece. but our provident and most gracious god, which command wind and sea, watch over we and deliver we with his powerful hand. from the unknown danger and hide destruction. that so we may praise he for his fatherly bounty and protection and with the prophet david say: except the lord keep the city, the watchman watch in vain, for if our god have not keep our ship, we have be all swallow up alive without help or redemption. and therefore he, for his mercy sake, grant that the memorial of his benefit do never depart from before our eye and that we may evermore praise he for our wonderful deliverance and his continual providence by day and by night. my company, with this accident, be much amaze, the company dismay, and not without just cause. immediate. we use our endeavour to free ourselves and with our boat, ^ounded round about our ship in the mean time, assay our pump to know if our ship make more water than her ordinary diligence to (@) it. we find nothing increase. and round about our ship, deep water, save under the mid-shippe. for she be a float, a bead and a eterne and bear some fathom before the main must and in^o other part, be like to be our destruction, for be eb water, the weight in the head and stern, by fail of the water, begin to open her plank in the midst and upon the upper deck. they be, go one from another, some two finger, some more, which we seek to ease and remedy by lightning of her burden and throw into the sea all that come to hand and lay out a anchor. we seek to wend she off and such be the wa^ and force we put to the capsten and tackle, fasten upon the (@) that we pluck the ring of the anchor out of the eye but after recover it, though not serviceable, all our labour be fruitless till god be please that the flood come to the laborious, god propitious, and then we have she off with great joy and comfort. when find the current favourable with we, we stand over to english bay and search it ^^e anchor. there have be some three hour upon the rock and wi^h the blow, as after we see, when our ship be bring a ground in peric^, which be the port of panama, a great part of her sheathe be beat off on both side in she bulge and some four foot long and a foot square of her false stem join to the keel, wrest a cross like unto a hog yoke which hinder she sail very much. here we give god praise for our deliverance and therefore praise and afterward procure to supply our wood and water which we have throw overbourd to case our ship, which be not much that supply it. please god, who be not ever angry, to look upon we with comfort and to send we a fair and large wind. and so we set sail once again in hope to disemboke the straight, but some dozen league before we come to the mouth of it, the wind change and force we to seek out some cove or bay with our boat to ride in, near at hand that we may not be force to return far back into the strait. they sound a cove, some sixteen league from the mouth of the straight which, after we call crabby cove, crabby cove it brook his name. well, for two cause: the one for that all the water be full of a small kind of red crab, the other for the crabbed mountain which overtop it. a three we may add for the crabbed entertainment it give. we in this cove we anchor, but the wind fresh in, and three or four hill over-topping, like sugarloaf, alter and straighten the passage of the wind in such manner as force it down with such violence in flaw and furious bluster as be like to overset our ship at a anchor and cause she to drive and we to weigh. but before we can weigh it, she be so'nere. the rock and the puff and gust of wind, so sudden and uncertain, sometime scant, sometime large, that it force we to cut our cable. and yet dangerous if our ship do not cast the right way here. necessity not be subject to any law force. we to put ourselves into the hand of he that be able to deliver, we, we cut our cable and sail all in one instant. and god to show his power and gracious bounty towards we, be please that our ship cast the contrary way towards the shore. seem that he, with his own hand, do wend she about, for in less than her length she flat, and in all the voyage. but at that instant she flat with difficulty, for that she be long, the worst property she have. on either side we may see the rock under we and be not half a ship length from the shore and if she have once touch it have be impossible to have. escape. magnify ever. be our lord god, which deliver jonas out of the whale belly and his apostle peter from be overwhelm in the wave and we from so certain perish sect 35 from hence we return to blanch bay and there anchor. expect god good will and pleasure. here begin, the bitterness of the time to increase with bluster and sharp wind, accompany with rain and sleet, snow and my people to be dismay again in manifest. a desire to return to brasill, which i will never consent unto, no no^ so much as to hear of, and all man be to take care that they go not one foot back, more than be of mere force, for i have not see voyages ^verthroune by pretence that any who have yield thereunto, but present they have, return home, as in the voyage of master edward fontom, which the earl of cumberland set forth to his great charge, as also in that of master thomas candish- edward f^nton and master thomas cand^sh, in which he die, both which pretend to shoot the strait of magelan and, by persuasion of some ignorant person, be in good possibility be bring to consent to return to brasill to winter. and after in the spring, to attempt the pass of the straight again. none of they make any abode in brasill for present. as soon as they look homeward, one with a little bluster wind take occasion to loose company. another complain that he want victual, another that his ship be leak, another that his mast sail or cordidge fail. he so, the willing, never want probable reason to further their pretence, as i see once be but young and more bold than experiment in 1582.. in a voyage under the charge of my uncle william hawkins of plymouth, master william hawkins esquire in the indies at the w end of the island of san ivan de portorico. one of the ship, call the bark bonner, be somewhat leak. the captain complain that she be not able to endure to england. whereupon a counsel be call and his reason hear and allow so it be, conclude that the victual munition and what be serviceable shall be take out of she and her man divide among our other ship, the hull remain to be sink or burn, to which i never speak word till i see it. resolve be my part, rather to learn, then to advise, but see the fatal sentence give and suspect that the captain make the matter worse than it be, rather upon policy to come into another ship which be better of sail then for any danger they may run into with. as much reason as my capacity can reach unto, i dissuade my uncle private and urge that, see, we have profit the adventurer nothing. we shall endeavour to preserve our principal especial have, man and victual, but see, i prevayle^ not. i go further and offer to find out, in the same ship and other, so many man as with i will be content to carry she home, give we the three part of the value of the ship, as she shall be value at at her return, by four indifferent person, and to leave the vide-admiral which i have under my charge and to make her vide-admiral, whereupon it be condescend that we shall all go aboard the ship and that the^e it shall be determine the. captain think himself somewhat touch in reputation, and so will not that further trial shall be make of the matter. say that if another man be able to carry the ship into england, he will in no case leave she. neither will he forsake she till she sink under. he the general, commend he for his resolution and thank i for my offer. tend to the general good my intention be to force those who, for gain can under-take to carry she home shall also do it gratis, according to their obligation. thus this leake-ship go well into england where, after she make many a good voyage in nine year, wherein she be employ to and fro and no doubt will have serve many more, have she not? be lay up and not use, fall into the hand of those which know not the use of ship. it be large to recount the voyage and worthy enterprise overthrow by this policy with the ship, which have thereby go to wrack sect 36 by this and the like, experience danger to hearken unto reason of return. remember and know that if once i consent to turn but one foot back, i shall overthrow my voyage and loose my reputation. i resolve rather to loose my life then to give ear to such prejudicial counsel, and so, as the wether give leave, we entertain ourselves the first day in necessary work and after in make of coal for wood be plentiful and no man will commence a action. of waist against we with intent, the wind continue long contrary, to see if we can remedy any of our break anchor, a forge i have in my ship, and of five anchor which we bring out of england, there remain but one that be serviceable in the land of pengwin. we lose one in crabbie cove, another of a three. upon another occasion we break a arm and the four on the rock have the eye of his ring break. this one day devise with myself i make to serve without work. he a new which when i take first in hand all man think it ridiculous. but in fine, we make it in that manner so serviceable as till our ship come to callaw, which be the port of lyma, she scarce use any other anchor. and when i come from lyma to panama, which be three year after, i see it serve the admiral in which i come, a ship of above five hundred ton, without other art or addition than what my own invention contrive, and for that, in the like necessity or occasion, other may profit themselves of the industry, the mend of a unserviceable anchor. i will recount the manner of the forge our eye, without fire or iron, it be in this sort: from the eye of the shank about the head of the cross, we give two turn. with a new strong halser, betwixt three and four inch, give a reasonable allowance for that which shall be the eye and serve in stead of the ring. then we fasten the two end of the hals so as in that part it be as strong as in any other, and with our capsten stretch the two byghte that every part may bear proportionable. then arm we all the hals round about with six yarn synnets and likewise the shank of the anchor and the head with a smooth matt make of the same synnet. this do with a inch rope. we wooll the two byghte to the shank, from the cross to the eye, and that also which be to serve for the ring and fit the stock according this. do those who before deride the invention be of opinion that it will serve for a need? only they put one difficulty: that with the fall or pitch of the anchor in hard ground with his weight, he will ^ut the hals in sunder on the head. for prevention, whereof we place a paunch, as the mariner term, it upon the head of the anchor. with who softness this danger be prevent and the anchor pass for serviceable. some of our idle time we spend in gather the bark and fruit of a certain tree. entertainment o^ time. to avoid idleness which we find in all place of the strait where we sound tree. this tree carry his fruit in cluster like a hawthorne, but that it be green, each berry of the bigness of a pepper corn and every of they contain, within four or five grain twice as big as a musterd-seed, which break, be white within as the good pepper and bite much like it, but hot. the bark of this tree have the savour of all kind of spice together, most comfortable to the stomach and hold to be better than any spice whatsoever. and for that a learned countryman of we, doctor turner, have write of it by the name of winter bark, in gather of winter^ bark, what i have. say, may suffice. the leaf of this tree be of a whitish green and be not unlike to the aspen leaf other. while we entertain ourselves in gather of pearl out of mussel, whereof there be abundance in all place, from cape froward to the end of the strait, the pearl be but of a bad colour of pearl and small. but it may be that in the great mussel in deep water, the pearl be big and of great value. of the small seed pearl there be great quantity and the mussel be a great refresh unto we, for they be exceed good and in great plenty. and here let i crave, pardon if i err. see i disclaim from be a naturalist by deliver my opinion. touch the breed of these pearl, which i think to be of a far different nature and quality to those find in the east and west indies, which be find in oyster, grow in the shell, under the ruff of the oyster, some say of the dew, which i hold to be some old philosopher conceit, for that it can be make probable how the dew shall come into the oyster, and if this be true then questionless we shall have they in our oyster as in those of the east and west india. but those oyster be by the creator make to bring forth this rare fruit, all their shell be to look to pearl itself and the other pearl find in our oyster and mussel in. diverse part be engender out of the fatness of the fish, in the very substance of the fish, so that in some mussel have be find twenty and thirty in several part of the fish, and these not perfect in colour nor clearness as those find in the pearle-oyster, which be ever perfect in colour and clearness like the sun in his rise, and therefore call oriental and not, as be suppose, because out of the east, for they be as well find in the west and no way inferior to those of the east. indies, other fish, be^ides, seal and crab, like shrimp, and one whale with two or three porpoise we see not in all the strait. here we make also a survey of our victual. and open certain barrel of oaten meal, we find a great part of some of they, as also of our pipe and fat of bread eat and consume by the rat. doubtless a five part of my company do not eat so much as these devour as we find daily in come to spend any of our provision. when i come to the sea, it be not suspect that i have a rat in my ship. prevention of ra^s. but with the bread in cask which we transport our of the hawk and the go to and again of our boat unto our prize, though we have diverse cat and use other prevention, in a small time they multiply in such a manner as be incredible it be. one of the general calamity of all long voyage and will be careful prevent as much as may be for, beside that which they consume, of the best victual they eat the sail and neither pack nor chest be free from their surprise. i have know they to make a hole in a pipe of water and say the pump have put all in fear, doubt, lest some leak have be spring upon the ship. the calamity they bring to a ship. moreover, i have hear credible person report that ship have be put in danger by they to be sink by a hole make in the bulge. all which be easy remedy at the first, but if, once they be somewhat increase with difficulty they be to. be destroy. and although i propound a reward for every rat which be take and seek mean by poison and other invention to consume they, yet their increase be so ordinary and many we be not able to clear ourselves from. they sect 37 at the end of fourteen day, one evening be calm and a goodly clear in the easter-boord. i will our anchor to be, weigh backwardness in the company and determine to go into the channel, whereof ensue a murmur among my company who be desirous to see the wind settle before we put out of the harbour. and in part they have reason. consider how we have be canvas from place to place yet on the other side, if we go not out before. night we shall loose the whole night sail and all the time which we shall spend in warp out, which will be doubtless a great part of the forenoon. and although the master signify unto i the disposition of my people and master, henry courton, a discreet and virtuous gentleman and my good friend, who in all the voyage be ever a especial furtherer of all that ever i ordain or propose, in this occasion seek to divert i that all but myself be contrary, incline to that which i think fit, and though the common say be, and the consequence thereof that it be better to err with many than all, contradict alone to hit the right way. yet truth tell i this proverb to be false. found. for that it be. not to be understand that for err it be better. but because it be suppose that by hit a man shall get emulation of the contradictor, i encounter it with another that say: better to be envy, then pity and well, consider that: be out of the harbour if the wind take we contrary, to go to elizabeth bay be better than to be in the port, for a man must of force warp in and out of it and in the time that the ship can be bring forth into the channel, the wind be good. a man may come from elizabeth bay to the port and that there we shall have. the wind first be more to the eastwarde and in a open bay, and, moreover, may set sail in the night, if the wind shall rise in the evening or in the night, whereas in the port of force we must wait the light of the day. i make myself deaf to all murmur and cause my command to be put in execution, and doubtless it be god gracious inspiration, as by the event be see for be get into the channel within a hour. the wind come good and we sail merry on our voyage, and by the break of the day we have the mouth o^ the strait open, and about four of the clock in the afternoon we be thwart of cape desire, which be the westermost part of the land on the souther side of the strait, sect 38. here, such as have command may behold the many misery that befall they advertisement ^or c^mmanders, not only by unexpected accident and mischance, but also by contradiction and murmur of their own people. of all calamity, the great which can befall a man of discretion and valour and as difficult to be overcome for to require reason of the common sort, be, as the philosopher say, to seek counsel of. a mad man herein. as i say before, they resemble a stiff neck horse who take the bridle in his tooth, carry the rider whether he please so once possess, with any imagination, no reason be able to convince they. the best remedy i can propound be to wish our nation, in this point, to be well advise and, in especial, all those that follow the sea ever have before their eye the ancient discipline of our predecessor who, in conformity and obedience to their chief and commander, have be a mirror to all other nation with patience, silence and suffer the advantage of obedience, put in execution what they have be command and thereby gain the blessing due to such virtue and leave to posterity perpetual memory. of their glorious victory a just recompense for all, such as conquer themselves and subject their most specious will to the will of their superior, sect 39, in apprehension whereof, at land, i can forbear the discipline thereof, as at this day and in the day of late memory, it have be practise in the state of flaunders, france and britain. wher^ as the spaniard, walloon, swisser and other nation be daily full of murmur and mutiny upon every sleight occasion, the like i also wish shall be imitate by those who follow the sea. that be that those who be subject to command presume no further then to that which belong unto they. i speak this for that i have sometime see unexpert and ignorant person. yea. unable to judge of any point, appertain to government or the guide of a ship or company of man, presume upon their fine wit and enamour of their own conceit, contradict and dispute against gra^e wise and experiment governor. many forward fellow think themselves better worthy to command then to be command. such person i advise not to go, but where they may command advertisement ^or young servitor. or else look, before they leap, to consider well under who they place themselves. see, for the most part it be in their choice to choose a governor from who they may expect satisfaction. but choice be once make to resolve with the patient wife in history that that day wherein she marry herself to a husband that very day. she have no long, any will more than the will of her husband. and so he that, by sea or land, place himself to serve in any action, must make reckon that the time the journey endure, he have no other will. nor dispose of himself, then that of his commander, for in the governor hand be all power to recompense and reward, to punish or forgive. likewise, those who have charge and command must sometime, with patience or sufferance, overcome their fury and misconceit, according to occasion, for it be a great point of wisdom, especial in a general murmur, where the cause be just, or that, as often time it happen, any probable accident may divert the mind of the discontent and give hope of remedy. or future event may produce repentance, to turn, as they say, the deaf ear and to wink at that. a man, see as it be sa^d of charles the five, emperor of germany and king of spain, who round his camp one night, disguise, hear some soldier rail and speak evil of he those which accompany he. be of opinion that he shall use some exemplary punishment upon they. not, so say he, for these now vex with the misery they suffer, ease their heart with their tongue, but if occasion present itself, they will not stick to sacrifice their life for my safety. a resolution worthy. so prudent a commander and so magnanimous a prince, the like be write of fabius maximus, the famous roman who endure. the attribute of coward with many other infamy, rather than he will hazard the safety of his country by rash and incertain provocation. no less worthy of perpetual memory be the prudent policy and government of our english navy, the patience of the earl of nottingham in 1588.. by the worthy earl of nottingham, lord high admiral of england, who, in like case, with mature and experiment knowledge, patient withstand the instigation of many courageous and noble captain who will have persuade he to have lay they aboard, but well, he foresee that the enemy have a army aboard he, none that they exceed, he in number of ship and those great in bulk, strong build and high mould, so that they who, with such advantage, fight from. above may easy distress all opposition below. the slaughter peradventure prove more fatal than the victory profitable. by be overthrow he may have hazard the kingdom, whereas by the conquest, at most, he can have boast of nothing but glory and a enemy defeat. but by sufferance he always advantage himself. of wind and tide, which be the freedom of our country and security of our navy, with the destruction of they which, in the eye of the ignorant, who judge all thing by the external appearance, seem invincible but true, consider be much inferior to we in all thing of substance, as the event prove, for we sink, spoil and take of they many, and they diminish of we but one small pynace, nor any man of name, save only captain cock, who die with honour amid his company. the great damage that, as i remember, they cause to any of our ship be to the swallow of her majesty, which i have, in that action, under my charge, with a arrow of fire shoot into her beakhead. which we see, not because of the sail till it have burn a hole in the rose as big as a man head. the arrow fall out and drive alongst by the ship side, make we doubt of it which, after we discover sect 40 in many occasion notwithstanding, it be most prejudicial to dissemble the reprehension and punishment of murmur and mutter when they carry a likelihood to grow to a mutiny, mutiny not always to be wink at, seem to lean to a faction or that a person of regard or merit, favour the intention or contradict the justice, etc. and other of like quality. the prudent governor be to cut off this hydra head in the beginning and, by prevention, to provide remedy with expedition. and this sometime with absolute authority, although the best be ever to proceed by counsel if necessity and occasion require not the contrary, for passion many time over-ruleth, but that which be sentence and execute by consent be justify, although sometime erroneous. march 29. 1594. sect 41 from cape desire, some four league northwest, lie four land which be very small and the middlemost of they be o^ the fashion of a sugarloaf. we be no soon clear of cape desire and his ledge of rock which lie a great way off into the sea. but the wind take we contrary by the northwest, and so we stand off into the sea two day and two night to the westward. in all the strait it ebb and flow. more or less, and in many place it high, very little water, but in some bay where be great indraught, it high eight or ten foot and doubtless further in more. if a man be furnish with wood and water and the wind good, he may keep the main sea and go round about the strait to the southwards and it be the short way for beside the experience which we make that all the south part of the strait be but land, south part of the strait, land many time have the sea open. i remember that sir francis drake tell i that have short the strait, a storm take he first at northwest and after veer about to the south-west which continue with he many day. with that extremity that he can not open any sail and that at the end of the storm he find himself in fifty degree, which be sufficient testimony and proof that he be beat round about the strait, for the least height of the strait be in fifty two degree and fifty minute, in which stand the two entrance or mouth, and moreover he say that stand about when the wind change. he be not well able to double the southermost island, and so anchor under the lee of it and go ashore, carry a compass with he and seek out the southermost part of the island, cast himself down upon the uttermost point, grovel, sir francis drake, embrace the southermost poin^ of the world and so reach. out his body over it present, he embark and then recount unto his people that he have be upon the southermost know land in the world and more ^urther to the southwards upon it than any of they yea or any man as yet know. these testimony may suffice for this truth unto all but such as be incredulous and will believe nothing but what they see. for my part, i be of opinion that the straight be navigable all the year long, although the best time be in november, december and january, and then the wind more favourable, which other time be variable, as ^n all narrow sea be some fifty league, a seaboord, the strait, the wind vere to the westward, we cast about to the. north-ward and lie the coast along, shape our course for the island mocha m^cha. about the fifteen of april we be thwart of baldivia, baldiu^a, which be then in the hand of the spaniard, but since the indian, in 1599, dispossess they of it and the conception which be two of the most principal place they have in that kingdom, and both port baldivia, have its name of a spanish captain, so call who afterward the indian take prisoner and it be, say they require of he, the reason why he come to molest they and to take their country from. they have no title nor right thereunto. he answer: to get gold, which the barbarous understanding cause gold to be melt and pour down his throat, say. gold. be thy desire, glut thou with it it. stand in forty degree, have a pleasant river and navigable, for a ship of good burden may go as high up as the city and be a goodly wood country. here our beef begin to take end and be then as good as the day we depart from england. it be preserve in pickell which, though it be more chargeable, yet the profit pay the charge in that it be make durable, contrary to the opinion of many which hold it impossible that beef shall be keep good, pass the equinoctial line. and of our pork i eat in the house of don beltran de castro in lyma, near four year old, very good preserve after the same manner. notwithstanding it have lose his pickle long before some degree. before a man come to baldivia, to the southward, as spaniard have tell i lie the island chule, not easy to be discern from the main, for he that pass by it can but think it to be the main, it be say to be inhabit by the spaniard, but bad yet rich of gold. the 19 of april be easter-even. we anchor under the island mocha. it lie in 39 degree. it may be some four league over and be a high mountainous hill, but round about the foot thereof, some half league from the seashore, it be champion ground, well inhabit and manure. from the strait to this island, we find that either the coast be set out more westerly than it be, or that we have a great current which put we to the westward, for we have not sight of land in three day after our reckon be to see it. but for that we coast, not the land. i can determine whether it be cause by the current or lie of the land, but spaniard which have sail alongst it have tell i that it be a bold and safe coast and reasonable sound of it. in this island of mocha. we have communication and contratation with the inhabitant, but with great vigilancy and care for they and all the people of chy be mortal enemy to the spaniard and hold we to be of they and so esteem sir francis drake when he be in this island, which be the first land also that he touch on this coast. they use he with so fine a treachery that they possess themselves of all the oar in his boat, save two, and in strive to get they also, they slay and hurt all, his man himself who have few wound, have three and two of they in the head, two of his company which live long after. have the one, seventeen, his name be. john bruer, who afterward be pilot with master candish and the other, above twenty, a negro-servant, to sir francis drake and with i. they use a policy which among barbarous people be not to be imagine. although i wrought sure treachery of the indian, for i suffer none to treat with i, nor with my people. with arm we be arm and meet upon a rock, compass with water. whether they come to parley and negotiate, be in communication with the casique and other, many of the indian come to the head of our boat and some go into they. certain of my people stand to defend the boat with their oar. for that there go a bad siege, be force to lay down their muskett, which the indian perceive. endeavour to fill the barrel with water, take it out of the sea in the hollow of their hand by chance. cast my eye aside, i discover their slyness and with a truncheon which i have in my hand give the indian three or four good lamskinne. the casiques see it begin to give i satisfaction by use rigour towards those which have be in the boat. but i have get the refresh i desire and all i can hope from they. will have no further conversation with they. at our first come two of their casique, who be their lord or king, come aboard our ship. we leave one. of our company ashore as a pledge, who we feast in good manner. they eat well of all that be set before they and drink better of our wine. one of they become a little giddy head and marvayl much at our artillery. i cause a piece to be prime and after to be ^hott off, whereat the one start but the other make no show of alteration. after put they ashore, load with toy and trifle which to they seem great riches. from all port of the island the people come unto we bring all such thing as they have, to wit sheep, cock, etc. from hen they will not part- and diverse sort of fruit and root which they exchange with we for knife, glass, comb. bell, bead, counter pin and other trifle, ex^hanges o^ trifle. we see little demonstration of gold or silver among they, though some they have and for that we see they make estimation of it. we will not make reckon of it, but they give we to understand that they have it from the main. the sheep of this island be great o^ sheep, good and fat. i have not taste better mutton any, where they be as we, and doubtless of the breed of those which the spaniard bring into the country. of the sheep of the country we can by no mean procure any one, although we see of they and use mean to have have of they, for they esteem they much, as reason will serve. they for many use, as in another place. god willing, i shall declare more. at large, they have small store of fish. this island be situate in the province of arawca and be hold to be people with the most valiant nation in all, chy, though general, the inhabitant of that kingdom be very courageous. they be clothe after the manner of antiquity, all of woollen, their cassock make like a sack, their apparel square with two hole for the two arm and one for the head, all open below, without line or other art, but of they some be most curious, wooven and in colour, and on both sidesalike. and house their house be make round in fashion, like unto our pigeon house with a laver in. the top to evacuate the smoke. when they make fire. they bring we a strange kind of tobacco, make into little cake, like pitch of a bad smell, with hole through the middle, and so lace many upon a string. they present we also with two spanish letter- think we to be spaniard- which be write by a captain of a frigate that some day before have receive courtesy at their hand and signify the same to the governor, wish that the people of the island will become good subject to the king and that therefore he will receive they into his favour and protection and send they some person as governor. but none of they speak spanish and so we deal with they by sign the people. of this island, as of all chy people (@) chy be of good stature and well make and of better countenance than those indian which i have see in many part. they be of good understanding and agility and of great strength. their weapon be bow, their weapon and arrow. and macanas. their bow, short and strong and their arrow of a small read or cane, three quarter of a yard long with two feather and head with a flint stone, which be loose and hurt. the head remain in the wound. some be head with bone and some with hard wood, half burn in the fire. we come betwixt the island and the main. on the south-west part of the island lie a great ledge of rock. which be dangerous and it be good to be careful how to come too near the island. on all part, immediate, when they discover we, both upon the island and the main we may see, they make sundry great fire, which be to give advise to the rest of the people to be in a readiness, for they have continual and mortal war with the spaniard. their hate to the sp^niards and the ship they see they believe to be their enemy, the city imperiall, lie over against this island, but eight or ten league into the country, for all the sea coast from baldivia till 36. degree, the indian have now, in a manner in their hand, free from any spaniard sect 42 have refresh ourselves well. in this island. for that little time we stay, which be some 3. day, we set sail with great joy and with a fair wind, sail alongst the coast and some eight league to the north-ward. we anchor again in a goodly bay and send our boat ashore with desire to speak with some of the indian of arawca and to see if they will be content to entertain amity or to chop and change with we. but all that night and the next morning appear not one person. and so we set sail again and towards the evening the wind begin to change and to blow contrary, and that so much, and the sea to rise so sudden that we can not take in our boat without spoil of they. this storm continue with we ten day, beyond expectation, a cruel storm. for that we think ourselves out of the climate of foul weather, but true, it be one of the sharp storm that ever i feel to endure so long. in this storm, one night hale up our boat to free the water out of they, one of our younker that go into they for that purpose. have not that regard, which reason. require unto our light horseman, for with hale she up to step into, she out of the boat, the important loss of a small vessel. he split she asunder and so we be force to cut she off, which be no small heart, grief unto i ^or that i know and all my company feel and many time lament the loss of she. the storm take end and we shape our course for the island of saint mary. saint mary, which lie in thirty seven degree and forty minute, and before you come unto the island, some two league in the trade way, lie a rock which a far off seem to be a ship under sail. this island be little and low, but fertile and well people. with indian and some few spaniard in it. some ten league to the north-ward of this island lie the city conception, city of conception, with a good port. from this we coast alongst till we come in thirty three degree and forty minute, in which height lie the land of ivan fernandes. ivan fernandes, betwixt, threescore and fourscore league, from the shore, plentiful of fish and good for refresh, i purpose, for many reason, not to discover myself upon this coast, good to avo^d discovery, till we be past lyma, otherwise call cividad reyes, for that it be enter by the spaniard the day of the three king. but my company urge i so far that, except i shall seem in all thing to overbeare they in not. condescend to that which, in the opinion of all but myself, seem profitable and best, i can not but yield unto, though it carry a false colour, as the end prove, for it be our perdition. this all my company know to be true, whereof some be yet live and can give testimony, but the mariner be ordinary. so carry away with the desire of pillage, wilfulness of mariner as sometime, for very appearance of small moment, he lose his voyage and many time himself. and so the greediness of spoil only hope for in ship of trade which go too and fro in this coast, blind they from forecast the peril whereinto we expose our voyage in discover ourselves, before we pass the coast of calla^ which be the port of lyma. to be short, we hale the coast aboard, and that evening we discover the port of balparizo, which serve the city of saint jago stand some twenty league into the country. when present, we descry four ship at a anchor. they seize ^pon 4. ship whereupon we man and arm our boat which row towards the ship. they see, we turn in and fear that which be run a shore with that little they can save and leave we the rest, whereof we be master in a moment and have the rifle of all the storehouse on the shore. this night i set a good guard in all the ship, long to see the light of the next morning to put all thing in order which appear, i begin to survey they and find nothing of moment save five hundred botozios of wine, two or three thousand of hen and some refresh of bread, bacon, dry beef, wax, candle and other necessary. the rest of their lade be plank, spare and timber for lyma and the valley which be a rich trade for it, have no timber but that which be bring to it from other place. they have also many pack of indian mantle, but of no value unto we, with much tallow and manteca de and abundance of great new chest in which we have think to be some great mass of wealth, but open they find nothing but apple therein. all which be good merchandise in lyma, but to we of small account. the merchandise on shore and the warehouse in their storehouse be the like and therefore in the same predicament. the owner of the ship give we to understand that at a reasonable price they will redeem their ship and load, which i hearken unto and so admit certain person which may treat of the matter and conclude with they for a small price. rather than to burn, they save for the great which i carry with i more to give satisfaction to my people then for any other respect, because they will not be persuade but that there be much gold hide in she, otherwise she will have yield we more than the other three. be in this treaty. one morning, at the break of day, come another ship, tour into the harbour and stand into the shore but be becalm against she. we man, a couple. of boat and take she before many hour in this ship they seize upon another ship. we have some good quantity of gold and some gold which she have gather in baldivia and the conception, from whence she come, of this ship be pilot and part owner alonso perezbueno, who we keep for our pilot on this coast till move with compassion for that he be a man charge with wife and child. we set he a shore betwixt santa and truxillo. out of this ship we have also store of good bacon and some provision of bread, hen and other victual and for that she have bring we so good a portion and her owner continue with we the better to animate he to play the honest. man, though we trust he no further than we see he, for we present discover he to be a cunning fellow and for that his other partner have lose the great part of gold and seem to be a honest man, as after he prove by his thankfulness in lyma. we give they the ship and the great part of her load, free. here we supply our want of anchor, light anchor, bring from the north s^a, though not according to that which be requisite in regard of the burden of our ship, for in the south sea the great anchor for a ship of six or eight hundred ton be not a thousand weight, partly because it be little subject to storm and partly because those they have till our come be all bring out of the north sea by land, for they make no anchor in those country, and the first artillery they have and the first artillery be also bring over land which be small, the carriage and passage, ^^om or porto velo to panama being most difficult and steep up hill and down hill they be all. carry upon negro back, but some year, be^ore my imprisonment, they fall to make of artillery. and since they forge anchor also, we furnish our ship also with a shift of sail of cotton cloth, sail of cotton clothe, which be far better in that sea than any of our double sail, for that, in all the navigation of that sea they have little rain and few storm, but where rain and storm be ordinary they be not good, for with the wet they grow so stiff that they can be handle. sect 43. i conclude the ransom of the ship with a ancient captain and of noble blood who have his daughter there ready to be, embark to go to lyma to serve donia teruza de castro. the viceroy, wife and sister to don beliran de castro, her apparel and he with diverse other thing which they have, embark in the great ship we restore for the good office he do, we and the confidence he have of we come and go only upon my word, for which he be ever after thankful and deserve much more. another that treat with. i be captain ivan contreres, owner of one of the ship and of the island, santa maria, in thirty seven degree and forty minute in treat of the ransom and transport and lade, the provision we make choice of. we spend some six or eight day at the end, whereof with reputation among our enemy and a good portion towards our charge and our ship as well, store and victual as the day we depart from england. we set sail the time we be in this port, i take small rest. they dep^rt from lyma and so do the master of our ship, hugh cornish, a most careful, orderly and sufficient man because we know our own weakness, for enter into the harbour we have but seventy five man and boy, five ship to guard, and every one moor by himself, which no doubt, if our enemy have know and conceal their weakness, they will have wrought some stratagem upon we, for the governor of chy be. there on shore, in view of we, a ancient flanders soldier and of experience, wisdom and valour, call don alonso de soto, mayor, the nobleness of alonso ^e soto, of the habit of saint jago, who be after captain general in terra firm and wrought all the invention upon the river of chagree and on the shore. when sir francis drake purpose to go to panama, in the voyage wherein he die, as also at my come into spain, he be precedent in panama and there and in lyma use i with great courtesy, like a noble soldier and liberal gentleman, he confess to i. after that he lie in ambush with three hundred horse and foot to see if, at any time, we have land or neglect. our watch with balsas which be a certain raffe make of mast or tree, fasten together to have attempt something against we. but the enemy i fear, not so much as the wine, the enemy less dangerous than the wine which, notwithstanding all the diligence and prevention i can use day and night, overthrow many of my people. a foul fault because too common among seaman and deserve some rigorous punishment with severity to be execute for. it have be and be daily the destruction of many good enterprise amid their best hope and beside the ordinary fruit it bring forth of beggary, ^hame and sickness. it be a most deadly sin, a drunkard be unfit for any government and, if i may be, hire with many thousand. i will not carry with. i, a man know to put his felicity in that vice, instil it with the name of good fellowship, which in most well govern commonwealth, have be a sufficient blemish to deprive a man of office, of honour and estimation. it waste our kingdom more than be well understand as well by the infirmity it cause as by the consumption of wealth to the impoverish of we and the enrich of other kingdom. and though i be not old in comparison of other ancient man, i can remember spanish wine, rare to be find in this kingdom. then hot burn fever be not know in england, spanish wine and burn fever unknown in england. and man live many more year. but since the spanish sack have be common in our tavern which, for conservation, be mingle with lyme in its make our nation complain of of the stone, the dropsy and infinite other disease not hear of before this wine come in frequent use. or but very seldom. to confirm which my belief, i have hear one of our learn physician affirm that he think there die more person in england of drink wine and use hot spice in their meat and drink then of all other disease beside. there be no year in which it waste not two million of crown of our substance by conveyance into foreign country and consume treasure which, in so well a govern, commonwealth as we be acknowledge to be through the whole world, in all other constitution, in this, only remain to be look into and remedy. doubtless, whosoever shall be the author of this reformation will gain with god a everlasting reward and of his country a statue of gold for a perpetual memory of so meritorious a work. sect 44, a league or better. before a man discover this bay, to the southward description of the bay, lie a great rock or small island near the shore under which, for a need, a man may ride with his. ship. it be a good mark and sure sign of the port and discover the bay. a man must give a good birth to the point of the harbour for it have perilous rock lie a good distance off it. neither ebb nor flow in this port, nor from this till a man come to guayaquill, which be three degree from the equinoctial line to the southward. let this be consider. it be a good harbour for all wind that partake, not of the north, for it run up south, and by west and south, south-west, but it have much foul ground. in one of these ship. we find a new devise for the stop of a sudden leak in a ship under water without board. a new devise for stop a leak without board when a man can come to it within board, which ease we of one that we have from the day we depart from detford, cause by the touch aground of our ship at low water, be load and in the neape stream come aground in the stern, the force of the tide cause to cast thwart wrest her slegg, and that in such sort as it make a continual leake, though not much, and for that other may profit themselves of the like. i think it good to set down the manner of it, which be take a round wicker basket and to fill it with piece of a junke or rope chap, very small and of a inch long, and after toze all as oacombe. then the basket be to be cover with a net, the mesh of it be at the least two inch square, and after to be tie to a long pike or pole which be to go a cross the basket mouth and put it under water. care be to be have to keep the basket mouth towards the ship side if the leak be any thing great. the oacombe may be somewhat long and it carry likelihood to do good and seem to be better. than the stitch of a bonnet or any other diligence which as yet i have see. another thing i note of these ship, which will be also use by we, that every ship carry with she a spare rudder, spare rudder, and they have they to hang and unhange with great facility, and beside, in some part of the ship they have the length, breadth and proportion of the rudder mark out for any mischance that may befall they, which be a very good prevention. ten league to the north-ward of this harbour be the bay of bay of quintera, where be good anchor, but a open bay where master thomas candish, for the good he have do to a spaniard in, bring he out of the strait. of magellan, where otherwise he have perish with his company, be by he betray, and a dozen of his man take and slay. but the judgement of god leave not his ingratitude unpunished, for in the fight with we in the vide-admiral, he be wound and maim in that manner as three year after i see he beg with crutch and in that miserable estate as he have. be better dead then alive. from balparizo we sail direct to coquinbo, coquinbo which be in thirty degree, and come, thwart the place. we be becalm and have sight of a ship, but for that she be far off and night at hand. she get from we and we have wind, enter the port, think to have have some ship. in it but we lose our labour and for that the town be half a league up in the country and we not man for any matter of attempt worthy prosecution. we make no abode on the shore but present set sail for the peru. this be the best harbour that i have see in the south sea. it be land-locked for all wind and capable of many ship. but the ordinary place where the ship lade and unlade and accommodate themselves be betwixt a rock and the main on the wester-side, some half a league up, within the entrance of the port, which lie south and south and by east and north and by west. in the incountry, direct over the port be a round pike hill. like a sugar loaf and before the entrance on the southern point of the port, come in out of the sea. it be a great rock, a good birth from the shore, and these be the mark of the port, as i remember. be clear of this port we shape our course for arica and leave the kingdom of chy. arica, in chy much commend one of the best country that the sun shine on for it be of a temperate climate and abound in all thing necessary for the use of man, with infinite rich mine of gold, copper and sundry other metal. the poor house in it, by report of their inhabitant, have of their own store bread, wine, flesh and fruit which be ^o plentiful. that of their superfluity. they supply other part, sundry kind of cattle as horse, goat and ox bring thither by the spaniard, for all sort of fruit be find in herd of thousand, wild and without owner, beside those of the country which be common to most part of america, in some of which be find the bezoar stone and those very good and great, among other. they have little beast like unto a squirrel, but that he be gray, his skin be the most delicate, soft and curious fur that i have see and of much estimation as be reason in the peru. few of they come into spain because difficult to be come by. for that the prince and noble lie wait for they, they call. this beast, chinchilla, and of they they have great abundance. all fruit of spain they have in great plenty, save stone fruit and almond ^or in no part of the indies have. i know that plumb cherry or almond have bear fruit, but they have certain little round as those of brasill, of the bigness of a walnut which be as good as a almond beside it. have most of the fruit natural to america, of which in another place i shall, god wi^ling, speak, particular the gold they gather, and plenty of gold be in two manner. the one be wash the earth in great trey of wood, in many water, as the earth waste away, the gold in the bottom remain. the other be by force. of art to draw it out of the mine in which they find it. in most part of the country the earth be mingle with gold. for the butizias in which the wine be which we find in balpharizo have many spark of gold shine in they of it. the goldsmith i carry with i, for like purpose, make experience. when baldivia and arawca be peaceable they yield great plenty and the best. but now their great mine be in coquinbo, as also the mine of copper which they carry to the peru and sell it better, cheap than it be ordinary sell in spain. the indian know the end of the spaniard molestation to be principal. the desire of their riches have enact that no man, upon pain of death, do gather any gold. the indian forbid the search of gold. in coquinbo it rain seldom, but every shower of rain be a shower of gold unto they. every shower a shower of gold, for with the violence of the water fall from the mountain, it bring from they the gold and beside give they water to wash it out. as also for their ingenious to work so that ordinary every week they have procession for rain in this kingdom they make much linen and wool^en cloth. linen and woollen cloth make in coquinbo and great store of indian mantle with which they furnish other part. but all, be course, stuff it have no. silk, nor iron, except in mine and those as yet not discover pewter. be well esteem and so be fin linen, woollen cloth, haberdasher ware, edge-tool and arm or munition. it have his governor and with two bishop, the one of saint jago, the other of the imperial, all under the viceroy and primate of lyma. saint jago be the metropolitan and head of the kingdom and the seat of justice, which have his appellation to lyma. the people be industrious and ingenious, of great strength and invincible courage, as in the war. the valour of the arawcans, which they have sustain above forty year continual against the spaniard, have be experience for confirmation whereof i will allege only two proof of many. the one be of a indian captain, take prisoner by the spaniard, and for that he be of name and know to have do his devoir against they. they cut off his hand, thereby intend to disenable he to fight any more against they. but he return home desirous to revenge this injury, to maintain his liberty with the reputation of his nation and to help to banish the spaniard with his tongue. entreat and incite they to persevere in their accustom, valour and reputation. abase the enemy and advance his nation. condemn their contrary of cowardliness and confirm it by the cruelty use with he and other, his companion in their mishap. show they his arm without hand and name his brother who half foot they have cut off because they may be unable to sit on horseback with force. argue that if they fear they not, they will not have. use so great inhumanity for fear. produce cruelty. the companion of cowardice. thus encourage he they to fight for their life, limb and liberty. choose rather to die a honourable death. fight then to live in servitude as fruitless member in their commonwealth. thus use the office of a sergeant maior and have load his two stump with bundle of arrow. succour those who, in the succeed battle, have their store waste and change himself from place to place, animate and encourage his countryman with such comfortable persuasion as it be report and credible, believe that he do much more good with his word and presence without strike a stroke, than a great part of the army do with fight to the utmost. the other proof be that such of they as fight on horseback be but slight arm for that their armour be a beast hide fit to their body green and after wear till it be dry and hard, he that it be best arm. have he double yet? any one of they, with these arm and with his lance, will fight hand to hand with any spaniar^ arm, from head to foot, and it be credible report that a indian be wound through the body by a spaniard lance with his own hand, have creep on upon the lance and come to grapple with his adversary and both fall to the ground together. by which be see their resolution and invincible courage and the desire they have to maintain their reputation and liberty. sect 45: leave the coast of chy and run towards that of peru. my company require the three of the gold we have get, which of right belong unto they, wherein i desire to give they satisfaction of my just intention, but not to divide it till we come home and so persuade they with the best reason i can allege, the difficulty to divide the bar and be part, how easy it be to be rob of they, and that many will play away their portion and come home as beggarly as they come out, and that the share can not be well make before our return to england, because every man merit can not be discern nor reward till the end of the voyage. in conclusion, it be resolve and agree that the thing of price as gold and silver shall be put into chest with three key, whereof i shall have the one, the master, another and the three, some other person, who they shall name. this they yield unto with great difficulty and not without reason, for the bad correspondence use by many captain and owner with their company. upon their return, defraud they or diminish their right, have hatch many jealousy and produce many disorder, with the overthrow of all good discipline and government, as experience teach. for where the soldier and mariner be unpaide or defraud, what service or obedience can be require at his hand the covetous captain or commander, most man unwilling to follow cove^ous commande^s. lose the love of those under his charge. yea though he have all the part beside require in a perfect commander, yet if he prefer his private profit before justice, hardly will any man follow such a leader, especial in our kingdom, where more absolute authority and trust be commit to those who have charge. then in many other country, and therefore in election of chieftain, care will be have in examination of this point, the shameful fruit whereof find, by experience of many year wherein i have wander the world, i leave to touch. in particular, because i will not diminish the reputation of any but this. let i manifest that there have be and be certain person who, before they go to sea, either rob part of the provision, the mischief of corrupt or scantle provision, or in the buy make penurious, unwholesome and avaritious pennyworth. and the last i hold to be the lea^t, for they rob only the victualler and owner but the other steal from owner, victualler and company and be many time the only overthrower of the voyage for the company. think themselves to be store with four or six month victual. upon survey they find their bread, beef or drink, short yea, perhaps all. and so be force to seek home in time of best hope and employment, this mischief be most ordinary in great action, last some be. so cunning that they not only make their voyage by rob before they go to sea, but o^ that also which come home. such gamester, a wise man of our nation, resemble to the mill on the river of thames, for grind both with flood and ebb. so these, at their go out and come home, will be sure to rob all other of their share, although this be a great abuse among we, and but of late day practise, and by i speak unto by way of animadversion, either in hope of redress or for infliction of punishment. yet i will have the world know that in other country the fault be far more insufferable, and the principal cause which i can find for it be that. our country employ her noble of man of credit in all action of moment, who rather choose to spend wealth and gain honour, then to gain riches without reputation, whereas in spain and other part the advancement of poor man and mean person by favour and interest produce no other end but private and particular respect to enrich themselves. yet the nobility themselves, for the most part, in all occasion pretend reward for any small service whatsoever which with we as yet be not in use. but the great and most principal robbery of all, in my opinion, be the defraud or detain of the company, three or wage of detain and defraud of wage, accurse by the just god who forbid the hire of the labourer to. sleep with we, to such i speak, as either abuse themselves in detain it, or else to such as force the poor man to sell it at vile and low price, and last to such as, upon feign cavil and suit, do deter the simple and ignorant sort from their due prosecution, which be too much in use among we, have breed in those that follow the sea a jealousy in all employment and many time cause mutiny and infinite inconvenience. a point deserve consideration and reformation and which, with great facility, may be remedy if upright justice will put itself as stickler betwixt the owner and company. no less worthy of reformation be the general abuse of mariner and soldier who rob all they can under the colour of pillage of mariner, by challenge of pillage, and after make ordinance, cable, sail, anchor and all above deck to belong unto they of right, whether they go by three or wage this, proceed from those pilfer war wherein every gallant that can arm out a ship, take upon he the name and office of a captain, not know what to command nor what to execute. such commander, for the most part consort and join unto themselves disorderly person, pirate and ruffian, under the title of man of valour and experience. they meet with any prize, make all upon the deck, they of duty, viz the best. piece of ordinance for the captain, the second for the gunner, the three for his mate, the best cable and anchor for the master, the main topsail for the boatsman, the bonnett for the quarter master and the rest of the sail for the company, the card and instrument of the master for the master. the surgeon instrument and chest for the surgeon, the carpenter tool and chest for the carpenter, and so consequent of each officer that answer the other in the two ship. if one happen upon a bag of gold, silver, pearl or precious stone, it be hold well, get, provide it be clean. steal though the ship and all her load beside be not worth so much little, consider the common injury in defraud. the owner, victualler and whole company and forget that if himself be a juryman upon another in like case, he will adjudge he to the gallow. but i will advise such novice to know that our true and ancient discipline of war be far different and be understand, be much more better for the general. beside it be ground on god law, from whence all law shall be derive, and true justice which distribute to every one that which to he belong of right, and that in due season, in the time of war, in our country as also in other, by the law of oleron, which to our ancient seaman be fundamental, nothing be allow for pillage but apparel. the law of oleron concern: pillage arm instrument. and other necessary belong to the person in that ship which be take, and these too, when the ship be gain by dint of sword, with a proviso that if any particular pillage exceed the value of six crown, it may be redeem for that value by the general stock and sell for the common benefit if the prize render itself without forcible entry. all in general aught to be preserve and sell in mass, and so equal, divide, yea, though the ship be win by force and entry. yet whatsoever belong to she of tackle, sail or ordinance be to be. preserve for the generality, save a piece of artillery for the captain, another for the gunner, and a cable and anchor for the master, which be the right due unto they, and these to be deliver when the ship be in safety and in harbour, either unload or sell, which law or custom well consider will rise to be more beneficial for the owner, victuallar and company. then the disorder new creep in. and before, remember for the sail, cable, anchor and hull be sell, every one a part yield, not the one half which they will do if they be sell altogether, beside the excuse of charge and robbery in the unload and part in the war of france in the time of queen mary and in. other war, as i have hear of many ancient captain, the company have but the four part and every man bind to bring with he the arm with which he will fight, which in our time i have know also use in france. and if the company victual themselves, they have then the one half and the owner the other half. for the ship, powder shot and munition. if any prize be take, it be sell by the tun ship and good, so as the load permit it, that the merchant have buy the good he may present, transport they, whethersoever he will, by this manner of proceed, all rest content, all be true. pay for this be just deal. if any deserve reward, he be recompense out. of the general stock. if any one have filch or steal or commit offence, he have. likewise his desert. and who once be know to be a disorder person or a thief, no man will receive he into his ship, whereas now a day many vaunt themselves of their theft and disorder. yea, i have see the common sort of mariner, under the name of pillage, maintain and justify their robbery most insolent before the queen majesty, commissioner, with arrogant and unseemly term. for that they will not condescend to their unreasonable challenge. the demand be better worth than five hundred pound, which some one pretend to be his and that, of the choice merchandise and most of it rob out of that part of the ship which they themselves and all the world can but confess to be merchandise. my opinion be that such malaperts deserve most just to have their spoil take from they or some. worse consideration and afterward to be severe punish in prevention of great, then can by paper be well declare. but i must tell you, withal such have be the partiality of some commissioner in former time, that upon information in lieu of punishment, opinion have hold they for tall fellow, when in truth they never prove the best man in difficult occasion. for their mind, be all set on spoil and can be well content to suffer their associate to bear the brunt. whill they be prowl after pillage, the better to gain and maintain the aforesaid attribute in tavern and disorderly place for the orderly and quiet man i have ever find in all occasion to be of best use, most valiant and of great sufficiency. yet i condemn none but those who will be repute, valiant and be not examine the accusation. all what soever be find upon the deck go for merchandise. be exempt out of the censure of pillage what ought to be repute pillage. silk, linen or woollen cloth in whole piece, apparel that go to be sell or other good, what soever though they. be in remnant manifest, know to be carry for that end or be comprehend in the register or bill of lade, be not to be contain under the name of pillage, but, as i have say, of the consort. so can i not but complain of many captain and governor against the disloyalty of captain who overcome with like greedy desire of gain, condescend to the smother and suppress of this ancient discipline, the cleanly to smother their own disloyalty in, suffer these breake-bulk to escape and absent themselves till the heat be past and partition make some of these cause the bill of lade to be cast into the sea or so to be hide that they never appear. other send away their prisoner who sometime be. more worth than the ship and her lade, because they shall not discover their secret steal treasure for many time. that which be leave out of the register or bill of lade with purpose to defraud the prince of his custom in their conceit conceivement o^ much more value th^n the trade hold to be excessive. be of much more value then that which the ship and lade be worth. yea, i have know ship worth two hundred thousand pound. and better clean sweep of their principal riches. nothing but the bare bulk be leave unsack. the like may be speak of that which the disorderly mariner and the soldier term pillage, yet all wink at and unpunished. although such prize have be render without stroke strike this. doubtless can but be a heart, grief and discouragement to all those who, virtuous and true, desire to observe the ancient discipline of our nation, their own honour and the service of their sovereign. but to prevent these unknown mischief, the prevention of undue pillagin^s and for his better discharge, i remember that my father, sir john hawkins, in his instruction in action under his charge, have this particular article that whosoever render or take any ship shall be bind to exhibit the bill of lade to keep the captain, master, merchant and person of account and to bring they to he to be examine or into england, if they shall be by any accident separate from he. what soever be find want the prisoner be examine be. to be make good by the captain and company which take the ship, and this upon great punishment. i be witness and avow that this course do redound much to the benefit of the general stock, to the satisfaction of her majesty and counsel, the justification of his government and the content of his follower. thus much have i set down concern, these abuse and the reformation thereof. for that i have neither see they divulge by any with who i have go to sea, neither yet record in writing by any man pen. let consideration present they to the ear of the powerful. but now to our voyage, sect 46 rvn alongst the coast, till we come within few league of arica. nothing happen unto we of extraordinary novelty or moment, for we have the brese favourable, which seldom happen in this climate, find ourselves in nineteen degree, we hale the shore, close aboard, purpose to see if there be any ship in the road of arica. arica, it stand in a great large bay in eighteen degree, and before you come to it, a league to the southward of the road and town be a great round hill high than the rest of the land of the bay, near about the town which we have discover, have sight present of a small bark, close aboard the shore. becalm man, our. boat we take. she be load with fish from moormereno, which be a goodly head-land, very high and lie betwixt twenty four and twenty five degree, and whether ordinary some bark use to go a fish every year in. she be a spaniard and six indian. the spaniard, for that he be near the shore, swim unto the rock, and though we offer to return he his bark and fish, as be our meaning, yet he refuse to accept it and make we answer that he dare not, for fear lest the justice shall punish he in so great subjection. be the poor unto those who have the administration of justice in those part and in most part of the kingdom and country subject to spain. the severity of spain insomuch that to hear the justice to enter in at their door, be to they destruction and desolation. for this cause. we carry she alongst with we. in this mean while we have sight of another tall ship come out of the sea which we give chase unto but can not fetch up, be too good of sail ^or we, our small prize and boat stand off unto. we descry another ship which they chase and take also load with fish, come from the land of juan fernandes. after we open the bay and port of arica but see it clean without ship, we hale the coast alongst and go aboard to visit the big prize. my company salute i with a volley of small shot. among they one musket break and carry away the hand of he that shoot it through his own default, which for that i have see to happen many time. i think it necessary to note in this place that other may take warning by his harm. the cause of the musket break be the charge with two bullet overcharge o^ artileries. the powder be ordain to carry but the weight of one and the musket not to suffer. two charge of powder or shot by this oversight. the fire be restrain with the overplus of the weight of shot and not be able to force both of they out. break all to piece. so to find a way. to its own centre and i be of opinion that it be a great error to prove great ordinance or small shot with double charge of powder or shot. my reason be for that ordinary the mettle be proportion to the weight of the shot which the piece be to bear and the powder correspondent to the weight of the bullet, and this be grant. i see no reason why any man shall require to prove his piece with more then be belong to it of right, for i have see many goodly piece break with such trial: be clean, without honey, comb, crack, flaw or other perceavable blemish which no doubt with their ordinary allowance will have serve many year. yea, i have be certify by man. of credit that some gunner have take a glory for break many piece in the trial which be easy to be do by sundry, slight and mean, not fit to be publish, much less to be exercise, be prejudicial to the seller and chargeable to the conscience of the practiser. therefore, it be good, this excessive trial by double charge be clean, abolish. if i shall make choice for myself, i will not willing that any piece shall come into fort or ship under my charge which have bear at any time more than his ordinary allowance. misdoubt lest through the violence of the double charge the piece may be craze within or so force as at another occasion with his ordinary allowance, he may break in piece. how many man, so many mind for to other. this may ^eeme harsh, for that the contrary custom have so long time be receive, and therefore i submit to better experience and contradict not but that in a demi culverin a man may put two saker or minion shot or many of small weight, and so in a muskett two calever shoot or many small, so they exceed not the ordinary weight prescribe by proportion, art and experience. these experiment i hold, convenient upon many occasion, yea, and most necessary. but the vain custom of double charge to cause their piece, thereby to give a better report, i affirm, can produce no other effect but danger loss and harm. sect 47 have visit our prize and find in. they nothing but fish. we take a small portion for our victual and give the big ship to the spaniard again, and the lesser we keep with purpose to make she our pinnace, the indian which we take in. she will by no mean depart from we the amity of the indian, but desire to go with we, for england, say that the indian and english be brother, and in all place where we come they show themselves much affectionate unto we. these be native of moremoreno and the most brutish of all that ever i have see, and except it be in form of man and speech, they seem altogether void of that which appertain to reasonable man. they be expert swimmer but after the manner of spaniel, they dive and abide under water a long time and swallow the water of the sea as if it be of a fresh river. except a man, see they, he will hardly believe how they continue in the sea as if they be mermaid and the water their natural element. their country be most barren and poor of food. if they take a fish alive out of the sea or meet with a piece of salt fish, they will devour it without any dress, as savoure, as if it have be most curious, sodden, or dress all which make, i believe, that they sustain themselves. of that which they catch in the sea the spaniard profit themselves of. their labour and travel and recompense they bad they be in worse condition than their slave. for to those they give sustenance, houseroom and clothing and teach they the knowledge of god, but the other they use as beast to do their labour without wage or care of their body or soul. sect 48 thwart of ariquipa. the ship we bring with we from balparizo be very leak and my company satisfy that their hope to find any thing of worth in she be vain. have search she from post to stem condescend to fire she and the rather to keep our company together which can not well suffer any division more than of mere necessity. so, by general accord, we ease ourselves of she and continue our course alongst the coast till we come thwart of the bay of pisco, which lie within 15. degree and 15. minute present. after we be clear of cape sangalean and his land, we range this bay with our boat and pinnace it have 2. small land in it but without fruit and be becalm. we anchor two day thwart of chilec by sea and by land. those of c have give advice to don garcia hurtado mend^ca, advise ^^ven ^y sea and land, marquis of viceroy of peru, resident in lima, of our be on the coast, he, present, with all possible diligence, put out six ship in warlike order with well near two thousand man. and dispatch they to seek we and to fight with we, under the conduct of don beltrian, his wife, brother, who depart out of the port of callao, turn to windward, in sight over the shore, from whence they have daily intelligence where we have be discover. and the next day after our departure out of chilca, about the middle of may, at break of day, we have sight each of other thwart of we be to wind-ward of the spanish armado, some two league, and all with little or no wind, our pinnace or prize be furnish with oar, come unto we, out of which we think to have take our man and so to leave she but be able to come unto we at all time. it be hold for better to keep she till necessity force we to leave she, and so it be determine that if we come to likelihood of board she shall lay our boat aboard and enter all her man and from thence to enter our ship and so to forsake she. although by the event, in that occasion this prove good notwithstanding, i hold it to be reprove. where the enemy be far superior in multitude and force and able to come and board if he list, and that the sure course be to fortify the principal, the best that may be, and to cutof all impediment. where a man be force to defence, for that no man be assure to have time answerable to his purpose and will, and upon doubt whether the other, in hope to save themselves, will not leave he in great extremity. sect 49. we present put ourselves in the best order we can to fight and to defend ourselves. our prayer we make unto the lord god of battle. for his help and our deliverance, put ourselves whole into his hand. about nine of the clock the brese begin to blow and we to stand off into the sea. the spaniard cheek by jowl with we ever get to the wind-ward upon we. for that the ship of the south-sea be ever mould, sharp under water and long all. their voyage depend upon, turn to wind-warde, and the brese blow ever southerly. as the sun begin to mount aloft, the wind begin to fresh, which, together with the roll sea that ever beat upon this coast, come out of the westerne-bourd, cause a chap sea, wherewith the admiral of the spaniard snap his main mast asunder and so begin to lag a stern, and with he other two ship, the vide-admiral split her maine-sayle: be come within shot of we upon our broad side, but to le-ward, the rear-admiral crack her mainyard asunder in the midst. be a head of we, one of the armado which have get upon the broad side of we to wind-ward, dare not assault we with these. disgrace upon they and the. hand of god, help and deliver. we, night come, we begin to consult what course be best to be take, to free ourselves. wherein be diverse opinion. some say it be best to stand off to the sea, close by all the night. other to lie it a hull. other to cast about to the shoare-ward two glass and after all the night to stand off to sea, close by the admiral of the spaniard, with the other two. be a stern of we, some four league the vice-admiral, a mile right to le-ward of we the rear-admiral, in a manner right a head, some culverin shoot and one upon our loose within shot also, the moon be to rise within two hour. after much debate, it be conclude that we shall bear up before the wind and seek to escape betwixt, the admiral and the vice-admiral which we put in execution. not know of any other disgrace befall they, but that of the rear-admiral, till after our surrender, when they recount unto we all that have past in the morning. at break of day, we be clear of all our enemy, and so shape our course alongst the coast for the bay of atacume, where we purpose to trim our pinnace and to renew our wood and water, and so to depart upon our voyage with all possible speed. the spanish armado return present to callao, which be the port of lyma or of the city of the king. it. be first name lyma and retain also that name of the river which pass by the city. call lyma the spanish armado be enter the port, the people begin to go ashore, where they be so mock and scorn by the woman. as scarce any one by day will show his face, they revile, they with the name of coward and golnia and crave licence of the viceroy to be admit in their room and to undertake the surrendry of the english ship. i have be certify for truth that some of they affront their soldier with dagger and pistol by their side. this wrought such effect in the heart of the disgrace, as they vow either to recover their reputation lose or to follow we into england. and so, with expedition, the viceroy command two ship and a pinnace to be put in order, and in they place the chief soldier and mariner of the rest and furnish they with victual and munition. the foresay general be once again dispatch to seek- we who range the coast and port, inform himself what he can- some fifty league to the north-ward of lyma, in sight of mongon. we take a ship half load with wheat, sugar, miell, canas and cordovan skin, which for that she be leak and sail bad and tackle in such manner as the mariner will not willing put themselves into she. we take what be necessary for our provision and fire she thwart of truxille. we set the company of her a. shore with the pilot which we have take in balparizo reserve. the pilot of the burn ship and a greek who choose rather to continue with we, then to hazard their life in go a shore for that they have. depart out of the port of santa, which be in eight degree, be require by the justice not to weigh anchor before the coast be know to be (@). it be a thing worthy to be note and almost incredible with how few man they use to sail a ship in the south sea, for in this prize which be above a hundred tun, be but eight person, and in a ship of three hundred tun they use not to put above fourteen or fifteen person. yea, i. have be credible, inform that with fourteen person, a ship of five hundred tun have be carry from guayaquil to lyma deep load which be above two hundred league and be force ever to gain their voyage by turn to wind-ward, which be the great toil and labour that t^e mariner have and slow sometime in this voyage, four or five month, which be general in all the navigation of this coast, but the security from storm and certainty of the brese, with the desire to make their gain, the great be the cause that every man force himself to the uttermost to do: the labour of two man, sect l, in the height of this port of santa, some seven hundred and fifty league to the westward. lie the land of solomon, the land of solomon of late year. discover at my be in lyma a fleet of four sail be send from thence to people. they which, through the emulation and discord that arise among they be, land and settle in the country, be utter, overthrow only one ship with some few of the people, after much misery, get to the philippines. this i come to the knowledge of by a large relation, write from a person of credit and send from the philippines to panama. i see it at my be there in my voyage towards spain. have edge near the coast to put the spaniard on shore, a thick fog take we so that we can not see the land but recover. our pinnace and boat. we sail on our course till we come thwart of the port, call malabrigo. it lie in seven degree. in all this coast, the currant run with great force but never keep any certain course, save that it run alongst the coast sometime to the southward, sometime to the north-ward, which now run to the north-ward force we so far into the bay which a point of the land cause, punta augus^a, that they call punta augussa, as think to clear ourselves by rove northwest. we can not double this point. make our way north, northwest. therefore, special care be ever to be have of the current and doubtless, if the providence of almighty god have not free we, we have run ashore upon. the land without see or suspect any such danger. his name be ever exalt and magnify for deliver we from the unknown danger by calm the wind all night the sun rise. manifest unto we our error and peril by discover unto we the land within 2 league, right a head, the current have carry we without any wind, at the least 4.. league which see, and the wind beginning to blow, we bring our tack aboard and in short time, clear ourselves. thwart of this point of augussa lie two desert island, they call they lobos for the, the multitude of seal which accustom to haunt the shore in the big be very good, harbour and secure. they lie in six degree and thirty minute. the next. day after we lose sight of those land, be thwart of payta which lie in five degree, and have man, our pinnace and boat to search the port. we have sight of a tall ship which have knowledge of our be on the coast and think herself to be more safe at sea then in the harbour, put herself then under sail. to she we give chase all that night and the next day. but in fine, be better of sail than we. she free herself thus be too lee-ward of the harbour and discover we continue our course alongst the shore that evening we be thwart of the river of guayaquill which have in the mouth of it two land, the souther-most and big call puma in. three degree and the other to the north-ward. p^ma be inhabit puma and be the place where they build their principal ship from-his river. lima and all the valley be furnish with timber, for they have none but that which be bring from hence or from the kingdom of chile by this river pass, the principal trade of the kingdom of quito. it be navigable, some league into the land and have great abundance of timber. those of the peru use to ground and trim their ship in puma or in panama and in all other part. they be force to carene their ship in puma. it high and fall fifteen or sixteen foot water and from this island till a man come to panama in all the. coast. it ebb and flow more or less keep the ordinary course which the tide do in all sea. the water of this river by experience be medicinable for all ache of the bone, for the stone and strangury. the reason which be give be because all the bank and low land adjoin to this river be replenish with salsaperillia which lie for the most part soak in the water. it participate of this virtue and give it this force. in this river and all the river of this coast be great abundance of alagartoes, and it be say that this exceed the rest. for person of credit have certify i that as small fish in other river abound in scoale, so the alagartoes in this they do. much hurt to the indian and spaniard and be dreadful to all who they catch within their clutch. sect li some five or six league to the north-ward of puma, be la punta de santa elena, under which be good anchor, clean ground and reasonable succour be thwart of this point. we have sight of a ship which we chase but be of better sail than we, and the night come on we lose sight of she and so anchor under the isla to recover our pinnace and boat which have go about the other point of the island, which lie in two degree and forty minute. the next day we pass in sight of puerto viejo, puerto in two degree ten minute, which lie without ship. we direct our course for cape passaos. it lie direct under the equinoctial line, some fourscore league. to the westward of this cape lie a heap of land, the spaniard call they be desert and bear no fruit. from cape passaos we direct our course to cape saint francisco, which lie in one degree to the northward of the line and be thwart of it. we descry a small ship which we chase all that day and night, and the next morning our pinnace come to board she but be a ship of advice and full of passenger, and our ship not able to fetch she up. they entreat our people bad and free themselves, though the fear they conceive cause they to cast all the dispatch of. the king, as also of particular, into the sea with a great part of their load to be light and better of sail for the ship of the south sea, load themselves like lighter or sand barge, presume upon the security from storm sect 52. be out of hope to fetch up this ship. we stand in with the cape where the land begin to trend about to the east-ward, the cape be high land and all cover over with tree, and so be the land over the cape, and all the coast from this cape to panama be full of wood, from the staite of magelan to this cape of san francisco. in all the coast, from head-land to head-land the course lie betwixt the north and north and by west and sometime more westerly, and that but seldom it be a bold coast and subject to little foul weather or alteration of wind for the brese, which be the sowtherly wind blow continual from balparizo to cape san francisco, except it be a great chance trend. about the cape, we hale in east, north-east, to fetch the bay of atacames, which lie some seven league from the cape, in the mid way, some three league from the shore, ly^th a bank of sand whereof a man must have a care for in some part of it there be but little water. the ten of june we come to a anchor in the bay of atacames, which on the w part have a round hammock. it seem a island, and in high spring i judge that the sea go round about it. to the east-ward it have a high sandy cliff and in the midst of the bay, a fair birth from the shore, lie a big black rock above water. from this rock to the sandy cliff be a drown marsh ground cause by his lowness and a great river which be broad but of no depth. manning our boat and run to the shore, we find present in the western bite of the bay, a deep river who indraught be so great that we can not benefit ourselves. of it be brackish, except at a low water which hinder our dispatch. yet in five day we fill all our empty cask, supply our want of wood and ground and put in order our pinnace here. for that our indian serve we to no other use. they dismiss their indian but to consume our victual we ease ourselves of. they give they hook and line which they crave and some bread for a few day and replant they in a far better country than their own which fall out. lucky for the spaniard of the ship which we chase thwart of cape san francisco, for victual grow short with she have many mouth, she be force to put a shore fifty of her passenger near the cape. whereof more than the one half die with famine and continual wade through river and water. the rest, by chance. meet with the indian which we have put ashore with their fish, guide and industry, be refresh, sustain and bring to habitation. sect 53: our necessary business be end. we purpose the fifteen day of may in the morning to set sail, but the fourteen in the evening we have sight of a ship some three league to sea ward, and through the importunity of my captain and company i condescend that our pinnace shall give her chase, which i shall not have do for it be our destruction. i give they precise order that if they stand not in again at night they shall seek i at cape san francisco for the next morning. i purpose to set sail without delay and so see that our pinnace slow her come at nine of the clock in the morning. we weigh our anchor and stand for the cape where we beat off, and on two day and our pinnace not appear, we stand again into the bay where we descry. she turn in without a main mast which stand off to the sea close by, with much wind and a chap sea bear, a taunt-sayle where a little be too much be to small purpose. sudden they bear it by the board and stand in with the shore, the wind, or rather god. blind they for our punishment. they know not the land and make themselves to be to wind-ward of the bay, bear up and be put into the bay of san matthew. it be a goodly harbour and have a great, fresh river which high fifteen or sixteen foot water and be a good country and well people with indidian. they have store of gold and emerald here. the spaniard from guayaquill make a habitation whilst i be prisoner in lyma, by the indian consent. but after not able to suffer the insolence of their guest and be a people of stomach and presumption, they suffer themselves to be persuade and lead by a molato. the indian, lead by a molato, this leader, many year before, have flee unto they from the spaniard. he, they have long time hold in reputation of their captain general and be admit also unto a chief office by the spaniard to gain he unto they. but now the indian unite themselves together, presume that by the help of this molato they shall force the spaniard out of the country, put their resolution in execution, drive their enemy into the wood. and s^ue as many as they can lay hand on. some they kill, few escape with life and those who have that good hap suffer extreme misery. before they come to quito, the place of near habitation of spaniard, to this bay, assoon, as our people in the pynnas saw their error, they bring their tack aboard and turn and tide it up as they can. assoon as we come to anchor, i procure to remedy that be amiss. in two day we dispatch all we have to do and the next morning we resolve to set sail and to leave the coast of peru and quito. the day appear, we begin to weigh our anchor and be a pike ready to cut sail, one out of the. top descry the spanish armado. spanish armado come about the cape which, by the course it keep present, give we to understand who they be. though my company, as be the custom of sea man, make they to be the fleet bind for panama, load with treasure and importune that in all haste, we shall cut sail and stand with they, which i contradict, for that i be assure that no ship will stir upon the coast till they have security of our departure, except some armado that may be send to seek we, and that it be not the time of the year to carry the treasure to panama, and beside, in ride, still at a anchor, they ever come near unto we, for they stand direct. with we, and we keep the weather gage where, if we have put ourselves under sail, the ebb in hand, we shall have give they the advantage which we have in our power by reason of the point of the bay, and be the armado as it be, we gain time to fit ourselves the better to fight, and true, as before, to a stiffnecked horse. so now again, i can but resemble the condition of the mariner to any thing better, then to the current of a furious river, repress by force or art which nevertheless cease not to seek a way to overthrow both fence and bank. even so, the common sort of seaman apprehend a conceit in their imagination. neither experiment, knowledge, example, reason nor authority can alter or remove they from their conceit opinion in this extremity. with reason, i labour to convince they and to contradict their pretence. but they, altogether without reason or against reason, break out. some into vaunt and brag, some into reproach of want of courage, other into wish that they have never come out of their country. if we shall refuse to fight with two ship whatsoever and to mend the matter, the gunner, for his part, assure i that with the first tire of shot, the unadvised courage of the multitude, he will lay the one of they in the sod and our pynace that she will take the other to task, one promise that he will cut down. the main yard, another that he ^ould take their flag, and all in general show a great desire to come to trial with the enemy. to some i turn the deaf ear, with other i dissemble and arm myself with patience, have no other defence nor remedy for that occasion. soothe and animate they to the execution of what they promise and persuade they to have a little sufferance, see they gain time and advantage by it, and to give they better satisfaction. i condescend that our captain, with a competent number of man, shall, with our pinnace, go to discover they with order, that they shall not engage themselves in that manner, as they may not be able to come unto we or we to succour they. in all these division and opinion, our master, hugh dormish, who be a most sufficient man for government and valour, and well, see the error of the multitude, use his office a^ become he, and so do all those of best understanding. in short space, our pinnace, discover what they be and cast about to return unto. we, the vide-admiral be next her begin with her chase to salute she with three or four piece of artillery, and so continue, chase she and gunning at she. my company see this- now begin to change humour, and i then to encourage and persuade they to perform the execution of their promise and vaunt of valour, which they have, but even now protest and give assurance of by their and forwardness and that we may have sea-room to fight. we present weigh anchor and stand off to sea with all our sail in hope to get the weather gage of our contrary. but the wind, scant with we and large with they. we be force to leeward and the admiral weather we the beginning of the ^ight. come room upon we which be within musket, shoot. we hail, first with our noise of trumpet, then with our wait, and after with our artillery, which they answer with artillery two for one, for they have double the ordinance we have, and almost ten man for one. immediate. they come shore aboard of we, upon our lee quarter, contrary to our expectation and the custom of man of war, and doubtless have our gunner be the man he be repute to be the inexperience of the spa^iards and as the world sell he to i. she have receive great hurt by that manner of board. but contrary to all expectation, our stern piece be unprime, and so be all those and carelessness of the english which we have to leeward save half one in the quarter which discharge wrought that effect in our contrary, as that they have five or six foot water in hold before they suspect it. hereby all man be to take warning by i, not to trust any man in such extremity when he himself may see it do. how far a commander be to trust his officer and come to fight, let the chieftain himself be sure to have all his artillery in a readiness upon all occasion. this be my oversight, this my overthrow, for i and all my company have that satisfaction of the sufficiency and care of our gunner as not any one of we ever imagine there will be any defect find in he. for my part, i, with the rest of our officer, occupy ourselves in: clear our deck, lace our net, make of bulwark, arm our top, fit our wast-cloathe, tallow our pike, sling our yard, double our sheet and tack, place and order our people and procure that they shall be well fit and provide of all thing. leave the artillery and other instrument of fire to the gunner, dispose and order with the rest of his mate and adherent which, as i say, be part of our perdition. for bear i ever in hand that he have five hundred in a readiness within one hour. fight we be force to occupy three person only in make and fill, and of five hundred else, of canvas and other cloth, give he for that purpose, at sundry time, not one yard be to be find. for this we have no excuse and therefore can not avoid the danger to charge and discharge with the ladle especial in so hot a fight and come now to put in execution the sink of the ship, as he promise. he seem a man without life or soul. so the admiral come close unto we. i myself and the master of our ship be force to play the gunner. those instrument of fire wherein he make i to spend excessive before our go to sea, now appear not deceit of the gann^r and his extreme carelessness and suspicious disloyalty, neither the brass ball of artificial fire to be shoot with slurbowe, whereof i have six bow and two hundred ball, and which be of great account and service, either by sea or land he have, stow they in such manner though in double barrel, as the salt water have, spoil they all so that come to use they, not one be serviceable. some of our company have he in suspicion to be more friend to the spaniard then to we, for that he. have serve some year in the tercera as gunner and that he do all this of purpose. few of our piece be clear when we come to use they, and some have the shot first put in and after the powder beside, after our surrendry. it be lay to his charge that he shall say he have a brother that serve the king in the peru and that he think he be in the armado. and how he will not, for all the world he shall be slay. whether this be true or no, i know not, but i be sure all in general give he a ill report and that he in who hand the chief execution of the whole fight consist. execute nothing, as be promise. and expect the grief and remembrance of which oversight once again enforce. i to admonish all captain and commander hereby to take advice. admonition for commander now and then, to survey their officer and storeroome the often the better. that so their defect and want may be supply in time, never rely too much upon the vulgar report, nor give too much credit to smooth tongue and boast companion. but to perform this task it be requisite that all captain and commander be such and so experiment in all office, that they may be able as well to control as to examine all manner of error in officer. for the government at sea hardly suffer a head without exquisite experience, the deficiency whereof have occasion some ancient seaman. to straighten the attribute of mariner in such sort who to be account a true mariner as that it ought not to be give, but to the man who be able to build his ship to fit and provide she of all thing necessary, and after to carry she about the world, the residue to be but sailor. hereby give we to understand that though it be not expedient that he shall be a axe-carpenter to hew, cut, frame and mould each timber piece, yet that he shall know the part and piece of the ship, the value of the timber, his knowledge for material, plank and ironwork, so to be able aswell to build in proportion as to procure all material at a just price. and again, though it be not expect that he shall sow the sail, arm the shrowd and put the tackle over head, yet be it requisite that shall know how to cut his sail, what length, be competent to every rope and to be of sufficiency to reprehend and reform those who err for provision and do amiss in provide his ship with victual munition and necessary of force. it must be expect that he be able to make his estimate and that once provide and perfect in season, and with expedition to see it load and stow commodious, with care and proportion, after that he be to order the spend thereof, that in nothing he be defraud, at home and at sea, ever to know how much. be spend and what remain unspent in the art of navigation. for navigation, he be bind also to know so much as to be able to give direction to the pilot and master and consequent to all the rest of inferior officer, sect 54. my meaning be not that the captain or governor shall be tie to the actual toil or to intermeddle with all office, for that be to bind he to impossibility, to diminish and abase his authority and to deprive the other officer of their esteem and of that that belong unto they, which be a great absurdity. but my opinion be that he shall be more then superficial, instruct and practise in the employment. yea, i be very persuade that the more absolute authority any commander give to hi^ under officer be worthy of it, the sweet be the command and the more respect and belove the commander for in matter of guide and dispose of the sailor offic^ of the master, with the tackle of the ship and the work which belong thereunto, within board and without all be to be commit to the master charge the pilot be to look careful to the sterridge of the ship, office of the pilot to be watchful in take the height of sun and star, to note the way of his ship with the augment and lessen of the wind etc. the boateswayne be to see his ship keep clean the boatswain, his mast, yard and tackle well, coat, mat and arm his shroud and stay well set his sail repair and sufficient prevent with martnet, blayle and casket. his boat fit with sail, oar thought, thole, danyd, windle and rother his anchor well, boy, safe, stop and secure with the rest to he appertain. the steward be to see the preservation of victual and necessary. the steward commit unto his charge and by measure and weight to deliver the portion appoint and with discretion and good term to give satisfaction to all. the carpenter be to view the mast and yard. the carpenter the side of the ship, her deck and cabin, her pump and boat, and moreover, to occupy himself in the most forceible work, except he be otherwise command. the gunner be to care for the britch and tackle of his artillery. the gunner the fit of his shot, tampkins, coin, crone and linstocke, etc. to be provident in work his fire work, in make and fill his, in accommodate his ladle, sponge and other necessary in sift and dry his powder, in clean the arm munition and such like work entrust unto he in this manner. every officer in his office aught to be a absolute commander, yet ready in obedience and love to sacrifice his will. to his superior command. this can but cause unity, and unity can but purchase a happy issue to dutiful travel direction in secret last, except it be in urgent and precise case, the head shall never direct his command to any but the officer. and these secret, except the occasion, require publication or that it touch all. in general, such order will be for the most part in write, that all may know what in general be command and require. sect 55, and as the wise husbandman, part requisite in a good husbandman, in walk from ground to ground, behold, one plow, another harrow, another sow and lop, another prune, one hedge, another thresh, and diverse occupy in several labour, some he commend, other he reproach, other he advise, and to another he say nothing. for that he see he in the right way. and all this for that he know and understand what they all do better than they themselves, though busy in their ordinary work. even so, a worthy commander at sea aught to have the eye, the like in a good chieftain. not only of his body but also of his understanding continual, set with watchful care upon all man and all their work under his charge. imitate the wise husbandman: first to know and then to command, and last to will their obedience, voluntary and without contradiction. for who know not that ignorance many time command that which it understand not which the artist perceive, first disdain, afterward disesteem and final. in these great action which admit no temporize, either he wayve the respect of duty or faint, perform the behest of his superior upon every slight occasion, either in public oppose or in private, murmur the small of which be most pernicious. thus much not amiss for instruction. sect 56: the reason why the admiral come to leewarde. why the spanish admiral ca^e to leeward, as after, i understand, be for that her artillery be very long and the wind fresh, bear a taunt sail to fetch we up and to keep we company. they can not use their ordinance to the weather of we but lay shake in the wind, and doubtless it be most proper for ship to have short ordinance, except in the stern or chase. the reason be many viz, easy charge, ease of the ship side, better traverse and mount, yea, great security of the artillery and consequent of the ship. for the long the piece be, the great, be the retention of the fire and so the torment and danger of the piece the great. but here will be contradiction. by many that dare avouch that long piece be to be prefer for that they burn their powder better and carry the shot further, and so necessary of better execution, whereas the short artillery many time spend much of their powder without burn and work thereby the slendere effect, to which i answer that for land service fort or castle the long piece be to be prefer, but for ship the short be much more serviceable and the powder in they be such as it ought, will be all fire long before the shot can come forth and to reach far in fight at sea be to little effect. for he that purpose, to annoy his enemy, must not shoot at random, nor at point blank if he. purpose to accomplish with his devoir, neither must he spend his shot nor powder. but where a potgun may reach his contrary, how much the near, so much the better. and this due execute. the short artillery will work its effect as well as the long. otherwise, neither short nor long be of much importance. but here my meaning be no^ to approve the overshort piece devise by some person, which at every shot they make dance out of their carriage. but those of indifferent length and which keep the mean betwixt seven and eight foot, sect 47, the entertainment we give unto our contrary entertainment of spaniard be, otherwise then be expect. they fall off and range a head, have break in piece all our gallery and present they cast about upon we and be able to keep we company with their fight, sail lay a weather of we, ordinary within musket shoot, play continual with they and their great artillery, which we endure and answer as we can. our pinnace engage herself so far as that, before she can come unto we, the vide-admiral have like to cut she off and come to lay we aboard and to enter her man, the vide-admiral board with she, so that some of our company enter our ship over her bow-sprit, as they themselves report. we be not a little comfort with the fight of our people in safety within our ship. for in all we be but threescore and fifteen man and boy when we begin to fight, and our enemy, thirteen hundred man and boy, the english 75.. little more or less, and those of the choice of peru, the spaniard 1300.. sect 58. here it shall not be out of the way to discourse a little of the spanish discipline, the spanish discipline and manner of their government in general, which be in many thing different to we. in this expedition come two general, the one, don beltran de castro, who have the absolute authority and command. the other, michael angel filipon, a man well in year and come to this preferment by his long and painful service, who, though he have the title of general by sea- i think it be rather of courtesy then- by patent, and for that he have be many year general of the south sea for the carriage and wa^tage of the silver from lyma to panama, he seem to be a assistant to supply that with his counsel, advice and experience, whereof don beltran have never make trial, for he command, not absolute, but with the confirmation of don beltran, for the spaniard never give absolute authority to more than one, a custom that have be and be approve in all empire, kingdom, commonwealth and army right discipline. the mixture have be seldom see to prosper, as will manifest appear if we consider the issue of all action and journey commit to the government of two or more general. the famous victory of hannibal against the roman consul paulus emillius and terrentius varro. two clac^etaines join in commi^^ion. dangerous be attribute to their equality of government. the unhappy overthrow give by the turk amurate to the christian prince in the journey of nicapolis be hold to have proceed. from the difference betwixt the head, every one lean to his own opinion. the overthrow in recovery of the holy land undertake by king richard of england and king philip of france spring from the like difference and dissension. the victory of the emperor charles the five against the protestant prince of germany, be impute to their distracture. arise from parity in command. if we look into our own action, commit to the charge of two general th^ effect and fruit which they have bring forth for the most part will be find to be little better. yea, most of they, through emulation, envy and pride, overthrow and bring to nought. though to cover their confusion, there have never be want, cloak and colour. the most approve writer. reprove and call it a monster with two head, and not without reason, for if the monarchy be general, approve for strong, sound and most perfect and most sufficient to sustain itself. and the democracie and aristocracy, utter reprove. as weak, feeble and subject to innovation and infirmity it can be, but error, confusion and imperfection to differ or dissent from it. for where the supreme government be divide betwixt two or more, the authority be diminish and so lose his true force. as a fagget of stick who bond, be break the entire strength, be easy dissolve, but all under correction. the spaniard in their armada by sea imitate the discipline, order and officer which be in a army by land and divide themselves into three body, to wit soldier, mariner and gunner. their soldier, the soldier ward and watch, and their officer in every ship round, as if they be on the shore, this be the only task they undergo, except clean their arm, wherein. they be not over curious. the gunner be exempt from all labour and care. the gunner, except about the artillery, and these be either almain, fleming or stranger, for the spaniard be but indifferent, practise in this art. the mariner be but as slave to the re^t. the mariner to moil and to toil day and night, and those but few and bad and not suffer to sleep or harbour themselves under the deck. for in fair or foul weather, in storm, sun or rain, they must pass void of covert or succour. there be ordinary in every ship of war. officer i^ a ship of war, a captain who charge, be as that of our master, with we and al^o a captain of the soldier, captain of the so^ldiers who command. the captain of the ship, captain of t^e ship, the soldier, gunner and mariner, in she yea, though there be diverse captain with their company in one ship, which be usual among they, yet one have the supreme authority and the residue be at his order and dispose. they have their, mr del campo, etc. seargeant, master, general or captain of the artillery, with their and all other officer, as in a camp. if they come to fight with another, armado, they order themselves, as in a battle by land, in a vanguard, rearward, main battle and wing, etc. in every particular ship the soldier be set all upon the deck, their forecastle, they account, their head, front or vanguard of their company, that abast, the ma^t, the rearward and the wa^te, the main battle wherein they place their principal force and on which they principal rely, which they call their or place of arm, which take their hope be lose. the gunner fight not, but with their great artillery the mariner attend only to the tackle of the ship and handle of the sail and be unarm and subject to all misfortune, not permit to shelter themselves but to be. still alof^, whether it be necessary or needless. so ordinary those which first fail be the mariner and sailor of which they have great need. they use few close fight or firework, and all this proceed, as i judge, of error in place, land captain for governor and commander by sea, where they seldom understand what be to be do or command prve of the sp^niards into o^r discipline. some that have be our prisoner have perfect themselves of that. they have see, among we and other, disguise under colour of treaty for ransom of prisoner, for bring of present and other imbassage. have note our form of ship, our manner of defence and discipline, since which espial in such action as they have be employ in they. seek to imitate our government. their imitation o^ o^t. discipline and reform. discipline at sea, which doubtless be the best and most proper that be at this day know or practise in the whole world, if the execution be answerable to that which be know and receive for true and good among we. in the captain, for so the spaniard call their admiral, be a english gunner who, to gain grace with those under who he serve, prefer himself and offer to sink our ship with the first shoot he make. who, by the spaniard relation, be travese of a piece in the bow to make his shot, have his head carry away with the first or second shot make out of our ship, it slay also two. or three of those which stand next, he which may be a good and gentle warning for all those who move either with covetousness, or with desire of revenge, or in hope of worldly promotion or other respect whatsoever, do, willing and voluntary, serve the enemy against their own nation. and if we consider the end of those who have thus err, we shall find they, for the most part lamentable and most miserable. the end of fugitive, at the least those who i have know have live to be point at with detestation and end their life in beggary void of reputation. sect 59: the fight continue so hot on both side that the artillery and musket never cease. play our contrary towards the evening, determine the. three time to lay we aboard with resolution, to take we, or to hazard all the order they set down for the execution hereof, be that the captain or admiral shall bring himself upon our weather bow and so fall aboard of we upon our broad side, and that the vice-admiral shall lay his admiral aboard upon his weather quarter and so enter his man into she, that from she they may enter we, or do as occasion. shall, minister, the captain of the vice-admiral be more hardy than considerate and presume with his ship and company to get the price and chief honour. wait not the time to put in execution the direction. give the spaniard pay dear for their rashness, but present, come aboard to wind. ward upon our broad side, which doubtless be the great and especial providence of almighty god for the discourage of our enemy and animate of we, for although she be as long or rather long than our ship, be rare, build and utter without fight or defence, what with our musket and what with our firework, we clear, she deck in a moment, so that scarce any person appear, and doubtless, if we have enter but a dozen man, we may have enforce they to have, render unto we or take she but our company be few and the principal of they slay or hurt we dare not, neither be it wisdom to adventure, the separation of those which remain, and so hold that for the best, and sound resolution to keep our force together in defence of our own. the vice-admiral see himself in great distress, call to his admiral for succour who present, lay he aboard and enter a hundred of his man and so clear themselves of we in this board. the vice-admiral have at the least thirty and six man hurt and slay, and among they his pilot, shoot through the body, so as he die present and the admiral also receive some loss which wrought in they a new resolution and take a new resolution only with their artillery to batter we and so, with time, to force we to surrender or to sink we, which they put in execution and place themselves within a musket shoot of our weather quarter. and sometime, on our broad side lay continual beat upon we, without intermission, which be doubtless the best and secure determination they can take, for they be rare ship and without any manner of close fight in board with we, their man be all open unto we and we under covert and shelter. for on all part our ship be musket free and the great artillery of force must cease. on either side the ship be once grapple together, except we resolve to sacrifice ourselves together in fire. for it be impossible, if the great ordinance play, the ship be bourd but that they must set fire on the ship they shoot at and then no surety can be have to free himself, as experience daily confirm. for a piece of artillery most proper, resemble a thunderclap which break upward or, on the side, hurt. not for that the fire have scope to dispense itself without find resistance till the violence which force it take end, and so it mount to its centre but break down right or stoop downward and find resistance or impediment before the violence that force it take end. be so subtle and penetrable a substance, pass and pierce, so wonderful as it leave the effect of his execution in all point answerable to his level and nighness. for if the cloud be nigh the earth, as some be high, some low, and break downward, the violence wherewith the fire break out be such and of so strange a execution that man have be find dead without any outward sign in their flesh and yet all their bone burn to dust. so the blade of the sword have be find, break all to piece in the scabbard, and the scabbard whole without blemish, and a crystal glass all shiver in piece. his cover and case remain sound, which come to pass. for that in the flesh, in the scabbard and in the case the fire be so subtle of nature, find easy passage without resistance, but the bone, the blade, the crystal be of substance more. solid, make great resistance, and so the fire, with the more fury work, the more his execution in its object, as be see in the spanish admiral or captain, after my imprisonment, cross from panama to cape san francisco, a rayo- for so the spaniard call a thund^rclappe- break over our ship, kill one in the foretop, astonish either two or three in the shroud, and split the mast in strange manner. where it enter it can hardly be discern, but where it come forth it drive out a great splinter before it and the man slay be clean in a manner without sign or token of hurt, although all his bone turn to powder and those who live and recover have all their body black as burn. with fire which plain declare and confirm that above say and may serve to judge in such occasion of person hurt with thunder. for if they complain of their bone and have little sign of the fire, their hazard of death be the great than when the fire have leave great impression outward. the fire out of a cloud work like effect only where it level direct, as experience daily teach, kill those who be opposite, hurt those who be near and only terrify those who be further distant. in like manner, the piece of ordinance hurt not those which stand aside nor those which stand a slope from his mouth, but those alone which stand direct against the true point of his level. though sometime the wind of the shot overthrow one and the splin^ers be accident main and hurt other, but principal where the piece do resemble the thunderclappe, as when the ship be bourd. for then, although the artillery be discharge without shot, the fury of the fire and his pierce nature be such as it enter by the seam and all part of the ship side and meet with so fit matter as pitch, tar, ocombe and sometime, with powder present, convert all into flame. for avoid whereof, as also the danger and damage which may come by pike and other invention of fire, and if any ship be oppress, with many ship at once and subject by they to be bourd, i hold it a good course. to strike his fire and main yard close to his deck and to fight with spritsail and myson and topsail loose. so shall he be able to hinder they from oppress he. some have think it a good policy to lance out some end of mast or yard by the port or other part policy to avoid bourding. but this be to be use in the great ship, for in the lesser, though they be never so strong, the weight of the big will beat out the opposite side and do hurt and make great spoil in the lesser and in board ordinary the lesser ship have all the harm which the one ship can do unto the other. here be offer to speak of a point much. canvas among carpenter and sea captain. diverse maintain, but yet undetermined that be, whether the race or lofty build ship be best for the merchant and those which employ themselves in trade, dispute concern ship of trade, i be of opinion that the race ship be most convenient, yet so as that every perfect ship ought to have two deck for the better strengthen of she, the better succour of her people, the better preserve of her merchandise and victual and for her great safety from sea and storm. but for the prince ship concern the prince, his ship and such as be employ continual in the war. to be build lofty, i hold very necessary for many reason. first, for majesty and terror of the enemy. second, for harbour of many man. three for accommodate more man to fight. four, for place and use more artillery. fifthly, for better strengthen and secure of the ship. six for overtop and subject the enemy. seven, for great safeguard and defence of the ship and company. for it be plain that the ship with three deck or with two and a half, show more pomp than another of her burden with a deck and half or two deck, and breed great terror to the enemy, discover herself to be a more powerful ship, as she be, than the other, which be indeed a ship of force, seem to be but a bark and with her low building, hide her burden. and who doubt that? a deck and a half can harbour that proportion of man that two deck and two deck and a half can accommodate to fight. nor carry the artillery, so plentiful nor so commodious. neither can the ship be so strong with a deck and a half as with two deck, nor with two as with three, nor carry her mast so taunt, nor spread so great a clue, nor contrive so many fight to answer one another for defence and offence, and the advantage the one have of the other. experience daily teach in the great expedition of eighty eight. all ship of war be not to below bu^lt, do not the elizabeth jonas, the triumph and the bear show great majesty than the ark royal and the. victory be of equal burden. do they not cause great regard in the enemy? do they not harbour and accommodate more than man and much better? do they not bear more artillery? and if they have come to board with the spanish high-charged ship, it be not to be doubt, but they will have muster themselves better than those which can not, with their prowess nor prop, have reach to their waste. the strength of the one can be compare with the strength of the other, but in board it go not so much in the strength as in weight and greatness. for the great ship that bourd with the lesser, with her mast, her yard, her tackle, her anchor, her ordinance, and with her side bruise and beat the lesser to piece. although the lesser be far strong according to proportion, the foresight of his majesty and the dainty be ship, in their proportion, far more strong than the carake which be take by they and their consort 92. for she have in a manner no strong build nor bind, and the other be strengthen and bind as art be able to afford, and yet both board with she be so bruise, break and bad handle as they have like to have. sink by her side though board with advantage to weather-ward of she. but what will have become? of they. if she shall have have the wind of they and have come aboard to windward of they in small time, no doubt she will have beat they under water an 90. in the fleet under the charge of sr john hawkins, my father, come from the southward. the hope of his majesty give chase to a french ship, think she to be a spaniard, she think to have free herself by she sail and so will not avail but endure the shoot of many piece and force the hope to lay she aboard, of which issue that mischief which, before i speak off for in a moment, the french ship have all her mast yard and sail in the sea, and with great difficulty. the hope. can free herself from sink. she, in the self same voyage, near the land of flores and corvo, the rainbow and the foresight come foul one of another. the rainbow be the great ship, leave the foresight much tear. and if god have not be please to separate, they the lesser doubtless have sink in the sea. bu^, in these encounter they receive little or no hurt. the board of the rainbow and foresight, as i be inform, proceed of the obstinacy and self will of the captain or master of the foresight, who will not set sail in time to give sea-room to the other come drive upon she. particular respect must give place to the general, for that she be more flotie, this pride i have. see many time to be the cause of great hurt and be worthy of severe punishment. for be all of one company and bind every one to help and further the good of the other as member of one body. their ought to be no strain of courtesy, but all be bind to suppress emulation and particular respect in seek the general good of all, yea of every particular more ingenious then that of his own. but in equity and reason the leeward ship ought ever to give way to the weather, most in hull or try, without any exception. first, for that she advantage the other in hull or try which be manifest, for that she to wind-ward, drive upon she to le-ward. second, for that the windermost ship, by open her sail, may be upon the other before she be look for, either for want of steeridge not be under way or by the roll of the sea, some one sea cast the ship more to le-ward, then ten other and three, for that the windermost ship be near and set sail, be in possibility to take away the wind from she to le-ward, come within danger, and this by way of. argument for a hull and under-sayle, in storm and fair weather, in harbour or at sea. humanity and courtesy be ever commendable and beneficial to all, whereas arrogancy and ambition be ever accompany with shame, loss and repentance. and though in many example touch this point, i have be a eye witness- arrogancy of a spanish general. yet i will record but one which i see in the river of civil at my come out of the indies. among the galleon load with silver for their waft, the king send to the tercera eight new galleon under the charge of villa, who enter the bar of saint joint. the ship load with silver, anchor in the midst of the river, in the deep water and the wafter on. either side, near the shore, the admiral of the wafter ride close by the galleon in which i be and have moor herself in that manner as her stream cable and anchor overlay our land-most and wind up with the first of the flood, she herself in one of her cable which, together with the great currant of the ebb and force of the wind which blow fresh, cause she to drive and to drag home her anchor, and with that which over-lay we, to cause we to do the like, whereupon on both side be cry out to veer cable. we, for our part, have lose all our cable in the tercera, save those which be a ground and those very short and veer to the better. end the admiral strain courte^ie think the other though load with silver bind to let slip one. so to give he way, and the general stand in his gallery, see the danger which both ship run into, be in a manner, board and board and drive upon the point of the shore, yet he command to hold fast and not to veer cable till he be require, and command in the king name, by the captain of our ship, protest the damage which shall ensue thereof to the king and merchant to run upon the admiral account and that in his ship he have no other cable but those which be aground and that they have veer as-much as they can, which the general know. and at last better consider will to veer his cable end for end, and so, with some difficulty and dispute, the punto be remedy which, if he have do at first he have, prevent all other danger, inconvenience and dispute by only weigh of his cable and anchor after the gust be past and let it ^all in a place more commodious, whereas his vainglory, stoutness and self-will have put in great peril two of the king ship and in they above two million of treasure. and it may be, if he have be one of the ignorant general such as be sometime employ, whereas he be one of best experience, i doubt not. but they will have stand so much upon their punto as, rather than they will have consent to veer their cable, for that it seem a diminution of authority- they will rather have suffer all to go to wrack without discern the danger and damage. but to return to my former point of advantage, which the great ship have of the lesser doubt and objection resolve, i will have it to be understand according to occasion and to be understand of ship of war with ship of war. it be no part of my meaning to maintain that a small man of war shall not board with a great ship which go in trade, for i know that the warlike ship that seek be not only bind to board with a great and the duty of a small ship against a great, but be she sure to hazard herself, she ought to board where any possibility of surprise may be. hope for witness the biscaine ship of five hundred ton, take by ship of less than a hundred. such be those which be take by captain george reymond and captain greenfield halse. both win by board and force of arm and do not mark berry with a ship of fourscore ton by board and ^ent of. sword. take a ship which come from the hispania, of near ^oure hundred ton to recount all such as have be in this sort. take by our countryman, as also those of great worth which they have lose for, not hazard the board. be never to make a end. yet discretion be ever to be use for a man that, in a small bark, go to warre-fare. be not bind to board with a carake, nor with a ship which he see provide with artillery and other prevention far above his possibility. the spaniard confess we to advantage they in our ship and attribute all our victory ^o that which be but a mass of dead wood. vainglory of the spanish. be it not manage and order by. art and experience affirm that if we come to handle stroke and board, they shall go far beyond we, which to any person of reasonable understanding can but seem most vainglorious for we leave not to board with they upon occasion when otherwise we can force they to surrender. but i conclude it to be great error and want of discretion in any man to put himself, his ship and company in peril, be able otherwise to vanquish his enemy. this imagination, so vain and void of ground, have grow from the ignorance of some of our common sort of mariner and vulgar people which have be prisoner in spain, who be examine and ask why her majesty ship in occasion board, not have answer and inform that it be the express order of her majesty and counsel, in no case to hazard her ship by board. yea, i have know some captain of our own to colour their faint, proceed, have aver as much which be nothing. so for in the hour that her majesty or counsel commit the charge of any her ship to any person, it be leave to his discretion to board or not to board, as the reason of service require. and therefore let no man hereafter pretend ignorance, nor for this vanity leave to do his duty or that which be most probable to redound to the honour and service of his prince and country and to the damage of his enemy. for in case he excuse himself with this allegation, it can but redound to his condemnation and disreputation. and i assure all man that in any reasonable equality of ship we can desire great advantage than we have of the spaniard by board, the reason why i hold it not convenient to discourse in particular, but experience and tract of time with that which i have see among they have teach i this knowledge and those who have see their discipline, and we can but testify. the same sect 60. again, all that which have be speak of the danger of the artillery in board be not to be wrest, nor interpret to cut of utter the use of all artillery after board. course for artillery after board. but rather i hold nothing more convenient in ship of war than fowler and great base in the cage work and murderer in the cobridge head. for that their execution and speedy charge and discharge be of great moment. many i know have leave the use of they and of sundry other prevention as of sherehooke stone in their top and arm, they pikebolts in their wales and diverse other engine of antiquity, disuse of engine of antiquity. but upon what inducement i can relate, unless it be because they never know their effect and benefit and may no doubt be use without the inconvenience before mention in great ordinance, as also such may be the occasion that, without danger, some of the great artillery may be use, and that with great effect, which be in the discretion of the commander and their gunner, as have be former see and daily be experiment in the revenge of her majesty, good experience be make who sink. two of the spanish armado lie aboard. she sect 61. in these bourding and skirmish, diverse of our man be slay and many hurt, and myself among they. receive six wound, one of they in the neck, very perilous, another through the arm, perish the bone and cut the sinew close by the armepit. the rest not so dangerous. the master of our ship have one of his eye, his nose and half his face. shoot away, master henry courton, be slay. on these two, i principal rely for the prosecution of our voyage. if god, by sickness or otherwise, shall take i away. the spaniard, with their great ordinance, lie continual play upon we, the spaniard, parley and now and then parl and invite we to surrender ourselves a the captain of our ship. in who direction? and guide our life, our honour and welfare now remain, see many of our people wound and slay and that few be leave to sustain and maintain the fight or to resist the entry of the enemy if he shall again board with we and that our contrary offer we good pertido. come unto i accompany with some other and begin to relate the state of our ship and how that many be hurt and slay and scarce any man appear to traverse the artillery or to oppose themselves for defence if the enemy shall board with we again and how that the admiral offer we life and liberty and to receive we a and to send we into our own country. say that if i think it. so meet he and the rest be of opinion that we shall put out a flag of truce and make some good composition. the great loss of blood have weaken i much. the torment of my wound, new receive make i faint and i labour for life. within short space expect i shall give up the ghost, but this parley pierce through my heart and wound my soul. word fail i wherewith to express it and none can conceive it. but he which find himself in the like agony. yet grief and rage minister force and cause i to break forth into this reprehension and execution, follow. great be the cross which almighty god have suffer to come upon i that assault by our profess enemy and by they wound as you see in body lie, gasp for breath. those who i repute for my friend to fight with i, those which i rely on as my brother to defend i in all occasion, those who i have nourish, cherish, foster and love as my child, to succour i help i and to sustain my reputation in all extremity, be they who first draw their sword against i. be they which wound my heart in give i up into my enemy hand. whence proceed this ingratitude? whence this faintness of heart, whence this madness? be the cause you fight for, unjust. be the honour and love of your prince and country. bury in the dust your sweet life. be they become loathsome unto you. will you exchange your liberty for thraldom? will you consent to see that which you have sweat for and procure with so great labour and adventure at the dispose of your enemy? can you content yourselves to suffer my blood spill before your eye and my life bereave i in your presence, with the blood and life of your dear brother to be unrevenged? be not a honourable death to be prefer before a miserable and slavish life. the one sustain the honour of our nation, of our predecessor and of our society, the other ignominious to ourselves and reproachful to our nation. can you? be persuade that the enemy will perform his promise with you that never leave to break it with other when he think it advantageous. and know you not that with he all be convenient that be profitable? hold they not this for a maxim, that in which number they account we to be? have you forget their faith? violate with my father in st john de vlua the condition and capitulation. be firm by the viceroy and twelve hostage, all principal personage give for the more security of either party to other. have you forget their promise? break with john vibao and his company in florida? have condition to give they ship and victual to carry they into their country immediate after they have deliver their weapon and arm. have they not their throat cut? have you forget how they deal with john and his company in this sea, yield upon composition, and how, after a long imprisonment and many misery, be carry from panama to lyma and there hang with all his company as pirate by the justice? and can you forget how daily they abuse our noble nature, which be void of malice, measure all by sincerity, but to our loss. for that when we come to demand performance, they stop our mouth, either with lay the inquisition upon we or with deliver we into the hand of the ordinary justice or of the king minister, and then urge with their promise. they shrink up to the shoulder and say that they have now no further power over we. they sorrow in their heart to see their promise be not accomplish. but now they can do we any good office. but to pray to god for we, and to entreat the minister in our behalf, come we into the south-sea to put out flag of truce and leave we our pleasant england with all her contentment, with intention or purpose, to avail ourselves of white rag and, by banner of peace, to deliver ourselves for slave into our enemy hand, or to range the world with the english, to take the law from they who, by our sword, prowess and valour. we have always, heretofore, be accustom to purchase honour, riches and reputation. if these motive be not sufficient to persuade you, than i present before your eye your wife and child, your parent and friend, your noble and sweet country, your gracious sovereign of all which account. yourselves for ever deprive if this proposition shall be put in execution. but for all these and for the love and respect you owe, i and for all beside that you esteem and hold dear in this world, and for he that make we and all the world banish out of your imagination such vain and base thought and, according to your wont resolution, prosecute the defence of your ship, your life and liberty, with the life and liberty of your companion who, by their wound and hurt, be disable and deprive of all other defence, and help save that which lie in your discretion and prowess. and you, captain, of who i make choice among many, to be my principal assistant and the person to accomplish my duty if extraordinary casualty shall disable i to perform and prosecute our voyage, tender your obligation and now in the occasion, give testimony and make proof of your constancy and valour, according to the opinion and confidence i have ever h^ld of you. whereunto he make answer. my good general, i hope you have make experience of my resolution, which shall be ever to put in execution what you shall be please to command. i and my action shall give testimony of the obligation wherein i stand. bind unto you what i have do. have not proceed from faintness of heart, nor from a will to see. imagination put in execution, for, beside the loss of our reputation, liberty and what good else we can hope for? i know the spaniard too, too well, and the manner of his proceed in discharge of promise, but only to give satisfaction to the rest of the company which importune i to move this point. i condescend to that which now i be ashamed of and grieve at because i see it dislike to you, and here i vow to fight it out till life or limb fail. i be you please, to recommend we to almighty god and to take comfort in he who i hope will give we victory and restore you to health and strength. for all our comfort and the happy. accomplish and finish. of our voyage to his glory. i reply this: be that which beseem you this sort to the opinion i ever hold of you, and this will gain you, with god and man, a just reward. and you the rest, my dear companion and friend who ever have, make a demonstration of desire to accomplish your duty. remember that when we first descry our enemy, you show to have a long to prove your valour against he. now that the occasion be offer, lie hold of the forelock, for if once she turn she back, make sure account never after to see her face again. and as true english man and follower of the step of our forefather, in virtue and valour, sell your blood and life dear. that spain may ever record it with sadness and grief. and those which survive rejoice in the purchase of so noble a victory with so small mean against so powerful a enemy. hereunto they make answer that, as hitherto, they have be conformable to all the undertake which i have command or counsel. so they will continue in the self same duty and obedience to the last breath vow either to remain conqueror and freeman or else to sell their life at that price which their enemy shall not willing consent to buy. they, at and with this resolution, both captain and company, take their leave of i every one particular, and the great part with tear and and embrace, though we be forthwith to depart the world. and never see one the other again, but in heaven promise to cast all forepast imagination into oblivion and never more to speak of surrendry. in accomplishment of this promise and determination, they resolve to fight it out. they persevere in, sustain the fight all this night, with the day and night follow and the three day after, in which time the enemy never leave we. day nor night beat continual upon we with his great and small shot, save that every morning, a hour before break of day, he edge a little from we to breath the enemy breathe, and to remedy such defect as be amiss, as also to consult what they shall do the day and night follow. this time of interdiction we employ in repair our sail and tackle, in stop our leak, the english repair their defect in fish and woll our mast and yard, in mend our pump and in fit and provide ourselves for the day to come. though this be but little space for so many work, yet give it great relief and comfort unto we and make we better able to endure the defence, for otherwise our ship must of force have sink before our surrendry, have many shot under water and our pump shoot to piece every day. in all this space, not any man of either part take rest or sleep and little sustenance beside bread and wine. in the second day fight, the vide-admiral come upon our quarter, william blanch, one of our master mate, with a lucky hand, make a shot unto she with one of our stern piece. it carry away his main mast close by the deck wherewith the admiral bear up to she, to see what harm she have receive and to give she such succour as she be able to spare, which we see be in good hope that they will have now leave to molest we any long have wherewithal to entertain themselves in redress their own harm, and so we stand away from they close by as we can advantage omit, which we shall not have, do but prosecute the occasion and bring ourselves close upon her weather. gage and with our great and small shot, hinder they from repair their harm. if we have thus, do they have be force to cut all by the board, and it may be lie a hull or to le-ward of we, with a few shot we may have sink she, at the least it will have declare to our enemy that we have they in little estimation. when able to go from they, we will not, and perhaps be a cause to have make they to leave we. but this occasion be let slip, as also that other to fight with they, sail quarter wind or before the wind, for have stand off to sea a day and a night, we have scope to fight at our pleasure. and no man have sea room be bind to fight as his enemy will, with disadvantage, be able otherwise to deal with equality. contrariwise, every man ought to seek the mean he can for his defence, and great advantage, to the annoyance of his contrary. now we may, with our foresail low set, have bear up before the wind, and the enemy of force must have do the like if he will fight with we or keep we company. and then shall we have have the advantage of they, for although their artillery be long, weighty and many more than we, and in truth do, pierce with great violence the difference of shot, yet we be of great boar and carry a weighty and great shot, be of more importance and of better effect for sink and spoil. for the small shot pass through and make but his whole and harm that which lie in his way. but the great shake and shiver all it meet, and with the splinter or that which it encounter many time do more hurt then with his proper circumference as be plain see in the battery by land, when the saker, the demy-colverin, their effect, the colverin and demi-canon be piece. that reach much further point blank than the cannon, be nothing of like importance for make the breach, as be the cannon, for that this shot be ponderous, pierce with difficulty, yea, work better effect, torment, shake and overthrow all, whereas the other, with their violence, pierce better and make only their hole and so hide themselves in the wool or rampire beside our ship. be yare and good of fleeridge, no doubt, but we shall have play better with our ordinance and with more effect than do our enemy, which be a great error, be able to fight with less disadvantage, error in fight, and yet to fight with the most that can be imagine, which i know not off, neither be able to direct, though i. have know it be in a manner senseless, what with my wound and what with the agony of the surrendry propound for that i have seldom know it speak of, but that it come afterward to be put in execution. the general not be able to succour his vide-admiral, except he shall utter leave. we give they order to shift as well as they can ^or the present and to bear with the next port and there to repair their harm. himself present, follow the chase and in short space fetch we up and begin a fresh to batter. we, with his great and small shot, the vide-admiral have, save what they can, cut the rest by the board and with foresail and my son come after we. also, and before the set of the sun be come upon our broad side, we bear all our sail and after keep we company, lie upon our weather quarter and annoy we what she can. here i hold it necessary to make mention of two thing which be most prejudicial unto we and the principal cause of our perdition. the error and fault of late day creep in among those who follow the sea and learned from the fleming and easterling. learned from the fleming and easterling. i wish that by our misfortune, other will take warning and procure to redress. they, as occasion shall be, offer. the one be to fight unarm. where they may fight arm. 1. to fight unarm. 2. to drink to excess. the other be in come to fight to drink themselves. drink, yea, some be so mad that they mingle powder with wine to give it the great force. imagine that it give spirit, strength and courage and take away all fear and doubt. the latter be for the most part true, but the former be false and beastly and altogether against reason. for though the nature of wine, with moderation, be to comfort and revive the heart and to fortify and strengthen the spirit, yet the immoderate use thereof work quite contrary effect. in fight, all receipt which add courage and spirit be of great regard to be allow and use and so be a draught of wine to be give to every man before he come to. action, but more then enough, be pernicious, for exceed the mean it offend and infeeble the sense, convert the strength which shall resist the force of the enemy into weakness. it dull and blind the understanding and consequent, deprave any man of true valour. for that he be disenable to judge and apprehend the occasion which may be offer to assault and retire in time convenient. the reins of reason be put into the hand of passion and disorder. for after i be wound, this breed great disorder and inconvenience. in our ship, the pot, continual walk, infuse desperate and foolish hardiness in many who, blind with the fume of the liquor, consider not of any danger, but thus and thus will stand at hazard, some in vain. glory vaunt themselves. some other rail upon the spaniard, another invite his companion to come and stand by he and not to budge a foot from he which, indiscreet, they put in execution and cost the life of many a good man. slay by our enemy musketeer who suffer not a man to show himself, but they present, overthrow he with speed and watchfulness for prevention of the second error. although i have great preparation of armour as well of proof as of light co^^eletts, yet not a man will use they, but esteem a pot of wine a better defence than a armour of proof which, true, be great madness and a lamentable fault worthy to be banish from among all reasonable people. and well to be. weigh by all commander. for if the spaniard surpass we in any thing, it be in his temperance. the spaniard surpass we only in temperance and suffer. and where he have have the better hand of we, it have be for the most part through our own folly. for that we will fight unarm with he be arm. and although i have hear many man maintain that in ship armour be of little profit, all man of good understanding will condemn such desperate ignorance. for beside that, the slight armour secure the part of a man body which it cover from pike, sword and all hand weapon. it likewise give boldness and courage. a man arm give a great and a weighty blow than a man unarm he. stand fast and with great difficulty be to be overthrow the use and profit of arm, and i never read but that the glister of the armour have be by author. observe for that, as i imagine, his show breed terror in his contrary and despair to himself if he be unarm. and therefore, in time of war, such as devote themselves to follow the profession of arm by sea or by land, ought to covet nothing more then to be well arm for as much as it be the second mean. next, god, protection for, preserve and prolong many man life. exact observe by the spanish, wherein the spanish nation deserve commendation above other. every one, from the high to the low, put their great care in provide fair and good arm. he which can come to the price of a corslet will have a coat of mail, a jackett, at least a buff-jerkin or a privy coat, and hardly will they be find without it, albeit they live and serve for the most part in extreme hot country, whereas i have know many breed in cold country in a moment, complain of the weight of their arm, that they smother they and then cast they off, choose rather to be shoot through with a bullet or launch through with a pike or thrust through with a sword, then to endure a little travail and suffering. but let i give these lazy one this lesson: that he that will go a warfare must resolve himself to fight, and he that put on this resolution must be content to endure both heat and weight, first for the safeguard of his life and next for subdue of his enemy, both which be hazard and put into great danger if he fight unarm with a enemy arm. now for my own opinion, i be resolve that armour be more necessary by sea then by land. arm more necessary by sea, then at land, yea, rather to be excuse, on the shore, then in the ship. my reason be for that: on the shore the bullet only hurt, but in the ship i have see the ^plinters kill. and hurt many at once. and yet the shor^ to have pass without touch any person, as in the galeon in which i come out of the indies in 1597.. in the road of tercera, when the queen majesty ship under the charge of the earl of essex chase we into the road with the splinter of one shot, be slay, maim and sore hurt at the least a dozen person, the most part whereof have be excuse if they have be arm and doubtless if these error have be foresee and remedy by we. many of those who be slay and hurt have be on foot and we enable to have sustain and maintain the fight much better and long and perhaps at last have free ourselves. for if our enemy have come to board with we, our close fight be such as we be secure and they open unto we. and what with our cubridge head, one answer the other. our hatch upon bolt, our brack in our deck and gunner room, it be impossible to take. we, as long as any competent number of man have remain, twenty person will have suffice for defence, and for this such ship be call impregnable and be not to be take but by surrender, not to be overcome but with board or sink, as in we by experience be verify, and not in we alone, but in the revenge of the queen majesty which be compass round about with all the armado of spain and bourd. sundry time, by many at once, be say, to have sink three of the armado by her side and in this conflict have lose all her mast and be no other than a log in the sea, can not be take with all their force and policy till she surrender herself by a honourable composition. by these precedent, let governor by sea take special care, above all to preserve their people, in imitation of the french who carry many soldier in their ship of war and secure they in their hold till they come to enter and to prove their force by the dint of sword. but here the discreet commander be to put difference, a difference for commander betwixt those which defend and those which be to offend, and betwixt those which assault and those which be assault. for, as i have say, no government whatsoever better. require a perfect and experiment commander, then that of the sea, and so no great error can be. commit then to commend such charge to man. unexperiment in this profession, a three and last cause of the loss of sundry of our man, most worthy of note for all, captain, owner and carpenter, be the race building of our ship, race-ship of war. dislike, the only fault she have. and now a day hold for a principal grace in any ship, but by the experience which i have have, it seem for sundry reason very prejudicial for ship of war, for in such, those which tackle the sail of force must be upon the deck and be open, without shelter or any defence. yet here it will be object that for this inconvenience waste clothes be provide wast-clothe not so useful, and for want of they it be usual to lace a bonnet or some such shadow. for the man worthy may it be, call a shadow. and one of the most pernicious custom that can be use for this shadow or defence be but of linen or woollen cloth, embolden many who without it will retire to better security, whereas now think themselves unseen. they become more bold then, otherwise they will, and thereby shoot through when they least think of it. some captain observe this error, have seek to remedy it in some of his majesty ship, not by alter the building as other devise, but by devise a. certain defence, make of four or five inch plank of five foot high and six foot broad, run upon wheel, and place in such part of the ship as be most open. these they name blender and make of elm for the most part, for that it shiver, not with a shot as oak and other timber will do, which be now in use and service. but best it be when the whole side have one blend and one armour of proof for defence of those which of force must labour and be a lose. this race building first come in by overmuch home in of our ship and receive for good under colour of make our ship thereby the better sea-shippe and of better advantage to hull. and try, but in my judgement it breed many inconvenience and be far from work the effect they pretend by disenable they for bear their cage work correspondent to the proportion and mould of the ship, make they tender side and unable to carry sail in any fresh gale of wind and diminish the play of their artillery and the place for accommodate their people to fight labour or rest. and i be none of those who hold opinion that the overmuch home in the more the better, be commodious and easy for the ship, and this out of the experience that i have learn, which with forcible reason i can prove to be much rather discomodious and worthy to be reform, but withal i hold it not. necessary to discourse here of that particularity, but leave the consequence to man of understanding. and so surcease sect 62. all this second day and the three day and night, our captain and company sustain the fight, notwithstanding the disadvantage where with they fight, the enemy be ever to windward and we to lee-ward. the disadvantage o^ ship to lee-wa^d their shot much damnify we and we little annoy they. for whensoever a man encounter with his enemy at sea in gain the weather, gage he be in possibilie to sink his contrary. but his enemy can not sink. he, and therefore he which be force to fight with this disadvantage, be to procure by all mean possible to shoot down his contrary mast or yard and to tear or spoylr his tackle and sail. and the b^st remedy, for which purpose, billet of some heavy wood fit to the great ordinance, be of great importance, and so be arrow of fire to be shoot out of slurbowe and case of small shot, join two and two, together with piece of wire of five or six inch long, which also shoot out of musket, be of good effect for tear the sail or cut the tackle. some be of opinion that cross bar and chain-shot be of moment for the spoil. of mast and yard, but experience daily teach they not to be of great importance, though near at hand, i confess they work. great execution, but the round shot be the only principal and powerful means to break mast or yard. and in this our fight. the admiral of the spaniard have his foremast shoot through with two round shot. the spaniards^ore-mast, ^ore-mast, thrice shoot through some three yard beneath the head. have either of they enter, but four inch further into the heart of the mast, without all doubt it. have free we, and perhaps put they into our hand, the three day in the afternoon which be the 22. of june 1594.. according to our computation, and which i follow in this my discourse, our sail. be tear our mast all perish, our pump rend and shoot to piece and our ship with fourteen short under water and seven or eight foot of water in hold, many of our man be slay and the most part of they which remain, sore, hurt and in a manner altogether fruitless and the enemy offer still to receive we a and to give we life and liberty and imbarkation for our country. our captain and those which remain of our company be all of opinion that our best course be to surrender ourselves before our ship sink, and so by common consent agree the second time to send a servant of my, thomas sanders, to signify unto i the estate of our ship and company, and that it be impossible by any other way to expect for hope of deliverance or life, but by the miraculous hand of god, in use his almighty power, or by a honourable surrender which in every man opinion be think most convenient so be. i desire by he to give also my consent that the captain may capitulate with the spanish general and to compound the best partido he can by surrender ourselves into. his hand upon condition of life and liberty. this he declare unto i be in a manner void of sense and out of hope to live or recover. which consider, and the circumstance of his relation, i answer as i can that he may judge of my state, ready every moment to give up the ghost and unable to discern in this cause what be convenient, except i may see the present state of the ship and that the honour or dishonour, the welfare or misery be for ^hem which shall be partaker of life at last. for that i have satisfaction of his valour and true deal. in all the time he have serve i and in correspondence of it have give he as be notorious charge. and credit. in many occasion i bind he by the love and regard he ought i and by the faith and duty to almighty god to tell i true, if all be as he have declare, whereunto he make answer, that he have manifest unto i the plain and naked truth, and that he take god to witness of the same truth with which receive satisfaction. i force myself what i can to persuade he to animate his companion and, in my name, to entreat the captain and the rest to persevere in defence of their liberty. life and reputation. remit all to his discretion, not doubt. but he will be tender of his duty and zealous of my reputation in prefer his liberty and the liberty of the company above all respect whatsoever. as for the welfare hope by a surrender, i be altogether unlikely to be partaker thereof. death threaten to deprive i of the benefit which the enemy offer, but if god will be please to free we, the joy and comfort i shall receive may perhaps give i force and strength to recover health, which answer be deliver to the captain he present, cause a slagge of truce to be put in place of our ensign and begin to parley of our surrendry with a spaniard which don beltran appoint for that purpose from. the poop of the admiral to offer in his name the condition before specify with his faithful promise and oath as the king general, to take we a and to send we all into our own country. the promise he accept and say that under the same he yield and surrender himself, ship and company immediate there. come unto i another servant of i and tell i that our captain have surrender himself and our ship, which, understand, i call unto one, i^an gomes de pineda, a spanish pilot, which be our prisoner and in all the fight we have keep close in hold. and will he to go to the general, don beltran de castro, from i to tell he that if he will give we his word and oath as the general of the king and some pledge for confirmation, to receive we a and to give we our life and liberty and present passage into our own country, that we will surrender ourselves and ship into his hand, otherwise that he shall never enjoy of we nor we any thing but a resolution. every man to die, fight. with this message i dispatch he and call unto i all my company and encourage they to sacrifice their life, fight and kill the enemy. if he give but a fillip to any of our companion, the spaniard, will we to hoist out our boat, which be shoot all to pe^^es, and so be. they see that. he call to we to amain our sail, which we can not well do, for that they be sling and we have not man enough to hand they in this parley. the vide-admiral come upon our quarter and not know of what have pass discharge. she two chase piece at we and hurt our captain very sore in the thigh and maim one of our master mate, th^ english surrender call hugh maire in one of his arm. but after know we to be, render he secure we, and we satisfy they that we can not. hoist out our boat nor strike our sail. the admiral lay we aboard bu^ before any man enter john gomes, go unto the general, who receive he with great courtesy, and ask he what we require, whereunto he make. answer that my demand be that in the king name, he shall give we his faith and promise to give we our life to keep the law of fair war and quarter and to send we present into our country and in confirmation hereof that i require some pledge. whereunto the general make. answer that in the king majesty name, his master, he receive we a and swear by god almighty and by the habit of a cautara, whereof he have receive knighthood and in token whereof he wear. in his breast a green cross, which be the ensign of that order, that he will give we our life with good entreaty and send we as speedy as he can into our own country, in confirmation whereof he take of his glove and send it to i as a pledge. with this message, john g^mes return and the spaniard enter and take possession of our ship. every one cry in with which our company begin to secure themselves. the general be a principal gentleman of the ancient nobility of spain and brother to the conde de lemos, who intention no doubt be according to his promise and therefore consider that some bad entreaty and insolency may be offer unto i in my ship by the common soldier. who seldom have respect to any person in such occasion, especial in the case i be, whereof he have inform himself. for prevention, he send a principal captain, bring up long time in flaunders, call pedro pulgar to take care of i and while the ship be one aboard, the other to bring i into his ship, which he accomplish with great humanity and courtesy, despise the bar of gold which be share before his face, which he may alone have enjoy if he will, and true he be, as after i find by trial a true captain, a man worthy of any charge and of the noble condition that i have know. any spaniard t^e mildness of a general. after victory, the general receive i with great courtesy and compassion, even with tear in his eye, and word of great consolation, and command i to be accommodate in his own cabbine where he seek to cure and comfort i the best he can, the like he use with all our hurt man six and thirty at least, and doubtless as true courage, valour and resolution be requisite in a general in the time of battle, so humanity, mildness and courtesy. after victory, sect 63. whilst the ship be together, the mainmast of the daintie^ell ^ell by the board, and the people be occupy in ransack and seek for spoil and pillage, neglect, the principal whereof ensue that within a short space the dainty grow so deep with. water which increase for want of prevention, that all who be in she desire to forsake she and weave and cry for succour to be save, be out of hope of her recovery. whereupon the dainty in danger of perish, the general call together the best experiment man he have and consult with they what be best to be. do it be resolve that general michael angel shall go aboard the dainty and with he threescore mariner, as many soldier, and with they the english man who be able to labour to free she from water and to put she in order, if it be possible, and then to recover perico, the port of panama, for th^t of those to wind ward, it be impossible to turn up. to any of they and near than to leeward, be not any that can supply our necessity and want, which lie from we east, north east, above two hundred league. michael, angel m^^haell, archangel, recover th^ sh^p be a man of experience and care. accomplish that. he take in hand, although in clear and bayl the water in place a pump, and in fit and mend her foresail he spend above six and thirty hour, during which time the ship lay all a hull. but this work end, they set sail and direct their coarse for the isle of pearl, and for that the dainty sail bad what, for want of her maine-sayle and with the advantage which all the south-sea ship have of all those build in. our-north sea, the admiral, give she a t^we which, notwithstanding the wind, calm with we as we approach near to the land. twelve day be spend before we can fetch sight of the land which lie alongst the coast, begin some eight league west, south-west from panama and run to the southward near thirty league. they be many, and the most unhabited. and those which have people have some negro slave unto the spaniard, which occupy themselves in labour of the land or in fish for pearl. in time past many enrich themselves with that trade, but now it be grow to decay. the manner of fish for pearl be fish for pearl with certain long pinnace or small bark in which there go four, five, six or eight. negro expert swimmer and great deever, who the spaniard call busos, with tract of time, use and continual practice have learned to hold their breath long under water. for the better achieve their work, these throw themselves into the sea with certain instrument of their art, go to the bottom and seek the bank of the oyster in which the pearl be engender and with their force and art, remove they from their foundation in which they spend more or less time according to the resistance the firmness of the ground afford. once loose they put they into a bag under their arm and after bring they up into their boat, have, load it. they go to the shore. there they open they and take out the pearl. they lie under the uttermost part of the circuit of the oyster. in rank and proportion, under a certain part which be of many plight and fold, call the ruff, for the similitude it have unto a ruff, the pearl increase in bigness as they be near the end or joint of the oyster. the meat of those which have these pearl be milky and not very wholesome to be eat in 1583.. in the island of margarita i be at the dreg of pearl oyster after the manner we drag oyster. in england and with my own hand i open many and take out the pearl of they, some great, some less, and in good quantity. how the pearl be engender in the oyster or mussel, for they be find in both diverse and sundry be the opinion, but some ridiculous. whereof, because many famous and learned man have write large, i will speak no more then. have be former speak but refer their curious desire to pliny with other ancient and modern author. they be find in diverse part of the world, as in the west indies, the place where pearl be find, in the south sea, in the east indian sea, in the strait of magellane and in the scottish sea. those find near the pool be not perfect but be of a thick colour, whereas such as be find near the line be most orient and transparent- the curious call it their water- and the best be a clear white shine with fiery flame. and those of the east india have the best reputation, though as good be find in the west india, the the choice one be of great value and estimation, but the great that i have read or hear of be find in these land of pearl, the which king philip the second of spain give to his daughter elizabeth, wife to albertus, archduke of austria and governor of the state of flaunders, in who possession it remain and be call for the rareness of. it be as big as the pommel of a poniard sect 64. in this navigation after our surrender, the general take especial care for the good entreaty of we. the general continue his honourable usage towards the sick and wound, and especial of those who be hurt, and god so bless the hand of our surgians. beside that they be expert in their art, that of all our wound man, not one die that be alive the day after our surrendry, the number whereof be near forty, and many of they with eight, ten or twelve wound and some with more. the thing that ought to move we to give god almighty especial thanks and praise, be that they be cure in a manner without instrument or salve. for the chest be all break to piece and many of their simple and compound throw into the sea. those which remain be such as be throw about the ship in, break pot and bag and such as: by the divine providence, be reserve at the end of three day, by order from the general, be command to be seek and gather together these with some instrument of small moment, buy and procure from those who have reserve they to a different end do not only serve for our cure but also for the cure of the spaniard be many more than those of our company, for the spanish surgian be altogether ignorant in their profession and have little or nothing wherewith to cure. and i have note. that the spaniard, in general, be nothing so curious in accommodate themselves with good and careful surgeon, nor to fit they with that which belong to their profession as other nation be though they have great need than any. that i do know at the time of our surrender, i have not the spanish tongue, and so be force to use a interpreter or the latin or french, which help m^ much for the understanding of those which speak unto i in spanish, together with a little smattering i have of the portugal. through the noble proceed of don beltran with we and his particular care towards i in cure and comfort, i, i begin to gather heart and hope of life and health. my servant which be on foot, advise i ordinary of that which past. but some of our enemy bad incline, repine at the proceed of the general and say he do ill to use we so well that we be lutheran and for that cause the say which be, give we be, not to be, keep nor perform. other that we have fight as good soldier and therefore deserve good quarter. other nickname, we with the name of corsarios or pirate, not discern thereby that they include themselves within the same imputation? some be of opinion that from panama the general will send we into spain. other say that he dare not dispose of we, but by order from the viceroy of peru who have give he his authority. this hit the nail on the head to all. i give the hear and lay up in the store-house of my memory that which i think to be of substance and in the store-house of my consideration endeavour to frame a proportionable resolution to all occurrant, conformable to god most holy will withal. i profit myself of the mean which shall be offer and bear great probability to work our comfort, help and remedy. and so, as time minister opportunity, i begin and endeavour to satisfy the general and the better sort in the point i dare intermeddle, and especial to persuade by the best. reason i can, that we may be send present from panama, allege the promise, give we the cost and charge ensue, which doubtless will be such as deserve consideration and excuse. beside that now, while he be in place and power and authority in his hand to perform with we, that he will look into his honour and profit himself of the occasion and not put we into the hand of a three person who perhaps bring more powerful than himself. he may be force to pray and entreat the performance of his promise, whereunto he give we the hear and bear we in hand that he will do what he can, the general and all in general, not only in the peru but in all spain and the kingdom thereof, before our surrendry hold all english man of war to be corsarlos or pirate, which i labour to reform both in the peru and also in the counsel. of spain and among the chieftain soldier and better sort with who i come to have conversation, allege that a pirate or corsario, what a pirate be be, he which in time of peace or truce, spoil or ^^b^eth those which have peace or truce with they. but the english have neither peace nor truce with spain, but war and ^herefore not to be account pirate beside spain, break the peace with england and not england with spain. and that by which of all kind of defiance be most reprove and of least reputation, the ransom of prisoner. and that by the cannon be more honourable, but above all the most honourable, be with trumpet and herald to proclaim and denounce the war by public defiance. 3. sort. of defiance. and so if they shall condemn the english for pirate of force, they must first condemn themselves. moreover, pirate be those who range the sea without licence of their prince, who, when they be meet with, be punish more severe by their own lord, then, when they fall into the hand of stranger which be notorious to be more severe, prosecute in england in time of peace, then in any the kingdom of christendom. but the english have all licence, either immediate from their prince or from other, thereunto authorize, and so can in any sense be comprehend under the name of pirate for any hostility undertake against spain or the dependency thereof. and so the state stand, as now it do. if in spain a particular man shall arm a ship, the custom of spain ^or of war, and go in warre-fare with it against the english and happen to be take by they, i make no question. but the company shall be entreat according to that manner which they have ever use since the begin of the war, without make further inquisition. then, if he be rich or poor, to see if he be able to give a ransom, in this also, they be not very curious. but if this spanish ship shall fall a thwart, his king, armado or galley, i make no doubt. but they will hang the captain and his company for pirate. my reason be for that by a special law it be enact that no man in the kingdom of spain may arm any ship and go in warre-fare without the king special licence and commission, upon pain to be repute a pirate and to be chastise with the punishment due to corsarios. in england, the case be different. the custom of england for the war once proclaim: every man may arm that will and have wherewith, which make for our great exemption from be comprehend within the number of pirate. wi^h these and other like argument to this purpose, to avoid tediousness, i omit, i convince all those who i hear to harp upon this string, which be of no small importance for our good entreaty and motive. for many to further and favour the accomplishment of the promise. late make unto we sect 65. one day after dinner, as be the ordinary custom, the general, his captain and the better sort of his follower be assemble in the cabin of the poop in conference. a eager contention arise among they. touch the capitulation of querra and the purport thereof a disputation concern. some say that only life and good entreaty of ^he prisoner be to be comprehend therein. other enlarge and restrain it according to their humour and experience. in (@) opinion be require. and what i have see and know touch that point wherein i pause a little and suspect the wo^st fear that it may be a bait lay to catch i withal. and so, excuse myself, say that where so many experiment soldier be, join together, my young judgement be little to be respect, whereunto the general reply that knowledge be not always incident to year, though reason require that the aged shall be the wise, but a art acquire by action and management of affair, and therefore they will be. but certify what i have see, and what my judgement be, in this point, unto which, see, i can not well excuse myself, i condescend and call my wit together. hold it better to shoot out my boult by yield, unto reason, although i may err, then to stand obstinate, my will be at war, with my consent and fear my denial may be. take for discourtesy which peradventure. may also purchase. i mislike with those who seem to wish i comfort and restitution. i submit to better judgement the reformation of the present assembly, the resolution etc. say, sir, under the capitulation of or fair war. i have ever understand, and so it have be observe in these as also in former time, that preservation of life and good entreaty of the prisoner have be comprehend and further, by no mean to be urge to any thing contrary to his conscience, as touch his religion, nor to be seduce or menace from the allegiance due to his prince and country, but rather to ransom he for his month pay, and this be that which i have know practise in our time in general among all civil. and noble nation. but the english, the noble usage of the english, have enlarge it one point more towards the spaniard, render a in these war have ever deliver they which have be take upon such composition without ransom. but the covetousness of our age have bring in many abuse, but abuse in these day and exclude the principal officer from partake of the benefit of this privilege. in leave they to the discretion of the victor, be many time poor than the common soldier, their quality consider whereby they be common, put to more than the ordinary ransom and not be able of themselves to accomplish it, be forget of their prince and sometime suffer long imprisonment which they shall not, with this don beltran say don. beltran, satisfy and answer this ambiguity. you have well resolve, and like a worthy gentleman with great courtesy and liberality, add: let not the last point trouble you, but be of good comfort, for i here give you my word anew that your ransom, if any, shall be, think due shall be, but a couple of greyhouds for i and other two for my brother, the conde leme. an^ this i swear to you by the habit of alcantera. provide always that the king, my master, leave you to my dispose as of right. you belong unto i, for among the spaniard, in their armada, if there be a absolute general, the ten of all be due to he, and he be to take choice of the best. where in other country it be by lot that the general ten be give, and if they be but two ship he do the like and be but one, she be of right, the general. this i hardly believe until i see a letter in which the king will his viceroy to give don beltran thank for our ship and artillery which he have give to his majesty. i yield to the general most hearty thanks for his great favour wherewith he bind i ever to seek how to serve he and deserve it. sect 66, in this discourse, general michael, angel, demand for what purpose serve the little short arrow which we have in our ship and those in so great quantity. i satisfy they that they. be for our musket, short arrow for musket, they be not as yet in use among the spaniard, yet of singular effect and execution, as our enemy confess for the upper work of their ship. be musket proof in all place. they pass through both side with facility and wrought extraordinary disaster which cause admiration to see themselves wound with small short where they think themselves secure and by no mean can find where they enter nor come to the sight of any of the shot. hereof they prove to profit themselves after, but for that they want the trapping which be first to be drive home before the arrow be put in, and as then understand not the secret, they reject they as uncertain and therefore not. to be use. but of all the shot use now, a day for the annoy of a enemy in ^ight by sea, few be of great moment for many respect which i hold not convenient to treat of in public. sect 67: a little to the southward of the island of pearl, betwixt, seven and eight degree be the great river of saint ventura. it fall into the south sea with three mouth, the head of which be but a little distant from the north sea in 1575. or 1576. one, john oxman of plymouth. john oxmans, voyage to the south sea, go into the west indies, join with the symaron. what the symaron be. these be fugitive negro and for the bad entreaty which their master have. give they be, then retire into the mountain and live upon the spoil of such spaniard as they can master and can never be bring into obedience till by composition. they have a place, limit they for their freedom, where they shall live quiet by themselves. at this day, they have a great habitation near panama. their habitation call saint jago negro. well, people, with all their officer and commander of their own, save only a spanish governor, by the assistance of these symaron, their assistance, he bring to the head of this river, by piecemeal and in many journey, a small pinnace. he fit it by time, in warlike manner and, with the choice of his company, put himself into the south sea where his good ha^. be to meet with a couple of ship of trade and in the one of they a great quantity of gold and, among other thing, two piece of special estimation. the one, a table of massy gold with emerald send for a present to the king. the other, a lady of singular beauty, marry and a mother of child. the latter grow to be his perdition, for he have capitulate with these symaron, john oxman. capitulate with they that their part of the booty shall be only the prisoner to the end, to execute their malice upon they, such be the rancour they have conceive against they. for that they have be the tyrant of their liberty. but the spaniard, not content to have they their slave, who? late have be their lord, add to their servitude cruel entreaty, and they again to feed their insatiable revenge accustom to roast and eat the heart of all those spaniard who, at any time they can lay hand upon john oxman, i say be take with the love of this lady, his folly, and to win her good will, what through her tear and persuasion, and what through fear and detestation of their barbarous inclination, break promise with the symaron, yield to her request, and which be to give the prisoner liberty with their ship, breach of promise for that they be not useful. for he, notwithstanding oxman, keep the lady who have in one of the restore ship either a son or a nephew, this nephew with the rest of the spaniard his pursuit, make all the have they can to pa^am^, and they use such diligence as within few hour, some be dispatch to seek those who little think so quick to be. overtake the pursuer, approach the river, be doubtful by which of the afore-remembred three mouth they shall take their way in. this waver, one of the soldier espy certain feather and evil fortune of hen and some bough of tree which they have cut off to make their way swm down one of the outlet. this be light sufficient to guide they in their course. they enter. the river and follow the track as far as their frigate have water sufficient. and then, with part of their soldier in their boat and the rest on the bank on either side, they march day and night in pursuit of their enemy. and in fine, come upon they, unexpected, at the head of the river, make good cheer in their tent and divide in two partiality about the partition and share of their gold. thus, be they surprise and not one escape. some say that john oxman flee to the symaron. he fly to the symaron, but they utter deny to receive or succour he for that. he have break his promise. the only objection they cast in his tooth be that if he have hold his. word with they. he never have fall into this extremity. in fine, he be take and after his ship also be possess by the spaniard, which he have hide in a certain cove and cover with bough of tree in the guard and custody of some four or five of his follower, all his company be convey to panama and there be ymbark for lyma where a process be make against they by the justice and all condemn and hang as pirate. this may be a good example to other in like occasion. first to shun such notorious sin, which can escape punishment in this life, nor in the life to come, for the breach of faith be repute among the great fault. breach of faith never unpunished. which a man can commit. second, not to abuse another man, wife much less to force she both be odious to god and man. three, to beware of mutiny which seldom or never be see to come to better end, for where such tree flourish, the fruit of force must either be bitter, sweet or very sour. and therefore, see we vaunt ourselves to be christian and make profession of his law. who forbid all such vanity? let we faithful shun they that we may partake the end of that hope which our profession teach and promise. sect 68. come in sight of the land of pearl, the wind begin to fresh in with we, and we profit out self of it. but come thwart of a small island which they call pacheta pacheta, that lie within the pearl land, close aboard the main and some eight or ten league south and by west from panama, the wind calm again. this island belong to a private man. it be a round humock, contain not a league of ground but most fertile, insomuch that by the owner industry and the labour of some few slave who occupy themselves in manure it, and two bark which he employ in bring the fruit. it give to panama, it be say, to be worth he every week, one with another a bar of silver value, betwixt two hundred and fifty or three hundred peso, which in english money may amount to fifty or threescore. pound and for that which i see at my be in panama touch. this i hold to be true. in our course to fetch the port of panama, we p^^ ourselves betwixt the land and the main, which be a goodly chan^ell of three, four and five league broad, and without danger except a man come too near the shore on any side, and that be think the better course then to go a seaboord of the land because of the swift run of the tide and the advantage to stop the ebb, as also for succour if a man shall happen to be becalm at any time beyond expectation, which happen sometime the seven of july, we have sight of perico. they be two little land which cause the port of panama, where all the ship use to ride, it be some two league west, northwest of the city, which have also a peer in itself for small bark. at full sea it may have haven some six or seven foot water, but at low water it be dry. the nine of july we, anokor, under perico, and the general present, advise the of that which have succeed in his journey, the general certefi, the of his success which understand by they cause bonfire to be make and every man to put luminary in their house. the fashion be much use among the spaniard in their feast of joy or for glad tiding, place many light in their church. in their window and gallery and corner of their house, which be in the begin of the night, the great joy of the spaniard and the city, close by the sea shore, show to we be far off, as though the city have be on a light fire. about eight of the clock, all the artillery of the city be shoot off, which we may discern by the flash of fire but can not hear the report yet. the armando be advise thereof and in a readiness, answer they likewise with all their artillery which take end as all the vanity of this earth do. the general se^led himself to dispatch advise for the ^ for the viceroy of peru and for the viceroy of the nova spana. for he also have be certify of our be in that sea and have fit a armado to seek we and to guard his coast. but now for a farewell and note it. let i relate unto you this secret note, how don beltran show i a letter from the king, his master, direct to the viceroy, wherein he give he particular relation of my pretend voyage, of the ship, their burden, their munition, th^ir number of man which i have in, they, as perfect as it he have see all with his own eye, say unto i: hereby may you discern whether the king, my master have friend in england and good and speedy advice of all that pass? whereunto i reply it be no wonder, for that he have plenty of gold and silver which work. this and more strange effect for my journey be public and notorious to all the kingdom. whereunto he reply that, if i think. it so convenient, leave shall be, give i to write into england to the queen majesty, my mistress, to my father and to other personage as i think good, and leave the letter open that he will send some of they in the king packet, other to his uncle, don rodrigo de castro, cardinal and archbishop of sevill, and to other friend, of he not make any doubt, but that they will be speedy in england, for which i thank he and accept his courtesy. and although i be myself unable to write, yet by the hand of a servant of i, i write three or four copy of one letter to my father, sir john hawkins, in which i brief make relation of all that have succeed. in our voyage. the dispatch of spain and new spain go by ordinary course in ship of advice, but that for the peru be send by a kinsman of the general, call don francisco de la cuena, which be dispatch don beltran haste all that ever he can to put his ship in order to return to lyma. he cause the dainty to be ground and trim, for in those land it high and fall some fifteen or sixteen foot water, and the general with his captain and some religious man be aboard. she and new name. she name she the visitation for that she be render on the day on which they celebrate the visitation of the bless virgin mary in that place. the ground be plain. and without vantage whereby to help the tender side and sharp ship they be force to shore, they on either side, in the midst of their solemnity. her prop and shore of one side fail and so she fall over upon that side. sudden entreat many of they which be in she very bad and doubtless have she be like the ship of the south sea. she have break out, she bulge, but be without mast and empty. for in the south sea when they bring a ground, a ship, they leave neither mast, ballast nor any other thing aboard beside the bare hull. her strength be such as it make no great show to have receive any damage, but the fear she put they all into be. not little and cause they to run out of her ^aster, then a good pace in these land be no succour nor refresh. only in the one of they be one house of straw and a little spring of small moment for the water which the ship use for their provision. they fetch from another island, two league west, northwest of these, which they call tabaga, have in it some fruit and refresh and some few indian to inhabit it. what succeed to i and to the rest during our imprisoment, with the rarity and particularity of the peru and tierra firm my voyage to spain and the success with the time i spend in prison in the peru, in the tercera in sevill, and in madrid, with the accident which befall i in they. i leave for a second part of this discourse. if god give life and convenient place and rest necessary for so tedious and troublesome a work. desire god that be almighty, to give his blessing to this and the rest of my intention, that it and they may be fruitful to his glory and the good of all, then shall my desire be accomplish and i account myself most happy to who be all glory and thanks from all eternity.