offer most excellent fruit by plant in virginia, whereas in our last meeting and conference the other day, observe your sufficient reason, answer all objection, and your constant resolution to go on in our plantation. they give i so good content and satisfaction that i be drive against myself to confess my own error in stand out so long whereby many of you, my friend, be, engage in the business before i, at who often instigation i be, but little move and light esteem of it till be in place where observe the wise and prudent speech of a worthy gentleman, well know to you all, a most painful mannager of such public affair within this city, which move so effectual, touch the public utility of this noble speech of a worthy gentleman, well know to you all, a most painful mannager of such public affair within this city, which move so effectual, touch the public utility of this noble enterprise that withhold no long. i yield my money and endeavour, as other do, to advance the same. and now, upon more advise, consideration, i must needs say i never account my poor mean employ to better purpose than by god help the success of this may be, and therefore i can but deliver, if you please to hear what i rude conceive of a sudden there be diverse monument already, publish in print to the world, manifest and show that the coast and part of virginia have be long since discover people and possess by a sudden there be diverse monument already, publish in print to the world, manifest and show that the coast and part of virginia have be long since, discover people and possess by many english, both man, woman and child, the natural subject of our late queen elizabeth of famous memory, conduct and leave there at sundry time, and that the same foot and possession be there, keep and possess by the same english or by their seed and offspring, without any interruption or invasion, either of the savage than native of the country or of any other prince or people for aught we ^eare or know to this day which argue sufficient to we, and it be true that over those english and indian people no christian king. other prince or people for aught. we ^eare or know to this day which argue sufficient to we, and it be true that over those english and indian people no christian king or prince other than james, our sovereign lord and king, ought to have rule or dominion or can, by possession, conquest or inheritance, true claim or make just title to those territory or to any part thereof. except it be, as we hear of late, that a challenge be lay to all by virtue of a donation from alexander, the six, pope of rome, wherein they say: be give all the west indies, include florida and virginia, with all america and whatsoever land adjacent. but what be this to we? they be blind. indeed that stumble. wherein they say, be give all the west indies, include florida and virginia, with all america and whatsoever land adjacent. but what be this to we? they be blind. indeed that stumble here. it be much like that great donation of constantine, whereby the pope himself do hold and claim the city of rome and all the western empire, a thing that so cross all history of truth and sound antiquity, that by the apt resemblance of those two donation the whole west empire from a temporal prince to the pope and the whole west indies from the pope to a temporal prince. i do very guess they be near of kin. they be so like each other. the one a old tale, vain and fabulous, the other. from the pope to a temporal prince. i do very guess they be near of kin. they be so like each other. the one a old tale, vain and fabulous, the other a new toy, most idle and ridiculous. when the flatterer of cambyses, king of persia, can find no law to warrant his immoderate lust and incestuous marriage with his own daughter. yet they tell he of another law which they have find, whereby the king of persia may do what they list. if, in these case likewise, there be a law that the pope may do what he list, let they that list obey he, for we believe not in he. let go therefore, these legendary fable, which howsoever some man hold authentic as their creed. may do what he list, let they that list obey he, for we believe not in he. let go, therefore, these legendary fable, which, howsoever some man hold authentic as their creed. yet, be they in the judgement of wise man, thing of no value, nor do import to we any cause of doubt or fear, but that we go on in our honest enterprise and lawful purpose, now in hand, that, as we hope, his majesty mind not the reliquish, his estate and interest derive to he by right of succession from his immediate predecessor. but for the further plant and succour our old colony have give we leave to make new supply which we late send thither under the conduct of christopher newport captain, and have but for the further plant and succour our old colony have give, we leave to make new supply which we late send thither under the conduct of christopher newport captain, and have grant many gracious privilege under the great seal to we and to our heir, for ever that will adventure or plant in the say plantation. so i wish and entreat all well affect subject, some in their person, other in their purse. cheerful to adventure and joint, take in hand this high and acceptable work, tend to advance and spread the kingdom of god and the knowledge of the truth among so many million of man and woman, savage and blind, that never yet see the true light shine before their eye to enlighten their mind. and the knowledge of the truth among so many million of man and woman, savage and blind, that never yet see the true light shine before their eye, to enlighten their mind and comfort their soul, as also for the honour of our king and enlarge of his kingdom, and for preservation and defence of that small number, our friend and countryman, already plant least. for want of more supply, we become a scorn to the world, subject our former adventure to apparent spoil and hazard and our people as a prey to be sack and pull out of possession, as be the french out of francia not many year ago, and which be the jest and last respect yet usual prefer for the singular good and benefit. pull out of possession, as be the french out of francia not many year ago, and which be the jest and last respect yet usual, prefer for the singular good and benefit that will undoubted arise to this whole nation and to every one of we in particular that will adventure therein, as by true relation god will, i shall make it manifest, appear to all. it be know to the world and can be forget, that the day and reign of queen elizabeth bring forth the high degree of wealth, happiness and honour that ever england have before her time, whereof to let pass the particular praise as impertinent. to my purpose, i do only call to mind our royal fleet and merchant ship, the jewel of england have before her time, whereof to let pass the particular praise as impertinent to my purpose. i do only call to mind our royal fleet and merchant ship, the jewel of our land, our excellent navigator and admirable voyage as into all part and round about the globe with good success, to the high fame and glory of our nation. so especial their aim and course be most direct to the new find world, to the main land and infinite land of the west. indies intend to discover with what convenience to plant and settle english colony in place not already possess and inhabit by subject of other christian prince, wherein, after many tedious and perilous adventure howsoever, strange sea and miserable famine have devour and distress. english colony in place not already possess and inhabit by subject of other christian prince, wherein, after many tedious and perilous adventure howsoever, strange sea and miserable famine have devour and distress ship and man of inestimable value. yet be not the remnant escape, swallow up of despair, nor their heart and spirit daunt with fear, but daily arm afresh with invincible courage and great resolution, scorn to sit down by their loss, make new attempt not endure to look on whilst so huge and spacious country, the four part of the world and the great and wealthy part of all the rest shall remain a wilderness subject for the most part, but to wild beast and fowl of the air and to savage people which have no and wealthy part of all the rest shall remain a wilderness subject for the most part, but to wild beast and fowl of the air and to savage people which have no christian nor civil use of any thing, and that the subject only of one prince christian which, but within the memory of man, begin first to creep upon the face of those territory and now, by mean of their remnant, settle here and there, do therefore imagine the world to be. they shoulder out all other nation, account themselves king and commander, not only in town and place where they have plant, but over all other part of america which contain sundry vast and barbarous region, many of which, to this day, they never know nor in town and place where they have plant, but over all other part of america which contain sundry vast and barbarous region, many of which to this day they never know, nor do ever settle soot therein, which, notwithstanding, if it be, yield they as due, yet their strength and mean, far inferior to their aspire, will never stretch to compass or replenish the hundred part thereof. and this we prove true. not many year ago, our prince and they be then at open hostility, their best and chief residence be scatter with so poor and slender troop that with handful of man at sundry time, we run through all surprise and sack their strong fort and town in those part, and may long since with ease follow. slender troop that, with handful of man at sundry time, we run through all surprise and sack their strong fort and town in those part, and may long since with ease follow and second our force have set they to their stint. but see, we so pass by their dwelling that in seat ourselves we seek not to unsettle they, but by god mercy, after many storm, be bring to the coast of another country, far distant and remote from their habitation. why shall any frown or envy at it? or if they do, why shall we neglect so fair a opportunity, faint or fear to enlarge ourselves? where be our force and ancient vigour? do our late reputation sleep in the dust? no, no, let not the we neglect so fair a opportunity, faint or fear to enlarge ourselves? where be our force and ancient vigour? do our late reputation sleep in the dust? no, no, let not the world deceive itself. we still remain the same and upon just occasion, give we shall quick show it too. have now, by god blessing, more mean than ever heretofore. be strong sense where we wont to lie, open our plant we trust. be firm, root our arm and limb. be strong, our branch, fair and much desire to spread themselves abroad. but before i come to describe this earthly paradise or to prove the point of my proposition mention before, you shall know that the first discovery and actual possession take thereof. be in the reign. come to describe this earthly paradise or to prove the point of my proposition mention before. you shall know that the first discovery and actual possession take thereof be in the reign and by the subject of henry the seven of england. at which time do spain also discover, and by that right of discovery do retain and hold their hispania and all other, their limit upon that coast? but that we now intend to ground upon be a more late discovery and actual possession take in the name and right of queen elizabeth in 1584. the 13 of july, as it be true, set down in the book of english uoyage by sundry english captain and gentleman in that voyage, who name be record in that discourse. the 13 of july, as it be true, set down in the book of english uoyage by sundry english captain and gentleman in that voyage who name be record in that discourse and many of which be yet live whereof, when her majesty have true information, she name the country virginia, and do assign to walter raleigh than a gentleman of worth, power and authority to plant force and colony there at his pleasure, who transport thither in 1587. by the conduct of john white, chief leader, above a hundred man, woman and child at one time, and leave they there to inhabit. to this day notwithstanding, it be true, indeed, as some may object, it be now above twenty year ago since these thing be do and time and leave they there to inhabit to this day notwithstanding. it be true, indeed, as some may object, it be now above twenty year ago since these thing be do. and yet ever since, in all this time, we never see or hear of any good that have come from thence, nor of any hope that may encourage we anew to engage ourselves therein. but let we right weigh the reason of it and then judge those hundred and upward conduct thither by john white, and who particular name you may see record in the same book of uoyage be leave there with intent and promise to be supply from england, with more company and all necessary, the next year follow. in the mean time they be. same book of uoyage be, leave there with intent and promise to be supply from england, with more company and all necessary, the next year follow. in the mean time they be to plant and fortify themselves in be^t manner they can and to make a discovery of such mineral and other merchandise as the country shall yield by nature. but as all good action have their cross and their bane attend on, they so have this. for that, those which have the manage of a new supply be the next year sufficient furnish to sea for that end. yet most unnatural, be taint with that common corruption of time, turn their head another way and with greedy mind betake themselves whole to hunt after pillage upon the. for that end. yet, most unnatural, be taint with that common corruption of time, turn their head another way and, with greedy mind, betake themselves whole to hunt after pillage upon the spanish coast. where spend their man, their time and provision? they be not able be come and arrive at the port to make up into the land to visit and relieve their friend, but be force to retire for england again, whereby the edge of those adventurer that set they forth be so abate that this most honourable enterprise, so happy begin, be by this occasion most unhappy end. neither have our poor countryman leave there any mean from thence to visit we, nor in all this time to give we any light of their own. this occasion most unhappy end. neither have our poor countryman leave there any mean from thence to visit we, nor in all this time to give we any light of their own estate, whereas then, if those beginning have be follow as they ought and as, by god help, we now intend, that country have long since become a most royal addition to the crown of england and a very nursery and fountain of much wealth and strength to this kingdom. when christopher columbus, the first bewrayer of this new world, be to make his proffer where he like best, he choose henry the seven of england as in those day the most worthy and best furnish for navigation of all. the king in christendom offer to invest. where he like best. he choose henry the seven of england as in those day the most worthy and best furnish for navigation of all, the king in christendom, offer to invest his majesty with the most precious and rich ^aines of the whole earth never know before, as he do also the like to the king of portugal and spain who, as the story say, for his poor apparel and simple look and for the novelty of his proposition, be of most man account a vain fool and utter reject, save that the spanish better conceive. then some other begin to entertain and make use of his skill which, within these hundred year, have bring forth those apparent fruit to the world as can be hide their conceive, then some other begin to entertain and make use of his skill which, within these hundred year, have bring forth those apparent fruit to the world as can be hide their territory, enlarge their navigation, increase, their subject enrich and their superfluity of coin, overspread all part of the world, procure their crown to flourish and high, commend the wisdom of spain who, quick apprehension and speedy address, prevent all other prince, albeit, as you know, their greatness of mind, arise together with their money and mean have (@) all christendom these forty year and more. and this i but mention to note the blind diffidence of our english nature which laugh to scorn the name of virginia and all other new project. be they never so. more, and this i but mention to note the blind diffidence of our english nature which laugh to scorn the name of virginia and all other new project, be they never so probable, and will not believe till we see the effect, as also to show how capable man ought to be in thing of great importance. advise to take the first occasion we read of hannibal, when chase home the roman to the gate of rome and neglect then to scale the wall, can never after, with all his strength and policy, come near the like advantage. yet i must brief tell you now what i conceive with joy, that howsoever the business of this plantation have be former miscarry, yet it be now go on in. like advantage. yet i must brief tell you now what i conceive with joy, that howsoever the business of this plantation have be former miscarry, yet it be now go on in better way. not enterprise by one or two private subject who in their greatness of mind seek to compass that which rather beseem a mighty prince such as we or the whole state to take in hand. for it be not unknown to you all how many noble man of honourable mind, how many worthy knight, merchant and other of the best disposition be now join together in one charter to receive equal privilege according to their several adventure. every man engage his purse and some nobleman, knight and gentleman intend to go in their own. now join together in one charter to receive equal privilege according to their several adventure. every man engage his purse and some nobleman, knight and gentleman intend to go in their own person, which i do hear, to protest and vow against any people whosoever shall any way seek to entrap or impeach our proceed. a utter revenge upon their body or good, if they be to be find upon sea or land whereby we have assure hope. god assist we to be effectual, able to make good against all and, in short time, to bring to a most happy event the thing we take in hand and now in describe the natural seat and disposition of the country itself, if i shall say no more, but with to a most happy event, the thing we take in hand. and now in describe the natural seat and disposition of the country itself. if i shall say no more, but with caleb and joshua, the land which we have search out be a very good land, if the lord love we, he will bring our people to it and will give it we for a possession. this be enough to you that be willing, but yet a little more. in particular, observe by the best map and print discourse and by conference of such as have be late there and see it, i think, good to deliver to satisfy other. first, the voyage be not long nor tedious. six week at ease will send we thither, whereas have be late there and see it. i think good to deliver to satisfy other. first, the voyage be not long nor tedious. six week at ease will send we thither, whereas six month suffice not to some other place where we trade. our course and passage be through the great ocean where be no fear of rock or flat, nor subject to the straight and restraint of foreign prince, most wind that blow be apt and fit for we and none can hinder we when we come to the coast. there be continual depth enough with good bottom for anchor hold and the land be fair to fall, with all full of excellent, good harbour. the world afford no better for ship of all burden, many pleasant. with good bottom for anchor hold and the land be fair to fall, with all full of excellent, good harbour, the world afford no better for ship of all burden. many pleasant land, great and small, affront the coast. two goodly river be discover wind far into the main, the one in the north part of the land by our western colony, knight and gentleman of excester, plymouth, and other the other in the south part thereof by our colony of london, upon which river be both broad, deep and pleasant, abound with store of fish. our colony have begin to fortify themselves and have build a town and name it in honour of our king james town, fourscore mile within land, upon the north side of the. our colony, have begin to fortify themselves and have build a town and name it in honour of our king james town, fourscore mile within land, upon the north side of the river, as be london, upon the river of thames, from whence we have discover the same river one hundred mile further into the main land, in the search whereof they be so ravish? with the admirable sweetness of the stream and with the pleasant land trend along on either side that their joy exceed, and with great admiration they praise god. the country itself be large and great, assure, though as yet no exact discovery can be make of all it be also commendable and hopeful every way, the air and climate most sweet and wholesome. be large and great assure, though as yet no exact discovery can be make of all. it be also commendable and hopeful every way. the air and climate most sweet and wholesome, much warm than england and very agreeable to our nature. it be inhabit with wild and savage people that live and lie up and down in troop like herd of dear in a forest. they have no law but nature, their apparel skin of beast, but most go naked. the better sort have house but poor one. they have no art nor science. yet they live under superior command. such as it be. they be general, very love and gentle and do entertain and relieve our people with great kindness. they be easy to be bring. they live under superior command. such as it be, they be general, very love and gentle and do entertain and relieve our people with great kindness. they be easy to be bring to good and will fain embrace a better condition. the land yield, natural for the sustentation of man: abundance of fish, both scale and shell of land and water, fowl, infinite store of deer rain^ and fallow, stag, coney and hare with many fruit and root, good for meat. there be valley and plain stream with sweet spring like vein in a natural body. there be hill and mountain. make a sensible proffer of hide treasure. never yet search the land. be full of mineral, plenty of wood, the want of england. there be grow goodly. there be hill and mountain. make a sensible proffer of hide treasure never yet search. the land. be full of mineral, plenty of wood, the want of england there be grow goodly, oak and elm, ^eech and birch, spruce, walnut, cedar and fir tree in great abundance. the soil be strong and lusty of it own nature and send out natural fruitful vines. run upon tree and shrub. it yield also ro^^n, turpentine, pitch and tar, sassafras, mulbery-tree and silkworm, many skin and rich fur, many sweet wood and dyer wood and other costly die. plenty of sturgeon, timber for ship mast, plancke and deale, soap, ash, caviar and what else. we know, not yet because our day be young, but of this that i have say if of sturgeon timber for ship mast, plancke and deale, soap, ash, caviar and what else we know, not yet, because our day be young, but of this that i have say, if bare nature be so amiable in it naked kind, what may we hope when art and nature both shall join and strive together to give best content to man and beast. as now, in handle the several part propound, i shall show in order as they lie, for the first, if i forget, not myself, how it may tend to advance the kingdom of god by reduce savage people from their blind superstition to the light of religion, when some object we seek nothing less than the cause of god be lead on by our own. god by reduce savage people from their blind superstition to the light of religion. when some object, we seek nothing less than the cause of god, be lead on by our own private end, and second, how we can warrant a supplantation of those indian or a invasion into their right and possession. to the first we say: as many action, both good in themselves and in their success, have be perform with bad intent. so in this case, howsoever, our naughtiness of mind may sway very much. yet god may have the honour and his kingdom advance in the action do. but yet, by the way, i think this objection come in due time and do well admonish we how to rectiffe our heart and ground our kingdom advance in the action do. but yet, by the way, i think this objection come in due time and do well admonish we how to rectiffe our heart and ground our meditation. before we begin, we do general applaud and high commend the goodness of the cause, and that it be such a profitable plough as every honest man ought to set his hand unto, both in respect of god and the public. good, this be our general voice, and we say truth, for so it be. but we must beware that under this pretence, that bittet root of greedy gain be not so settle in our heart that be in a golden dream if it fall, not out present to our expectation we flinke away with. that bittet root of greedy gain. be not so settle in our heart that be in a golden dream. if it fall, not out. present to our expectation, we flinke away with discontent and draw our purse from the charge. if any show this affection, i will wish his baseness of mind to be note what must be our direction then? no more but this: if thou do once approve the work, lay thy hand to it cheerful, and withdraw it not till thy task be. do at all assay and new supply of money. be not lag, nor like a dull horse that be always in the lash, for here lie the po^son of all good attempt, when as man without hale and pull will not be. not lag, nor like a dull horse, that be always in the lash. for here lie the po^son of all good: attempt, when, as man without hale and pull will not be draw to performance, for by this other be discourage, the action lie undo and the first expense be lose. but be we to look for no gain in the lieu of all adventure. yes, undoubted there be assure hope of gain, as i will show, anon in due place. but look it, be not chief in your thought. god that have say by solomon, cast thy bread upon the water and after many day thou shall find it. he will give the blessing. and as for supplant the savage, we have no such intent. our intrusion. cast thy bread upon the water, and after many day thou shall find it. he will give the blessing. and as for supplant the savage, we have no such intent. our intrusion into their possession shall tend to their great good and no way to their hurt unless, as unbridled beast, they procure it to themselves. we purpose to proclaim and make it know to they all, by some public interpretation, that our come thither be to plant ourselves in their country, yet not to supplant and root they out, but to bring they from their base condition to a far better, first in regard of god, the creator, and of jesus christ, their redeemer, if they will believe in he, and second in respect of earthly blessing. base condition to a far better, first in regard of god, the creator, and of jesus christ, their redeemer, if they will believe in he, and second in respect of earthly blessing, whereof they have now no comfortable use, but in beastly brutish manner, with promise to defend they against all public and private enemy. we can remember since don john daquila with his force invade ireland, a noble civil kingdom where all except a few runagate be settle in the truth of religion and live by wholesome law under the mild government of christian king and prince, long before his grandsire cradle. yet he think it no robbery to proclaim and publish to the world that his come thither be to none other end but to free. and prince long before his grandsire cradle. yet he think it no robbery to proclaim and publish to the world that his come thither be to none other end but to free the nation from their bondage and tyrannous subjection and to bring the blind soul to catholic religion. a plausible pretence, the least end of his thought. but if this be coin in those day by the minter themselves to pass for currant through the world, howsoever base it be? indeed, we hope they will be as favourable to our case and give as free passage and allowance to our invasion, much more currant and so far different as not to bring a people, according to our proverb, out of the fry pan into the fire. but passage and allowance to our invasion, much more currant and so far different as not to bring a people, according to our proverb, out of the fry pan into the fire, but to make their condition true, more happy, by a mutual interchange and commerce in this sort that, as to our great expense and charge, we make adventure to impart our divine riches to their inestimable gain and to cover their naked misery with civil use of food and clothing, and to train they by gentle mesne to those manual art and skill which they so much affect and do admire to see in we. so, in lieu of this, we require nothing at their hand but a quiet residence to we and we that by our so much affect and do admire to see in we. so in lieu of this we require nothing at their hand but a quiet residence to we and we, that by our own labour and toil we may work this good unto they and recompense our own adventure, cost and travel in the end, wherein they shall be most friendly welcome to conjoin their labour with we and shall enjoy equal privilege with we in whatsoever good success time or mean may bring to pass, to which purpose we may very believe that god have reserve, in this last age of the world, a infinite number of those lose and scatter sheep to be win and recover by our mean, of who so many as obstinate refuse to. in this last age of the world, a infinite number of those lose and scatter sheep to be win and recover by our mean, of who so many as obstinate refuse to unite themselves unto we or shall malign or disturb our plantation, our chattel or whatsoever belong to we. they shall be hold and repute recusant, withstand their own good and shall be deal with as enemy of the commonwealth of their country. whereby how much good we shall perform to those that be good and how little injury to any will easy appear by compare our present happiness with our former ancient misery, wherein we have continue brutish, poor and naked britane to this day, if julius caesar with his roman legion or some other have. compare our present happiness with our former ancient misery, wherein we have continue brutish, poor and naked britane to this day, if julius caesar with his roman legion or some other have not lay the ground to make we tame and civil. but for my second point, propound the honour of our king by enlarge his kingdom. to prove how this may tend to that, no argument of i can make it so manifest as the same be clear in itself. divine testimony show that the honour of a king consist in the multitude of subject and certain. the state of the jew be far more glorious by the conquest of david and under the ample reign of solomon, then, ever before or after, the twelve tribe be. and certain the state of the jew be far more glorious by the conquest of david and under the ample reign of solomon. then, ever before or after, the twelve tribe be then all subject the border nation tributary. no doubt a happy subjection to many of they, whereby they have the better mean to believe and know god, the creator of heaven and earth. honourable, i grant be just conquest by sword, and hercules be feign to have. have all his felicity in subdue and root out the tyrant of the world, but unfeigned, it be most honourable indeed to subdue the tyranny of the roar lion that devour those poor soul in their ignorance and lead they to hell for want of light. when our dominion be most honourable indeed to subdue the tyranny of the roar lion that devour those poor soul in their ignorance and lead they to hell for want of light, when our dominion shall be enlarge and the subject multiply of a people, so buy and ransom, not by storm of rage, cruelty as west india be convert with rapier point and musket shoot, murder so many million of naked indian, as their story do relate, but by fair and love mean suit to our english nature, like that soft and gentle voice wherein the lord appear to elias. how honourable will this be in the sight of man and of age to come, but much more glorious in the sight of god, when our king shall come to. to elias. how honourable will this be in the sight of man and of age to come, but much more glorious in the sight of god, when our king shall come to make his triumph in heaven. the prophet daniel do assure that for this conquest of turn many unto righteousness, he shall shine as the star for ever and ever. and yet this be not all that may be, say the ancient law, the law of moses, set it down as a bless thing when the prince and people of god shall be able to lend to all and need to borrow of none. and it add very much to the fame and wisdom of king solomon, which the world come far and near to wonder at. lend to all and need to borrow of none, and it add very much to the fame and wisdom of king solomon, which the world come far and near to wonder at, in that his kingdom be replenish with gold and silver in abundance and with riches bring in by ship, send yearly forth in ample trade of merchandise whereof we read not the like among all the king of israel- and upon good warrant i speak it here in private- what by these new discovery into the western part and our hopeful settle in chief place of the east with our former know trade in other part of the world. i do not doubt by the help of god, but i may live to see the day. place of the east with our former know trade in other part of the world. i do not doubt, by the help of god, but i may live to see the day, if merchant have their due encouragement, that the wisdom, majesty and honour of our king shall be spread and enlarge to the end of the world. our navigation mighty increase and his majesty custom more than treble. and as for the three part, the relieve our man already plant to preserve both they and our former adventure, i shall not need to say much. the necessity be so apparent that i hope no adventurer will be want therein, our saviour christ. resemble they that give over in their best duty to foolish builder that have lay the necessity be so apparent that i hope no adventurer will be want therein our saviour christ, resemble they that give over in their best duty to foolish builder that have lay the foundation, do gravel themselves in the mid way and so become ridiculous. it have be extreme madness in the jew when have send to spy the land that flow with milk and honey and ten for two, return back with tiding of impossibility to enter and prevail. if then they have retire and lose the land of promise, no doubt the devil that envy then that enterprise of they do now the like in we and we must make account and look to be encounter with many discoragement, partly by our friend and neighbour, such envy then that enterprise of they do now the like in we, and we must make account and look to be encounter with many discoragement, partly by our friend and neighbour, such as we use to say, will neither go to church nor tarry at home, as also- which be no new thing, even by such as have be send to spy the land one while object the charge will be great, the business long and the gain nothing, and beside, the anakime that dwell in the mountain will come and pull we out by the ear with such like foolery. i know not what, but we must be prepare, with caleb and josua so high commend, to oppose a extraordinary zeal against the detra^^ings of such to ear with such like foolery. i know not what, but we must be prepare, with caleb and josua so high commend, to oppose a extraordinary zeal against the detra^^ings of such, to rescue our enterprise from malicious ignorance and to still their murmur with reproof. for though in ordinary and common occasion it be our duty to be carry with ordinary patience, meekness and humility, yet to show a excellent spirit when the cause be worth it and, in such a case as this, require pass resolution, it be but our weakness to stumble at straw and a baseness to gnaw upon every bone that be cast in our way, which we may observe by those noble dog of albania present to king alexander, who nature contemn to. and a baseness to gnaw upon every bone that be cast in our way, which we may observe by those noble dog of albania present to king alexander, who nature contemn to encounter or prey upon silly beast of no valour, but with a overflow courage, fly upon the lion and the tiger, do th^n declare their virtue, and now it follow how it can be good for this commonwealth, which be likewise most apparent many way. first, if we consider what strength of ship may be, raise and maintain thence in furnish. our own want of sundry kind, and the want of other nation too, in such needful thing arise thence which can hardly now be obtain from any other part of the world as plank and of sundry kind and the want of other nation too, in such needful thing arise thence which can hardly now be obtain from any other part of the world as plank and timber for ship with deal and wainscot, pipestave and clabbord with store of soap, ash, whereof there grow the best wood to make, they in great abundance all which we may there have, the wood for the cut and the ash for the burn, which, though they be gross commodity, yet no merchandise be better request, nor will soon yield gold or silver in any. our border nation, england and holland alone, spend in these about three hundred thousand pound sterling every year. we may transport hither or unto hamborough, holland or other place fifty better. any. our border nation, england and holland alone spend in these about three hundred thousand pound sterling every year. we may transport hither or unto hamborough, holland or other place fifty better cheap then from prusia or polonia, from whence they be only now to be have, where also the wood be, so spend and waste that from the place where the wood be cut and the ash burn they be bring by land at least two hundred mile to ship, and from thence we may have iron and copper also in great quantity, about which the expense and waste of wood, as also for building of ship, will be no hurt but great service to that country. the great superfluity whereof the continual cut down in many the expense and waste of wood, as also for building of ship, will be no hurt but great service to that country. the great superfluity whereof the continual cut down in many hundred year will not be able to overcome, whereby will likewise grow a great benefit to this land in preserve our wood and timber at home, so infinite and without measure upon these occasion. cut down and fall to such a sickness and waste consumption as all the physic in england can cure. we doubt not. but to make there in few year store of good wine as any from the canary by replant and make tame the vines that natural grow there in great abundance. only send man of skill to do it and cooper. of good wine as any from the canary by replant and make tame the vines that natural grow there in great abundance. only send man of skill to do it and cooper to make cask and hoop for that and all other use for which there be wood enough at hand. there be silkworm and plenty of mulberietree whereby lady, gentlewoman and little child be set in the way to do it. may be all employ with pleasure in make silk comparable to that of persia, turkey or any other. we may bring from thence sturgeon caviar and new land-fish of the best. there grow hemp for cordage- a excellent commodity- and flax for linen cloth, which be sow and well manure in such a climate and fertile. caviar and new land-fish of the best there grow, hemp for cordage- a excellent commodity- and flax for linen cloth, which be sow and well manure in such a climate and fertile soil, will make great benefit and will put down that of other country. and for the make of pitch, tar, turpentine, soap-ash, deal, wainscott and such like, we have already provide and send thither skilful workman from foreign part which may teach and set we in the way whereby we may set many thousand a work in these and such like service. for, as i tell you before, there must be art and industry with other help and mean, extend, with a little patience, to bring these thing to pass. we must not look to reap. i tell you before, there must be art and industry with other help and mean, extend, with a little patience, to bring these thing to pass. we must not look to reap with joy, except we sow in tear. the abundance of king salomon, gold and silver do not rain from heaven upon the head of his subject, but heavenly providence bless his navigation and public affair, the chief mean of their wealth. experience have late. teach we by some of our neighbour province how exceed it mount the state of a commonwealth to put forth navigation, if it be possible, into all part and corner of the world, to furnish our own want and also to supply from one kingdom to another such several needful thing as. navigation, if it be possible, into all part and corner of the world to furnish our own want and also to supply from one kingdom to another such several needful thing as for want of ship and other mean they can furnish of themselves, for this will raise experience and man of skill as also strength at sea and land with honour. wealth and riches return still to the head and fountain from whence their first occasion grow. we may but look a little back and we shall see what a novice our nation be within these sixscore year in case of foreign trade: not know whence to fetch nor which way to transport, but only to some mart or staple town within two day sail, and that these sixscore year in case of foreign trade, not know whence to fetch nor which way to transport, but only to some mart or staple town within two day sail, and that be count. so great a matter then that therefore they be call merchant adventurer and the great hulk of italy which in those day bring spice, corant and such like and land at southampton. the storehouse then for merchandise be chronicle for wonder in our english story. for indeed we know no better then, but be content as babe, with easterling on the one hand and lumbards on the other, which be continual leiger in london and feed we as they list, and take this ever as a rule that domestic merchandise bring forth, but poor. hand and lumbards on the other, which be continual leiger in london and feed we as they list and take this ever as a rule that domestic merchandise bring forth but poor effect in a commonwealth whereof i need not have show example further than our own door. what be the case of england before the golden day of queen elizabeth, at who come to the crown, the state of merchant be so poor and mean that rent out her custom in ward, but at a very low rate. yet it bring the farmer upon his knee. a man that mark the difference and shall compare those time and these together, shall think it be impossible, unless his knowledge teach he otherwise that the day and reign of knee, a man that mark the difference and shall compare those time and these together, shall think it be impossible, unless his knowledge teach he otherwise, that the day and reign of one elizabeth, who hand be ever lend to distress neighbour prince, and her sword unsheathe, continual repulse, foreign enemy, shall yet relieve and raise the state of her custom, the strength of her navy and the condition of her people every way seven fold to that they be before only by encourage the royal trade of merchandise, as we see it this day apparent. let god have the honour and bless be her memory and the memorial of those manager of state in her day for their worthy counsel, many of which, though, they now sleep. let god have the honour and bless be her memory and the memorial of those manager of state in her day for their worthy counsel, many of which, though, they now sleep and rest with their sovereign in peace. yet some do still remain and do succeed in place, where long may they stand and their seed after they like the pillar and worthy of king david, to shield the head and honour of our solomon and still to uphold and enlarge our happiness for ever. and this i be drive to speak and mention, by the way, where i mean it, not in regard of some which, upon a disaster, begin to ware weary of all, discourage themselves and other from this and all other foreign adventure. the way where i mean it, not in regard of some which, upon a disaster, begin to ware weary of all, discourage themselves and other from this and all other foreign adventure, to let they know that each thing have increase from whence it have beginning, and to put ourselves in mind that we fail not in further those cause that bring forth such effect. another instance may be show in one particular, which tax very much our english nation and all the subject of our sovereign king, that enjoy such plenty of wood-land and fruitful soil within england, scotland, ireland and wales, yet our want of industry to be such that netherlander, which have not a stick of wood grow nor any land for sow, shall surpass soil within england, scotland, ireland and wales. yet our want of industry to be such that netherlander, which have not a stick of wood grow nor any land for sow, shall surpass and go beyond we, in continual plenty of corn and ship. i think the reformation hereof shall find more favour at our hand that in such point of civil policy. no people of lesser mean shall cast we so behind, and each well mind man shall lend his help to heal and cure such stain and scar in the face of our state as be view and weigh well may very well make we blush. and now to our present business in hand, which so many stumble at. in regard of the continual charge, i will be view and weigh well may very well make we blush. and now to our present business in hand, which so many stumble at in regard of the continual charge i will have. they know that it can be great, nor long as the business may be. handle two thing be especial: require herein people to make the plantation and money to furnish our present provision and ship now in hand. for the first, we need not doubt, our land abound with swarm of idle person which have no mean of labour to relieve their misery, do likewise swarm in lewd and naughty practice, so that if we seek not some way for their foreign employment, we must provide short, more prison and correction for their bad condition. do likewise swarm in lewd and naughty practice, so that if we seek not some way for their foreign employment, we must provide short more prison and correction for their bad condition. for it fare with populous common weal, as with plant and tree that be too frolic, which, not able to sustain and feed their multitude of branch, do admit a engraft of their bud and science into some other soil. account it a benefit for preservation of their kind and a disburden their stock of those superfluous twig that suck away their nourishment. and we shall find that hence it be the goth and uandalle, with other barbarous nation, see a overflow of their multitude at home. do therefore send their army out as rage flood. we shall find that hence it be the goth and uandalle with other barbarous nation, see a overflow of their multitude at home. do therefore send their army out as rage flood at sundry time to cover the face of spain, italy and other province to f^ee their own from pester, so that you see it no new thing but most profitable for our state to rid our multitude of such as lie at home, pester the land with pestilence and penury and infect one another with vice and villainy worse than the plague itself, who very misery drive many of they by mean to be cut off as bad and wicked member, or else both they and they to be relieve at the common charge of other. very misery, drive many of they by mean to be cut off as bad and wicked member, or else both they and they to be relieve at the common charge of other. yet i do not mean that none but such unsound member and such poor as want their bread be fit for this employment, for we intend to have of every trade and profession, both honest, wise and painful man, whereof our land and city be able to spare and furnish many, as we have experience in our last send thither, which will be glad to go and plant themselves so happy, and their child after they to hold and keep conformity with the law, language and religion of england for ever touch, which i do earnest. to go and plant themselves so happy, and their child after they, to hold and keep conformity with the law, language and religion of england for ever touch, which i do earnest. admonish you to beware and shun three kind of people. the first, a most vile mind sort and for the most part bad member of this city by some mean, shake out of their honest course and now shift by their wit, will be always devise some unhappiness to wrong the plantation such as daily, beat their brain and seek, by lie, suggestion, under colour of good pretence to the commonwealth, to infringe our ancient liberty and will, if they be not, meet withal and curb by authority, make a monopoly to themselves of each thing. colour of good pretence to the commonwealth, to infringe our ancient liberty and will, if they be not, meet, withal and curb by authority, make a monopoly to themselves of each thing after other. belong to the freedom of every man profession, the very wrack of merchandise- the second sort, be papist profess or recusant, of which i will not one season with the least taint of that leaven to be settle in our plantation, nor in any part of that country. but if once perceive such a one, weed he out and ship he home for england, for they will ever be plot and conspire to root you out if they can, howsoever they swear, flatter and equivocate. believe they not keep only these two example in? for england, for they will ever be plot and conspire to root you out if they can, howsoever they swear, flatter and equivocate, believe they not? keep only these two example in mind? watson, the seminary priest, in his print quodlibet, he of all other man protest the great truth and fidelity to his prince and country, object all the bloody plot and treason to have come from the combination of jesuit and from parson, that arch-atheist in chief. but as for himself, he wish no long to live and breath than the thought of his heart shall be true and upright to his prince and country. notwithstanding this, watson be the very first wretch of all other that have his hand in treason against our king and heart shall be true and upright to his prince and country. notwithstanding this, watson be the very first wretch of all other that have his hand in treason against our king and reap his reward according to his wish. the other example be a popish pamphlet. call the lay catholic petition. offer to his majesty for toleration of popery. protest likewise their fidelity and unfeigned love to his majesty. offer to be bind life for life, with good surety for their loyal behaviour. happy man have we be to have take their bond. no doubt, for even at that instant when this petition be exhibit, the chief head of those lay catholic be then labour with all their might to undermine the parliament house, to shake the pillar. even at that instant when this petition be exhibit, the chief head of those lay catholic be then labour with all their might to undermine the parliament house, to shake the pillar and the whole frame of the kingdom to shiver. and which be more. there be new disperse, a idle discourse against a honourable personage of this land by a papist that term himself a catholic divine. defend garnet the popish priest. say there be nothing against he at his arraignment, but only his acquaintance with the powder-plotte which say he be reveal unto he in auricular confession. he may not, therefore, by the law and right of catholic religion, disclose, nor make it know how, like you, these catholic and this divinity, if they grow so. in auricular confession. he may not, therefore, by the law and right of catholic religion, disclose, nor make it know how, like you, these catholic and this divinity, if they grow so bold and desperate in a mighty, settle state, how much more dangerous in the birth and infancy of you. therefore, if you will live and prosper, harbour not this viperous brood in your bosom, which will eat out and consume the womb of their mother. the three sort to avoid be evil, affect, magistrate, a plague that god himself complain of by the prophet isaiah. o my people, they that lead thou, cause thou to err, touch which i be no way able to speak enough, for herein lie the very life of all. let no. isaiah o my people, they that lead thou, cause thou to err, touch which i be no way able to speak enough for. herein lie the very life of all. let no partiality prefer they, unless they be worthy man, if they be papist or popish mind if profane atheist contemn god and his word, turn religion to policy, unchaste idle, ambitious, proud and tyrannous, forget their allegiance to their king and duty to their country, neglect their commission of employment, advance vil^e and vicious person like themselves and base use those that be virtuous, godly and well affect. then look for no blessing nor assistance of god, but misery, cross and confusion in all we take in hand, but in man of knowledge and religious education there. and well affect, then look for no blessing nor assistance of god, but misery, cross and confusion in all we take in hand. but in man of knowledge and religious education there be ever find true humility, temperance and justice. join with confidence, valour and noble courage, such as be in moses, the man of god, who justice exceed and courage be incomparable, and yet the meek man that go upon the earth, ten of such will chase a hundred. no adversity can make they despair. their provident care will ever be to repulse injury and repress the insolent, to encourage the painful and best mind to employ the idle to some honest labour and to relieve with mercy and commiseration the most feeble, weak and mean member. repress the insolent, to encourage the painful and best mind, to employ the idle to some honest labour and to relieve with mercy and commiseration the most feeble, weak and mean member. and as for the general sort that shall go to be planter, be they never so poor, so they be honest and painful, the place will make they rich. all kind of artificer we must-first employ be carpenter, shipwrights, mason sawyer, brickemaker, bricklayer, plowman, sower planter, fisherman, cooper, smith, mettel-man, tailor, turner and such like, to make and fit all necessary for comfort and use of the colony and for such as be of no trade. if they be industrious, they shall have there employment enough for there be a world of mean to set many. use of the colony and for such as be of no trade. if they be industrious, they shall have there employment enough for there be a world of mean to set many thousand a work^, partly in such thing as i mention before, and many other profitable work, for no man must live idle there. and by this employment we may happy stop the course of those irregular youth of no religion that daily run from we to rome and rheims for exhibition, which after a little hammer and train there by parson and his imp, they become pliable for the impression of any villainy whatsoever, as appear by their position and practice at home and abroad. and hereby our mariner shall not lie idle, nor our owner. they become pliable for the impression of any villainy whatsoever, as appear by their position and practice at home and abroad. and hereby our mariner shall not lie idle, nor our owner. sell their ship for want of freight. you know how many good ship be daily, sell and make away to foreign nation. how many man, for want of employment, betake themselves to tunis, spain and florence, and to serve in course not warrantable, which will better beseem our own wall and border to be spread with such branch that their native country and not foreign prince may reap their fruit as be both exquisite navigator and resolute man for service as any the world afford. we intend to plant there, god will great, plenty of sugar. foreign prince may reap their fruit as be both exquisite navigator and resolute man for service as any the world afford. we intend to plant there- god will great- plenty of sugar cane, for which the soil and climate be very apt and fit, also linseed and rapeseeds to make oil which, because the soyle^s strong and cheap, may there be sow and the oil make to great benefit. we must plant also orange, lemon, almond, aniseed rice, cummin, cotten, wool, carowey seed, ginger, mad, olive, oris, sumacke and many such like which i can now name, all very good merchandise and will there grow and increase, as well as in italy or any other part of the straits, whence we fetch they now and in search the name all very good merchandise and will there grow and increase as well as in italy or any other part of the straits whence we fetch they now and in search the land, there be undoubted hope of find cochinell, the plant of rich indigo, graineberry, beaver, hide, pearl rich treasure, and the south sea lead to china with many other benefit which our daylight will discover. but of all other thing that god have deny that country, there be want of sheep to make woollen cloth, and this want of cloth must always be supply from england, whereby, when the colony be thorough increase and the indian bring to our civility as they will, in short time it will cause a mighty vent of english clothes. a. from england whereby, when the colony be thorough increase and the indian bring to our civility as they will, in short time it will cause a mighty vent of english clothes, a great benefit to our nation, and raise again of that ancient trade of clothing so much decay in england who lift up again. i think i see apparent approach by the good disposition of our best sort of citizen who willing engage themselves to undertake all new discovery, as into this of the west and by the north west to find out china, and unto the east, beyond the cape, into the red sea, the gulf of persia, the straits of sunda and among all the king of india, for the good and honour of our. unto the east, beyond the cape, into the red sea, the gulf of persia, the straits of sunda and, among all, the king of india, for the good and honour of our nation, which call to mind a blind prophecy in one of the sibell, that before the end of the world there shall be a discovery of all nation which shall come to be know and acquaint together, as one neighbour with another, which, since the confusion of tongue, have lyeu obscure and hide. but however that be, yet these good mind and resolution do serve for imitation to other and do deserve assure the best encouragement whereby we shall not still betake ourselves to small and little ship, as we daily do begin, but shall rear. serve for imitation to other and do deserve, assure the best encouragement whereby we shall not still betake ourselves to small and little ship, as we daily do begin, but shall rear again such merchant ship, both tall and stout, as no foreign sail that swim shall make they veil or stoop, whereby to make this little northern corner of the world to be, in short time, the rich storehouse and staple for merchandise in all europe. the second thing to make this plantation be money to be raise among the adventurer, wherein the soon and more deep man engage themselves. their charge will be the short and their gain the great, as in this last point which i have to speak for the good of each particular. more deep man engage themselves. their charge will be the short and their gain the great, as in this last point which i have to speak for the good of each particular adventurer. i will make it plain. first you shall understand that his majesty have grant we a enlargement of our charter with many ample privilege, wherein we have knight and gentleman of good place, name for the king, counsel of virginia to govern we, as also every planter and adventurer shall be insert in the patent by name. this ground be lay. we purpose present to make supply of man, woman and child, so many as we can to make the plantation. we call those planter that go in their person to dwell there and those present to make supply of man, woman and child, so many as we can to make the plantation. we call those planter that go in their person to dwell there and those adventurer that adventure their money and go not in person and both do make the member of one colony. we do account twelve pound ten shilling to be a single share adventure. every ordinary man or woman, if they will go and dwell there, and every child above ten year that shall be carry thither to remain, shall be allow for each of their person a single share, as if they have adventure. twelve pound ten shilling in money. every extraordinary man as divine governor, minister of state and justice, knight, gentleman, physician and such as. person a single share, as if they have adventure. twelve pound, ten shilling in money. every extraordinary man, as divine governor, minister of state and justice, knight, gentleman, physician and such as, be man of worth for special service, be all to go as planter and to execute their several function in the colony and be to be maintain at the common charge and be to receive their divident, as other do, at seven year end and they be to be agree with all before they go and to be rate by the council according to the value of their person, which shall be set down and register in a book that it may always appear what people have go to the plantation, at what time they go. the value of their person, which shall be set down and register in a book that it may always appear, what people have go to the plantation, at what time they go and how their person be value. and likewise if any that go to be planter will lay down money to the treasurer, it shall be also register and their share enlarge according, be it for more or less. all charge of settle and maintain the plantation and of make supply shall be bear in a joint stock of the adventurer for seven year after the date of our new enlargement, during which time there shall be no adventure nor good return in private from thence, neither by master, mariner, planter nor passenger. they shall be restrain. the date of our new enlargement, during which time there shall be no adventure nor good return in private from thence, neither by master, mariner, planter nor passenger. they shall be restrain by bond and search that, as we supply from hence to the planter, at our own charge, all necessary for food and apparel for fortify and build of house in a joint stock, so they be also to return from thence the increase and fruit of their labour for the use and advancement of the same joint stock till the end of seven year, at which time we purpose, god will, to make a division by commissioner appoint, of all the land grant unto we by his majesty, to every of the colony according to each. at which time we purpose god will to make a division by commissioner appoint of all the land grant unto we by his majesty, to every of the colony according to each man. several adventure agree with our register book, which we doubt not will be for every share of twelve pound, ten shilling, five hundred acre at least. now, if any think that we shall be tie to a continual charge of make new supply for seven year, let they conceive thus much that if we do it thorough at the first, by engage ourselves at once in furnish, many man and other mean assure after the second year the return from thence will be able, with a overplus, to make supply at large, so that our at once. in furnish many man and other mean assure after the second year the return from thence will be able, with a overplus to make supply at large, so that our purse shall be free and the overplus of stock will also grow to greatness, which stock be also, as the land to be divide, equal at seven year end or soon, or so often as the company shall think fit for the greatness of it to make a divident, and as by this we shall be soon free from charge and expense, so there grow a great benefit to the planter by bestow their labour cheerful to make return of stock, for hereby, the soon they f^eeing we from disbursment, the more our share and portion. grow a great benefit to the planter by bestow their labour cheerful to make return of stock for hereby, the soon they f^eeing we from disbursment, the more our share and portion will be lessen in the divident of stock and land at seven year end, whereby the less come to we, the more will be to they. so that here be no discouragement any way, if man will be capable to do themselves good, but if we will be so wise to linger and lie in the wind to hear what news to bring in our stock next year, and when we be behind for four or five adventure we come drop in with one or two and still run in arrearage for twice. so much for our stock next year, and when we be behind for four or five adventure, we come drop in with one or two and still run in arrearage for twice. so much, for i know many that will bring in stock among we, but they lie out to see what success first, and upon such like term, be this gentlemanlike or marchantlike- in truth it be paltry and such as- will bring all to nought. if we shall be so, mind too, and i tell you true, our single share will make but a hungry plantation if we do not at the least double they now, and therefore i urge it the more for that the very life of all be now in the begin, by make our supply we do not at the least double they now, and therefore i urge it the more for that the very life of all be now in the begin. by make our supply thorough, and thence will our gain arise both soon and certain. yet i grant that other may come in hereafter at any time, either to adventure h^s person or money or both. but if there be spend one year of the seven before he come in, or he that come in with the first shall notwithstanding be a year behind in supply. they shall be both alike shorten in a seven part of the divident both of stock and land, and if two year behind, then shorten two seventh, and if but six month, yet a. be both alike, shorten in a seven part of the divident both of stock and land, and if two year behind, then shorten two seventh and if but six month yet a fourteen part. for every man be register according to the time his money or person begin to adventure or make supply, so that they which come late get not the (@) of those that bear the first brunt of the business. and this will neither advantage he that withhold nor hinder ^im that be forward, for whatsoever fall from he that be slack will be find of he that supply in due time. but every man that come in now in the first of these seven year and shall afterward upon all occasion perform i^ due be find of he that supply in due time. but every man that come in now in the first of these seven year, and shall afterward, upon all occasion, perform i^ due time, every twelve pound ten shilling, so bring in, shall be account a entice, single share, and shall receive according, without abridgement, as it have be bring in when the enterprise first begin and not otherwise. and as for the division of land at seven year end, which some may object, will be little worth and unequal d^uided. let they understand that no man shall have his lot entire in one place to be all of the best or all of the worst, but each man shall have proportionable to his adventure in three or four. shall have his lot entire in one place to be all of the best or all of the worst. but each man shall have, proportionable to his adventure in three or four distinct difference that may be make in the goodness or badness of the ground by commissioner, equal choose by the adventurer here and the planter there. and as for the value and little worth now of those ground in virginia, we know that in england, within these thirty or forty year the yearly rent of those ground in many place be not worth five shilling. that now do go for forty and more and howsoever, those ground in virginia be now but little worth indeed. yet time and mean will make they better, consider how they. shilling that now do go for forty and more and howsoever. those ground in virginia be now but little worth indeed. yet time and mean will make they better consider how they pass our ground in england, both in regard of the soil and climate fit for many precious use and also in how many several place we purpose to plant our colony and not to bestow our cost upon james-towne only and upon the ground lie thereabouts and to let all the rest lie barren. for see his majesty have grant to our colony as much circuit of ground as all england almost. we purpose- god will, if we may be, supply with sufficient mean to settle out of hand six or seven plantation more, all upon. much circuit of ground as all england almost. we purpose. god will, if we may be, supply with sufficient mean to settle out of hand six or seven plantation more, all upon or near our main-river as capital town, twenty mile each from other. and every plantation shall manure and husband the land and ground, lie near unto it and allot for the circuit thereof, and shall all endeavour for a joint stock and shall be still supply from hence, with more money and provision and against any public injury, shall be ready to unite and join themselves together. and by this mea^es we shall come to have our divident in land of worth and well manure, which will be either buy or rent of we at a join themselves together and by this mea^es we shall come to have our divident in land of worth and well manure, which will be either buy or rent of we, at a good value, by the planter or by such as intend hereafter to inhabit there, as also by these several plantation which, happy one place better fit then another. we shall bring forth more, several sort of merchandise and be also better fortify and beside the planter, will be in such hope to have their own share and habitation in those land which they have so, husband, that it will cause contend and emulation among they, which shall bring forth the most profitable and beneficial fruit for the joint stock, whereby, undoubted, we shall be soon free. so, husband, that it will cause contend and emulation among they, which shall bring forth the most profitable and beneficial fruit for the joint stock, whereby, undoubted, we shall be soon free from further expense. our gain will grow and our stock increase. we shall fell our timber, see our plank and quick, make good ship there and shall return from thence with good employment. a hundred sail of good ship yearly, all which good and much more, we shall withstand and bring ourselves into a labyrinth if we pinch and spare our purse now, therefore, not to hold you long with many word, be near exchange time, as i take it, remember what i have say in prove my proposition and take my conclusion in a word. not to hold you long with many word. be near exchange time as i take it. remember what i have say in prove my proposition and take my conclusion in a word or two. see our provocation be so many, our cause and title good. avaunt all idle oracle that seek to bar. we, the wisdom of the wise, say in these case, whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy. might our forefather not look out in time lose the prime and fair proffer of the great wealth in the world, and we tax their omission for it. yet now it fall out that we, their child be. try in the like. there be yet a excellent portion leave, and by divine providence, and we tax their omission for it. yet now it fall out that we, their child be. try in the like. there be yet a excellent portion leave and by divine providence, offer to our choice which, see, we have arm to embrace. let it not be account hereafter as a prize in the hand of fool that have no heart to use it. the honour of our nation be now very great by his majesty mean, and we his subject can enlarge and uphold it by gaze o^ and talk what have be do, but by do that good which may be commend hereafter, if we sit still and let slip occasion, we shall gather rust and do unfeather our own wing, commit the folly of the. by do that good which may be commend hereafter, if we sit still and let slip occasion, we shall gather rust and do unfeather our own wing, commit the folly of the wise roman herein that in time of their glory flow with the conquest and spoil of the world and have get the goddess victoria to rome, they clip her wing and set she up among their god that she may take her flight no more as she have former do from the grecian and other, and so effeminate their valour with idleness and security. it bring confusion and ruin to their state. let not such a prize of hopeful event, so late purchase by the hazard of our valiant man in the deep sea of foreign. it bring confusion and ruin to their state. let not such a prize of hopeful event, so late purchase by the hazard, of our valiant man in the deep sea of foreign danger, now perish in the haven by our neglect. the life of our friend already plant, and of those noble knight and gentleman that intend to go short, must lie at our mercy to be relieve and supply by we, or to be make a prey unto other, though we fear not the subject of any prince in amity that they will offer wrong unto we and howsoever. we hear tale and rumour of this. and that yet be not dismay, for i tell you, if we find that any miscreant have wrong or go about unto we and howsoever we hear tale and rumour of this. and that yet be not dismay, for i tell you, if we find that any miscreant have wrong or go about to hurt our few hundred there, we shall be ready to right it again with many thousand. like the giant anteus who often foil, renew his strength the more and consider well that great work of free the poor indian from the devourer, a compassion that every good man but pass by will show unto a beast. their child, when they come to be save, will bless the day when first their father see your face. if those undaunted english and scottish captain that so often venture their life and spill their blood to reconquer palestina. save will bless the day when first their father see your face. if those undaunted english and scottish captain that so often venture their life and spill their blood to reconquer palestina from the turk and saracen have see the gap so open in their day and the way lead to so many goodly purchase certain, it have not now be leave for we to do. how strange a thing be this that all the state of europe have be a sleep so long that for a hundred year and more the wealth and riches of the east and west shall run no other current but into one coffer. so long till the run over spread itself abundant among a factious crew of new create friar and that the east and west shall run no other current but into one coffer so long till the run over, spread itself abundant among a factious crew of new, create friar, and that to no more special end, then, with instigate bloody plot to pierce the heart of a christian state and true religion. it be long since i read in a little treatise make by frith, a english martyr, a excellent foretell touch, the happiness of these northern land and of great wonder that shall be wrought by scot and english before the come of christ. but i have almost forget and can ready call it to mind as i will, and therefore i omit it now, protest unto you. it will be my grief and sorrow to but i have almost forget and can ready call it to mind as i will, and therefore i omit it now, protest unto you, it will be my grief and sorrow to be exempt from the company of so many honourable mind man and from this enterprise tend to so many good end. and then, which i true think this day there be not a work of more excellent hope under the sun. and far excel all circumstance, weigh those noble deed of alexander hercules and those heathen monarch for which they be deem god among their posterity. and so i leave it to your consideration with a memorable note of thomas lord howard, earl of surry, when k henry the eight, with his noble at dover, take. their posterity. and so i leave it to your consideration with a memorable note of thomas lord howard, earl of surry. when k henry the eight with his noble at dover take ship for turwin and turney and bid the say earl farewell who he make governor in his absence, the story say, the nobleman weep and take his leave with tear. a admirable good nature in a valiant mind, grieve to be, leave behind his prince and peer in such a honourable service.