a discovery of the bermuda, now call the summer land. i be in ship, call the sea-venture, with sir thomas gate, our governor, sir george summer and captain newport, three most worthy honour gentleman who balour and fortitude the world must needs take notice of and that, in most honourable design, bind for virginia in the height of thirty degree of northerly latitude, or there about we be take with a most sharp and cruel storm upon the five and twenty day of july 1609.. which do not only separate we from the residue of our fleet, which be eight in number, but with the violent work of the sea our ship become so shake, tear and leak that she receive so much water as cover two tire. of hogshead above the ballast, that our man stand up to the middle with bucket, barito and kettle to bail out the water and continual pump for three day and three night together without any intermission. and yet the water seem rather to increase, then to diminish in so much that all our man be utter, spend, tire and disable for long labour, be even resolve, without any hope of their life, to shut up the hatch and to have commit themselves to the mercy of the sea, which be say to be merciless, or rather to the mercy of their mighty god and redeemer, who mercy exceed all his work, see no help nor hope in the apprehension of man, reason that any mother child can escape. that inevitable danger which every man have propose and digest to himself of present sink so that some of they have some good and comfortable water in the ship, fetch they and drink one to the other, take their last, leave one of the other until their more joyful and happy meeting in a more bless world. when it please god, out of his most gracious and merciful providence so to direct and guide our ship, be leave to the mercy of the sea. for her most advantage, that sir george summer sit upon the poop of the ship where he sit three day and three night together, without meal, meat and little or no sleep. coun the ship to keep she as upright as he can, for otherwise she must needs instant have founder most wish and happy descry land whereupon he most comfortable, encourage the company to follow their pump and by no mean to cease bail out of the water with their bucket and kettle, whereby they be so overweary and their spirit so spend with long, fast and continuance of their labour that for the most part they be fall asleep in corner. and wheresoever they chance, first to fit or lie, but hear news of land wherewith they grow to be somewhat revive, be carry with will and desire beyond their strength, every man bustle up and gather his strength and feeble spirit together to perform as much as their weak force will permit they, through which weak mean it please god to work so strong as the water be, stay for that little time which, as we all much fear, be the last period of our breathe, and the ship keep from present sink when it please god to send she, within half a english mile of that land that sir george summer have not long before descry, which be the land of the bermuda, and there neither do our ship sink but, more fortunate, in so great a misfortune, fall in between two rock where she be fast lodge, and lock for further budge, whereby we gain not only sufficient time, with the present help of our boat and skiffe, safe to set and convey our man ashore, which be one hundred and fifty in number, but after ward have time and leisure to save some good part of our good and provision which the water have not spoil, with all the tackle of the ship and much of the iron about she which be necessary, not a little avail able for the building and furnish of a new ship and pinnace which we make there for the transport and carry of we to virginia. but our delivery be not more strange in fall so opportune and happy upon the land as our feed and preservation be beyond our hope and all man expectation. most admirable for the land of the bermuda, as every man know that have hear or read of they be never inhabit by any christian or heathen people but ever esteem and repute a most prodigious and enchant place, afford nothing but gust, storm and foul weather which make every navigator and mariner to avoid. they as scylla and charybdis or as they will shun the devil himself and no man be ever hear to make for the place. but as against their will, they have, by storm and dangerousness of the rock, lie seven league into the sea. suffer shipwreck. yet do we find there the air so temperate and the country so abundant, fruitful of all fit necessary for the sustentation and preservation of man life, that most in a manner of all, our provision of bread, beer and victual be quite spoil in lie long drown in salt water notwithstanding, we be there for the space of nine month, few day over, not only well, refresh, comfort and with good satiety content, but out of the abundance thereof provide we some reasonable quantity and proportion of provision to carry we for virginia and to maintain ourselves and that company we find there, to the great relief of they as it fall out in their so great extremity and in respect of the shortness of time until it. please, god, that by my lord la war come thither their store be better supply and great and better provision we may have make if we have have better mean for the store and transportation thereof. wherefore my opinion sincere of this island be that, whereas it have, be and be still account the most dangerous, infortunate and most forlorn place of the world, it be in truth the rich, healthful and please land, the quantity and bigness thereof consider and mere natural, as ever, man set foot upon the particular profit and benefit whereof shall be more especial insert and hereunto annex, which every man, to his own private knowledge that be there, can avouch and justify for a truth upon the eight and twenty day. of july 1609.. after the extremity of the storm be something qualify, we fall upon the shore at the bermuda where, after our general sir thomas gate, sir george summer and captain new port have, by their provident carefulness, land all their man and so much of the good and provision out of the ship as be not utter spoil. every man dispose and apply himself to search for and to seek out such relief and sustentation as the country afford. and sir george summer, a man mu^ed to extremity and know what thereunto belong, be in this service, neither idle nor backward but present by his careful industry, go and find out sufficient of many kind of fish, and so plentiful thereof that in half a hour he take so many great fish with hook as do suffice the whole company one day. and fish be there so abundant that if a man step into the water they will come round about he, so that man be fain to get out for fear of bite. these fish be very fat and sweet and of that proportion and bigness that three of they will convenient lade two man- those we call rock-fish- beside there be such abundance of mullet. that with a scene may be. take at one draught, one thousand at the least, and infinite store of pilchard with diverse kind of great fish, the name of they unknown to i, of crayfish, very great one and so great store as that there have be take in one night with make light even sufficient to feed the whole company a day. the country afford great abundance of hog, as that there have be, take by sir george summer, who be the first that hunt for they, to the number of two and thirty at one time, which he bring to the company in a boat build by his own hand. there be fowl in great number upon the land where they breed that there have be. take in two or three hour a thousand at the least. the bird be of the bigness of a good pigeon and lay egg as big as hen egg upon the sand where they come and lay they daily, although man sit down among they. that there have be take up in one morning by sir thomas gate man one thousand of egg, and sir george summer man come a little distance of time after they have, stay there whilst they come and lay their egg among they that they bring away as many more with they, with many young bird very fat and sweet, another sea foul there be that lie in little hole in the ground like unto a cony-hole and be in great number exceed good meat, very fat and sweet, those we have in the winter, and their egg be white and of that bigness that they be not to be know from hen egg. the other bird egg be speckle and of a different colour there be also. great store and plenty of heron, and those so familiar and tame that we beat they down from the tree with stone and staff. but such be young heron beside many white heron, without so much as a black or gray feather on they, with other small bird so tame and gentle that a man walk in the wood with a stick and whistle to they. they will come and gaze on you so near that you may strike and kill many of they with your stick, and with sing and hollow you may do the like. there be also great store of tortose, which some call turtle, and those so great that i have see a bushel of egg in one of their belly, which be sweet. than any hen egg and the tortose itself, be all very good meat and yield great store of oil which be as sweet as any butter, and one of they will suffice fifty man a meal at the least, and of these have be take great store with two boat, at the least forty in one day. the country yield diverse fruit, as prickle, pear, great abundance, which continue green upon the tree all the year. also great plenty of mulberry, white and red, and on the same be great store of silkworm which yield cod of silk, both white and yellow, be some course and some fine. and there be a tree call a palmito tree, which have a very sweet berry upon which the hog do. most seed but our man find the sweetness of. they do willing share with the hog, for they they be very pleasant and wholesome which make they careless almost of any bread with their meat. which occasion we to carry in a manner all that store of flower and meal we do or can save for virginia. the head of the palmito tree be very good meat, either raw or sodden. it yield a head which weigh about twenty pound and be far better meat than any cabbage. there be a infite number of cedar tree, the fair, i think, in the world, and those bring forth a very sweet berry and wholesome to eat. the country, for as much as i can find myself or hear by other, afford no venomous creature or so much as a rat or mouse or any other thing unwholesome. there be great store of pearl, and some of they very fair, round and oriental, and you shall find at least one hundred seed of pearl in one oyster. there have be likewise find some good quantity of amber greece and that of the best sort. there be also great plenty of whale which i conceive be very easy to be kill, for they come so usual and ordinary to the shore that we hear they oftentimes in the night a bed and have see many of they near the shore in the day time. there be bear upon the bermuda, at the time of our be there, two child, the one a man child there baptize by the name of bermuda and a woman child baptize by the name of barmuda, as also there be a marriage between two english people upon that island. this island, i mean the main island, with all the break land adjacent, be make in the form of a half moon, but a little more round and divide into many break land and there be many good harbour in it. but we can find but one especial place to go in, or rather to go out from it, which be not altogether free from some danger, where there be three fathom water at the entrance thereof, but within six, seven or eight fathom at the least, where you may safe lie, land-locked from the danger of all wind and weather, and moor to the tree the come into it be so narrow and straight between the rock as that it will, with small store of munition, be fortify and easy defend against the force of the potent king of europe, such advantage the place afford. there be also plenty of hawk and very good tobacco, as i think, which through forgetfulness i have almost omit now have finish. and rig our ship and pinnace. the one call the deliverance, the pinnace which we build there, the patience we prepare and make ourselves ready to ship for virginia. have powder, some store of hog flesh for provision thither and the company thereof for some reasonable time, but be compel to make salt there for the same purpose, for all our salt be spend and spoil before we recover the shore. we carry with we also a good portion of tortoise-oyle which either for fry or bake, do we very great pleasure. it be very sweet, nourish and wholesome. the great defect: we find there be tar and pitch for our ship and pinnace in stead, whereof we be force to make lime there of a hard kind. of stone and use it which, for the present occasion and necessity, with some war, we find cast up by the sea from some ship wrack, serve the turn to pay the seam of the pinnace sir george summer build, for which he have neither pitch nor tar, so that god, in the supply of all our want, beyond all measure, show himself still merciful unto we that i may accomplish our intend age. to virginia, for which i confident hope he do yet reserve a blessing in store, and to the which, i presume, every honest and religious heart will ready give their amen. when all thing be make ready and commodious, fit the wind come fair. we set sail and put off from the bermuda the ten day of may in the year 1610. and arrive at james town in virginia the four and twenty day of the same month, where i find some threescore person live, and be then some three week or there about pass and not hear of any supply. it be think fit, by a general consent, to use the best mean for the preservation of all those people that be live, be all in number two hundred person. and so, upon the eight of june, one thousand six hundred and ten, we embark at james town, not have above fourteen day virtual, and so be determine. to direct our course for newfoundland, there to refresh we and supply ourselves with victual to bring we home. but it please god to dispose otherwise of we and to give we better mean for be all of we. ship in four pinnace and depart from the town almost down half the river we meet my lord la war, come up with three ship, wet, furnish with victual, which revive all the company and give they great content. and after some few day, my lord understand of the great plenty of hog and fish be at the bermuda and the necessity of they in virginia, be desirous to send thither to supply himself with those thing for the better comfort of his man and the plantation of the. country, whereupon sir george summer, be a man best acquaint with the place and be willing to do service unto his prince and country, without any respect of his own private gain, and be of threescore year of age at the least, out of his worthy and valiant mind, offer himself to undertake to perform, with god help, that dangerous voyage for the bermuda, for the better relief and comfort of the people in virginia and for the better plantation of it, which offer my lord la war, very willing and thankful, accept. and so, upon the nineteen of june, sir george summer embark himself at james town in a small barge of thirty ton or thereabouts that he build at the bermuda, wherein he labour from morning. until night, as due as any workman do, labour for wage and build she all with cedar, with little or no iron work at all, have in she but one boult which be in the kilson notwithstanding, thanks be to god, she bring we in safety to virginia and so i trust he will protect he and send he well back again to his heart, desire and the great comfort of all the company there. a addition send home by the last ship from our colony in the bermuda, be bind for the summer. land in the ship call the plough. we embark the 28. of april 1612. so pass down to gravesend. we anchor at tilbery hope until the five of may the wind come fair. we. put forth and come to the down the six of may, where we stay till the nine and then set forward. we have a fair and comfortable passage and, by god blessing, find so direct a course that on the eleven of july, in the morning betwixt nine and ten of the clock, we descry our hope and desire land, and in the afternoon of the same day, about three a clock, we arrive in a very safe harbour near s george island. there we land all our man and woman and have be at a anchor abdue a hour before we can hear of our three man which have be leave there. as soon as we have land, all our company, we go all to prayer and give thanks unto the lord for our safe arrival. and while we be at prayer we see our three man come row down to we, the sight of who do much rejoice we. so they welcome we and we the like to they. again we sing a psalm and praise the lord for our safe meeting and go to supper. the next day be the sabbath day, which we dedicate to god in the best manner we can. we abide still in the foresay island with all the rest of our company till monday morning, be the thirteen of july. then we go up with our ship and company high into the harbour. to the place where these three man have plant themselves. and whereas many english man will have think that we shall have find these three man either dead or more like savage, then civil, i assure you all my friend and acquaintance, and so general to all my country man in england, we find they civil, honest and religious and make conscience of their way. you shall not hear a oath proceed out of their mouth, vain and idle talk they use not, and it seem apparent unto our eye that they have not be idle, give for howsoever to be. but three of they leave in such a desolate place, not inhabit nor assure of any to come to. they will have make most man faint in. any thing they shall have take in hand. yet be it not so with these man. nay, they show unto we a good example. who be now come to they, for they have plant corn, great store of wheat, bean, tobacco and melon, with many other good thing for the use of man beside they have wrought upon timber in square, and saw of cedar tree, for they intend to build a small pinnace to carry they into virginia, be almost out of hope and comfort of our come, because captain davies his time be to have, be with they long before we come, and thus they spend their time in labour, employ themselves in one good action or other. now to certify you the truth of the. state of the country, i be loath to write that which i have see by reason you will condemn my writing as i fear and think it to be. but false report come from we to draw more company hither, for i perceive the world be give too much to such surmise. but why shall i fear to write that which i know to be true when, as all, the ship company will or may approve it but can reprove it as first the captain, the master and his mate and all the rest of the sailor first? i will begin with the fish and fowl which the country do yield. we be no soon come within a league of the land but a company of fish as it be, meet we and never leave we till we be come to a anchor within the harbour and as soon as we have pass over our business and all thing safe and in order, with a hook and line, we take more than all our whole company be able to eat so that there be enough to feed many more. the next day after the sabbath, we go with our net and boat and if we will have load two boat we may, and so may you do. day by day. fish do so abound and they be of these sort: mullet breame, hogge-fish, rock-fish and lobster with more sort. of other fish, which i can name turkle, there be of a mighty bigness. one turkle will serve, or suffice, three or four score at a meal, especial. if it be a she turkle, for she will have as many egg as will suffice fifty or threescore at a meal. this i can assure you. they be very good and wholesome meat. none of it bad, no, not so much as the very gut and maw of it, for they be exceed fat and make as good tripe as your beast belly in england. and for foul we go the three day of our arrival unto the bird-iland, as we call they, and use neither stick nor stone-bow nor gun. we take they up with our hand. so many as we will, that every one of the company be to have some three, some four a piece. three for a child, boy or girl, for a man, four, then reckon what those that serve some fourscore people do amount unto. but this be for certain, if we will have bring away twice so many more we may. but our order be not to take fish or fowl but for one or two meal because that by reason of the fly and heat of the country they will not keep especial these two month, june and july, and some part of august, some six day after our come, we send out for hog. so the company which go out, bring home some for the meat of. they- i hold your mutton of england- not of so sweet and pleasant a taste. fowl there be, of diverse sort, but among all there be a bird like unto you, which you call in england a crow, which though they talk in the barmuda language, yet their tongue shall walk as fast as any english woman. we can go up into the wood, but they will follow after we with such a outcry that it will fret a man to hear they. they be very good meat, fat and as white flesh as a chicken we many time make some of. they leave their talk with stone or cudgel, for they will sit and face you hard at your hand, and whereas it be report that this land of the bermuda, with the land about it, which be many, at the least a hundred, be enchant and keep with evil and wicked spirit, it be a most idle and false report. god grant that we have bring no wicked spirit with we, or that there come none after we, for we find none there so ill as ourselves, nor the three man never see any evil or hurtful thing in the land all the time since their come, and we have find the like since our land. no, nor any noisome thing or hurtful more than a poor fly. which tarry not above two or three month for the inclination of the weather. consider in what climate it lie. we have have for the space of some forty day no rain but very cool and fresh gale of wind, yet in the daytime very hot. but we agree with it very well and not a man that have lie sick or disease but all like well and follow and employ themselves to one business or other for the fruit which the land yield. they be the mulberry great store and pear, which have in they a red liquor, as the pomegranate have, or somewhat red, but very wholesome. if you eat a hundred at one time you shall never surfeit of they if you eat some proportion. of they, they will bind. but if you exceed in eat of they, then be they of the contrary operation. yet never any that hurt themselves by they. eat they never so many. it be certain that one man eat above a peck of they in some ten hour and be never the worse. we have a kind of berrie upon the cedar tree, very pleasant to eat, and for the palmito tree the top of it be a great deal sweet and wholesome than any cabedge. in some of our land there grow pepper, but not so good as our indian pepper. diverse sort of other good thing there be, which the several time of the year bring forth one after another, but the top of the palmito tree be in season and good all the year. for the ground i hold it, the rich ground to bear forth fruit whatsoever one shall lay into it that be in the world and very easy and light for dig, so that if a man will labour he may turn up a great quantity in a day. for it be a fat, sandy ground and of colour, a brownered, after the time of our land. many of the company dig certain plait of ground and sow diverse sort of seed to make trial of the ground, and for certain they be see. above the ground, spring up the four day after their sow and among all the rest of the seed, the cucumber and the melon be forward. we have set and sow fourscore and one sort of seed. it be ten day before the ship come away and for the most part they be all come up. of necessity i must needs mention the palm-tree once again. i have find it so good: take a hatchet and cut he, or a augar and bear he, and it yield a very pleasant liquor, much like unto your sweet wine. it bear likewise a berry, in bigness of a prune and in taste, much like also. we have olive grow with we, but no great store. many other good, excellent thing. we have grow with, we, which this short time will not permit i to write of so large as i may, but this be of truth- that hog, turkle fish and fowl do abound as dust of the earth for ambergris and pearl. we have not have leisure in so few day since our arrival to go look out for the one or to fish for the other. but the three man which be leave there have find of they both. also they have make a great deal of tobacco and if some will come that have skill in make it, it will be very commodious both to the merchant and to the maker of it and for the silkworm. if any be bring over and some of skill to use they, there will be very much good do with they. for the very spider in these our land do weave perfect fine silk, both yellow and white. the timber of the country consist of three sort. the one be the cedar, very fine timber to work upon, of colour red and very sweet. the other sort we have no name for for there be none in the company. have see the like in other country before we come. some do think it to be, but it be not. so it be very fine wood, of colour yellow and it bear a leaf like unto a walnut and the rind or bark be much like a malnut tree and the bark, if one taste of it, will bite one tongue, as if it be guinea pepper. that will also be very sweet. the other be much like unto the second, but only it be white. the palm-tree be no timber but it grow up of a great height and no tree grow like unto it for other tree, as they grow up in length, so they grow in bigness, but the palm-tree the high it grow, so the small it grow. there be another kind of wood. which some also think be, and some of it be come over. for example, other kind of tree there be, but no timber tree they be, but among all the rest there grow a kind of tree call mangrowes. they grow very strange and will make a man wonder to see the man of their grow, whereof you shall hear at more leisure. also, among all the of fish, there be one very strange fish, and beautiful to behold. we call it a angell-fish as well. it may be, for as you see, the picture of a angel make, so be this, and it show of many colour, both in the water swim and out of the water, and as dainty a fish of meat as a salmon. or rather better, the plentiful time of our fruit be in your winter, from october till it be may or about the latter end of may be the plentiful time of our fruit, but some we have all the year of one fruit or other. the climate i hold to be very good and agreeable with our constitution of england and for the virtual, very wholesome and good for the three man which be leave there, be very fat and fair, not tan or burn in the sun so much as we which come last and they say themselves they never be sick all the time of their be there, and one of they have be there three year and upward one, christopher carter, by name, a buckingham-shire. man bear in wickham or thereabouts and for such extraordinary weather for thunder and lightning, as it be report of these land. i can see no such matter but more temperate and better weather than you have in england. we have go a hunt and lie out night by night for hog and if we have be wet by weather or by wade we may lay we down so wet to sleep with a palm-tree leaf or two under we and one above we, and we sleep sound without any take cold or be disturb with any thing else. your air in england be far more subject to disease then these land be whale. there be great store at that time of the year when they come in. which time of their come be in february and tarry till june. likewise, there come in two other fish with they, but such as the whale have rather be without their company. one be call a swordfish, the other a threasher. the swordfish swim under the whale and prick he upward, the threasher keep above he and with a mighty great thing, like unto a flail, he so bange the whale that he will roar as though it thunder. and do give he such blow with his weapon that you will think it to be a crack of great shot. hasty occasion of business do make i write somewhat hasty and leave out many thing which be fit to be speak of, wherefore against my will i be. force to leave my work, which i have begunue before i come into the midst of it, but i hope it will suffice you that be my friend to pass it over in the best manner you can, for there be much break english of it and bad pen regard, i pray you, the matter, not the manner, the truth of the story and not the style. but this i say to they that have adventure in virginia, especial to such as think they shall lose by that worthy action: let they do the like to we, and i make no doubt, but we shall in short time give they satisfaction for our enchant land, which be keep, as some say, with spirit will wrong no friend nor foe, but yield all man their expectation. if we can praise god for so great a blessing and labour to make benefit of it to his glory, the honour of our religion, the strength of our country and good of ourselves, and if you in england will do what be fit for you, as we will, by god help what be fit for we, we hope short. to see the day that man shall say: bless be god that suffer sir thomas gate and sir george summer to be cast away upon these land. a copy of the article which master r more, governor deputy of the summer land, propound to the company that be there with he to be subscribe, unto which both he and they subscribe the second of august in his house, 1612. which about the same time he send into england to the worshipful company of the adventurer. we who have here under subscribe our name, be by the great goodness of god safe. arrive at the summer land with purpose here to inhabit, do hereby promise and bind ourselves to the performance of the several article hereafter follow, and that, in the presence of the most glorious god who have in mercy bring we hither first, we do faithful promise and by these present solemn bind ourselves evermore to worship that aforesaid only true and everliving god, who have make the heaven and the earth, the sea and all that therein be, and that, according to those rule that be prescribe in his most holy word, and ever to continue in that faith into the which we be baptize in the church of england and to stand in defence of the same against all atheist, papist, anabaptist, brownist and all other. heretic and sectary whatsoever, dissent from the say, word and faith. second, because the keep of the sabboth-day, holy be that, wherein a principal part of god worship do consist, and be, as it be, the key of all the other part thereof. we do therefore, in the presence aforesaid, promise that we will set apart all our own labour and employment on that day, unless it be those that be of mere necessity. much more vain and unfruitful practice, and apply ourselves to the hear of god word, prayer and all other exercise of religion in his word, require to the uttermost of our power, three: see the true worship of god and a holy life can be sever. we do therefore promise in the presence aforesaid that to the uttermost of our power we will live together in do that which be just both towards god and man, and in particular, we will forbear to take the most holy name of god in vain, in ordinary swear by it or any other thing, or by scoff or vain abuse of his most holy word, or to use curse or filthy speech or any other thing forbid in god most holy word. as also to live together without steal one from another or quarrel one with another or slander one of another, and to avoid all thing that stand not with the good estate of a christian church and well govern commonwealth, as also to embrace the contrary as justice and peace, love and all other thing that stand with the good and comfort of society. four: whereas we be here together, far remote from our native soil of england and yet be indeed the natural subject of our most royal and gracious king james of england, scotland, france and ireland king, defender of the faith, etc. we do, therefore, in the presence aforesaid, solemn promise ever more to continue the loyal subject of our say, sovereign king, his heir and successor, and never to revolt from he or they unto any other whatsoever, but evermore to acknowledge his supreme government. five: whereas we be send hither by diverse adventurer of the city of london and other part of the realm of england, we do here, in the presence, aforesaid, promise to use all diligence for the good of the plantation and not to purloin or embezzle any of the prohibit commodity out of the general estate, but to use all faithfulness, as it become christian to do, as also to be obedient to all such governor or governor, or their deputy or deputy, as be or shall be by they send to govern we, as also to yield all reverence towards the ministry or minister of the gospel send or to be send. six and last, we do, here, in presence, aforesaid, promise: the lord assist we that. if, at any time hereafter, any foreign power shall attempt to put we out of this, our lawful possession. not cowardly to yield up the same, but manful to fight as true english man for the defence of the commonwealth we live in and gospel we profess, and that while we have breath we will not yield to any that shall invade we upon any condition whatsoever.