a discovery of the bermuda, other wise call the i will of devil, i be in ship, call the sea-venture with sir thomas gate, our governor, sir george summer and captain newport, three most worthy honour gentleman who, valour and fortitude the world must needs, take notice off and that, in most honourable design, bind for virginia in the height of thirty degree of northerly latitude or thereabouts. we be take with a most sharp and cruel storm, upon the five and twenty day of july 1609.. which do not only separate we from the residue of our fleet, which be eight in number, but with the violent work of the sea, our ship become so shake, tear and leak that she receive so much water as cover. two ^ire of hogshead above the ballast, that our man stand up to the middle with bucket and kettle to bail out the water and continual pump for three day and three night together without any intermission. and yet the water seem rather to increase, then to diminish in so much that all our man be utter, spend, tire and disable for long labour, be even resolve, without any hope of their life, to shut up the hatch and to have commit themselves to the mercy of the sea, which be say to be merciless, or rather to the mercy of their mighty god and redeemer, who mercy exceed all his work, see no help nor hope in the apprehension of man, reason that any mother child can. escape that inevitable danger, which every man have propose and digest to himself, of present sink so that some of they have some good and comfortable water in the ship, fetch they and drink one to the other, take their last, leave one of the other until their more joyful and happy meeting in a more bless world. when it please god, out of his most gracious and merciful providence so to direct and guide our ship, be leave to the mercy of the sea for her most advantage, that sir george summer sit upon the poop of the ship where he sit three day and three night together, without meal, meat and little or no sleep. coun the ship to keep she as upright as he can. for otherwise she must needs instant have founder most wish happy descry land whereupon he most comfortable, encourage the company to follow their pump and by no mean to cease bail out of the water with their bucket and kettle, whereby they be so over weary and their spirit so spend with long, fast and continuance of their labour that for the most part they be fall asleep in corner and wheresoever they chance first to sit or lie but hear news of land wherewith they grow to be somewhat revive, be carry with will and desire beyond their strength. every man bustle up and gather his strength and feeble spirit together to perform as much as their weak force will permit. he through which weak mean it. please god to work so strong as the water be, stay for that little time which, as we all much fear, be the last period of our breathe, and the ship keep from present sink when it please god to send she, within half a english mile of that land that sir george summer have not long before descry, which be the island of the bermuda, and there neither do our ship sink but, more fortunate, in so great a misfortune, fall in between two rock, where she be fast lodge and lock for further budge, whereby we gain not only sufficient time, with the present help of our boat and skiff, safe to set and convey our man ashore, which be one hundred and fifty in number. but afterward have time and leisure to save some good part of our good and provision which the water have not spoil, with all the tackle of the ship and much of the iron about she which be necessary, not a little available for the building and furnish of a new ship and pinnace which we make there for the transport and carry of we to virginia. but our delivery be not more strange in fall so opportune and happy upon the land as our feed and preservation be beyond our hope and all man expectation. most admirable for the land of the bermuda, as every man know that have hear or read of they be. never inhabit by any christian or heathen people but ever esteem and repute. a most prodigious and enchant place afford nothing but gust, storm and foul weather which make every navigator and mariner to avoid. they as scylla and charybdis, or as they will shun the devil himself and no man be ever hear to make for the place. but as against their will, they have, by storm and dangerousness of the rock, lie seven league into the sea, suffer shipwreck. yet do we find there the air so temperate and the country so abundant, fruitful of all fit necessary for the sustentation and preservation of man life. that most in a manner of all, our provision of bread, bear and victual be quite spoil in lie, long drown in salt water notwithstanding, we be there for the space of nine month, few day over or under, not only well refresh, comfort and with good satiety content, but out of the abundance thereof provide we some reasonable quantity and proportion of provision to carry we for virginia and to maintain ourselves and that company. we ^ound there to the great relief of they as it fall out in their so great extremity, and in respect of the shortness of time until it please god that by my lord come thither their store be better supply and great and better provision we may have make if we have have better mean for the store and transportation thereof. wherefore my opinion sincere of this island, be that, whereas it have be and be still account the most dangerous, infortunate and most forlorn place of the world, it be in truth the rich, healthful and please land, the quantity and bigness thereof consider and mere natural, as ever, man set foot upon the particular profit and benefit whereof shall be more especial insert and hereunto. annex which every man, to his own private knowledge that be there, can avouch and justify for a truth, upon the eight and twenty day of july 1609.. after the extremity of the storm be something qualify, we fall upon the shore at the bermuda where, after our general sir thomas gate, sir george summer and captain newport have, by their provident carefulness, land all their man and so much of the good and provision out of the ship as be not utter spoil. every man dispose and apply himself to search for and to seek out such relief and sustentation as the country afford. and sir george summer, a man enure to extremity and know what thereunto belong, be in this service neither idle nor backward. but present by his careful industry, go and find out sufficient of many kind of fish, and so plentiful thereof that in half a hour he take so many great fish with hook as do suffice the whole company one day. and fish be there so abundant that if a man step into the water they will come round about he, so that man be fain to get out for fear of bite. these fish be very fat and sweet and of that proportion and bigness that three of they will convenient lade two man, those we call rock fish. beside there be such abundance of mullet that with a scene may be take at one draught, one thousand at the least, and infinite store of pilchard with diverse kind of great fish, the name of they unknown to i, of crayfish, very great one and so great store, as that there have be take in one night with make light even sufficient to feed the whole company a day. the country afford great abundance of hog, as that there have be take by sir george summer, who be the first that hunt for they, to the number of two and thirty at one time, which he bring to the company in a boat build by his own. have there be fowl in great numupon, the land where they breed, that there have be take in two or three hour a thousand at the least the bird be of the bigness of a good pigeon and lay egg as big as hen egg upon the sand where they come and lay they daily although man sit down among they. that there have be take up in one morning by sir thomas gate man one thousand of egg and sir george summer man come a little distance of time after they have stay there whilst they come and lay their egg among they that they bring away as many more with they, with many young bird very fat and sweet. another sea foul there be that lie. in little hole in the ground like unto a cony-hole, and be in great number, exceed good meat, very fat and sweet, those we have in the winter, and their egg be white and of that bigness that they be not to be know from hen egg. the other bird egg be speckle and of a different colour. there be also great score and plenty of heron and those so familiar and tame that we beat they down from the tree with stone and staff. but such be young heron beside many white heron, without so much as a black or gray feather on they, with other small bird so tame and gentle that a man walk in the wood with a slick and whistle to they. they. will come and gaze on you so near that you may strike and kill many of they with your stick, and with sing and hollow you may do the like. there be also great store of tortose, which some call turtle, and those so great that i have see a bushel of egg in one of their belly which be sweet than any hen egg, and the tortose itself be all very good meat and yield great store of oil which be as sweet as any butter, and one of they will suffice fifty man, a meal at the least, and of these have be take great store with two boat at the least forty in one day. the country yield diverse fruit as prickle, pear, great abundance. which continue green upon the tree all the year, also great plenty of mulberry, white and red, and on the same be great store of silkworm which yield cod of silk, both white and yellow, be some course and some fine. and there be a tree, call a palmito tree, which have a very sweet berry upon which the hog do most feed. but our man find the sweetness of they do willing share with the hog, for they they be very pleasant and wholesome, which make they careless almost of any bread with their meat, which occasion we to carry in a manner all that store of flower and meal we do or can save for virginia, the head of the palmito tree be very good meat. either raw or sodden it yield a head which weigh about twenty pound and be far better meat than any cabbage. there be a infinite number of cedar tree, the fair i think, in the world, and those bring forth a very sweet berry and wholesome to eat. the country, for as much as i can find myself or hear by other, afford no venomous creature or so much as a rat or mouse or any other thing unwholesome. there be great store of pearl, and some of they very fair, round and oriental, and you shall find at least one hundred seed of pearl in one oyster. there have be likewise, find some good quantity of amber greece, and that of the best sort there be also. great plenty of whale, which i conceive be very easy to be kill, for they come so usual and ordinary to the shore that we hear they oftentimes in the night a bed, and have see many of they near the shore in the day time. there be bear upon the bermuda, at the time of our be there, two child, the one a man child- there, baptize by the name of bermuda and a woman child baptize by the name of barmuda, as also there be a marriage between two english people upon that island. this island, i mean the main island with all the break island adjacent, be make in the form of a half moon but a little more round and divide into many break. land and there be many good harbour in it. but we can find one especial place to go in, or rather to go out from it, which be not altogether free from some danger, and that lie on the southeastside, where there be three fathom water at the entrance thereof, but within six, seven or eight fathom at the least, where you may safe lie, land-locked from the danger of all wind and weather, and more to the tree the come into it be so narrow and straight between the rock as that it will, with small store of munition, be fortify and easy defend, with all advantage the place afford against the force of the potent king of europe. there be also plenty of hawk and very good tobacco, as i think, which through forgetfulness i have almost omit now. have finish and rig our ship and pinnace the one call the deliverance, the pinnace the patience we prepare and make ourselves ready to ship for virginia. have powder, some store of hog flesh for provision, thither and the company thereof for some reasonable time, but be compel to make salt there for the same purpose, for all our salt be spend and spoil. before we recover the shore, we carry with we also a good portion of tortose oil which either for fry or bake, do we very great pleasure. it be very sweet, nourish and wholesome. the great defect we find there be tar and pitch for our ship and pinnace in steed, whereof we be force to make lime there of a hard kind of stone and use it which, for the present occasion and necessity, with some wax we find cast up by the sea from some ship wrack, serve the turn to pay the seam of the pinnace sir george summer build, for which he have neither pitch nor tar, so that god, in the supply of all our want beyond all measure, show himself still merciful unto we that we may accomplish our intend voyage to virginia, for which i confident hope he do yet reserve a blessing in store and to the which, i presume, every honest and religious heart will ready give their amen when all thing be make ready and commodious, fit the wind come fair. we set sail and put off from the bermuda the ten day of may in the year 1610. and arrive at james town in virginia the four and twenty day of the same month, where we find some threescore person live and be then some three week or thereabouts pass and not hear of any supply. it be think fit, by a general consent, to use the best mean for the preservation of all those people that be live, be all in number two hundred person. and so, upon the eight of june, one thousand six hundred and ten, we embark at james town, not have above fourteen day. victaile and so be determine to direct our course for newfoundland, there to refresh we and supply ourselves with victaile to bring we home. but it please god to dispose otherwise of we and to give we better mean for be all of we, ship in four and depart from the town almost down half the river. we meet my lord la war, come up with three ship well furnish with victaile, which revive all the company and give they great content. and after some few day, my lord understand of the great plenty of hog and fish be at the bermuda and the necessity of they in virginia, be desirous to send thither to supply himself with those thing for the better comfort of his man and the plantation of the country. whereupon sir george summer, be a man best acquaint with the place and be willing to do service unto his prince and country, without any respect of his own private gain, and be of threescore year of age at the least, out of his worthy and valiant mind, offer himself to undertake to perform, with god help, that dangerous voyage for the bermuda, for the better relief and comfort of the people in virginia and for the better plantation of it, which offer my lord war, very willing and thankful, accept. and so, upon the nineteen of june, sir george summer embark himself at james town in a small barge of thirty ton or thereabout that he build at the bermuda, wherein he labour from morning until night. as due as any workman do, labour for wage and build she all with cedar, with little or no iron work at all, have in she but one boult which be in the k^son notwithstanding. thanks be to god, she bring we in safety to virginia and so i trust he will protect he and send he well back again to his heart desire and the great comfort of all the company there. the bermuda lie in the height of two and thirty degree and a half of northerly latitude. virginia bear direct from it west, north west two hundred and thirty league.