iwenal his ten satyr. the argument of this ten satire: wealth, honour, empire, strength and eloquence. beauty, long life, child and wife. we wish these happiness seem to outward sense in this world swell sea, for these we fish. happy, we think ourselves, if these we have. these therefore, only of the god we crave. and yet these thing be those which hurt we most. wealth tempt the thief, honour the envious man. strength make man rash, and eloquence be cross, beauty be a whore. long life be but a span. and wife and child say as do the rest, that thing most seek for be not always best. the man who will be true bless, therefore, must unto virtue way himself apply. he must be patient, constant. seek no more resolve and neither wish nor fear to die, and let he unto god refer the rest. who better than ourselves know what be best? in all the land, from gades unto the east to ganges, few there be who know what be best or worst. though error be, mist be quite remove. for what with reason, be there fear or love, what in conceit have ere so well begin, which have not in the end be wish. undo the gentle, god give as man will have they have. take from they all that ere they give, they they by their grant, all that ere man crave, have undo many a house they may have. save in peace, in war, most hurtful thing be seek thus. flow, eloquence have come to nought: murder itself. thus milo wondrous strength wherein he trust, be his bane at length. but heap of coin, hoard with too much care strangle, and so do wealth, which be so rare, exceed other their estate, and all, as do the british whale the dolphin small. thus, in those cruel time when nero bid the soldier rifle, all the good man have they get. they present to longine house, to senecaes rich garden where they rouse and spoil and bear away what ere they can. and then the house of lateran, these do they rob, while as the poor man sleep. seldom the soldier in a cottage. peep bear but a little of thy silver plate. at night about thou, when thou travel late. the sword, the spear, the shadow of a reed shake in moon light, fill thou full of dread, whereas the empty traveller go by and sing before a thief full merry. the chief vow in every church most know be riches. wealth increase our coffer grow. and yet in pitcher poison be not. take in cup beset with gem, suspect thy bane. or when the setine wine thou may behold burn within a burnish pot of gold. now, which of these two wise man do thou praise? or he which laugh, or he which weep? always a laugh. censure be a easy thing, but strange whence to other, tear shall always. spring, merry democritus, do always smile and beat his lung with laughter. yet mean, while within those city where this wise man bode, there go no purple golden coat, abroad there be no chair of state, as then no swoop train or litter bear by man. o have he see the praetor, mount high and in his chariot, through the street pass by in mighty jupiters own robe clad, or in his gown with gaudy colour make, or else the circle of his massy crown such as may weigh, and press his shoulder down the load whereof, in public, make he sweat. now, lest this consul might himself forget, within his coach, his servant sit by. teach his master pride, humility, anon, he take his mace of ivory. on top, whereof jove bird sit, perch high. there may you hear a noise of corneter, and here a rank of other officer. other attend at the horse reins all which he hire and with his money gain. democritus be wont in the same sort, at every one he meet, to laugh. and sport who wisdom show that so it may fall out, lord may be bear amid the witless rout man, joy and sorrow, he a like disdain and at their tear will laugh. when they complain: ' when fortune frown to he, it be no matter, he will send a halter to she and point at she. thus man desire both vain and hurtful, thing for which, unto the god, his vow, he bring other desirous. to be great and know, have be envy and thereby overthrow their catalogue and all their act, deface their honour, lose and they themselves disgrace, their statue spoil and drag along the street their coach-wheel break and all tread under foot and their proud horse which in triumph go. they must be slay and for their master shend. and now the smoke and fire begin to flame and that adore head which have such fame, mighty sejanus, he who be so great, begin to fry amid the flame heat and of the ash of his honour, face pitcher be make and vessel of disgrace. o who can think that ever great seian ' shall be burn, become a dripping-pan. where be thy laurel, thy triumphant bay, thy bull? for sacrifice. the people say sejanus to his death, be lead forth right and go along in all the people sight, whereat the envious multitude be glad. look, say they. what a face, what lip he have, say one. i never love this haughty man. i do foresee this end when he begin. but say now, tell i what be his offence, who his accuser? upon what pretence? what proof, what witness do any bring against sejanus when they wrought this thing? tut, none of these. it be sufficient there be a letter from campania, send which to the senate. come o ho be it. so no more. i guess now how the world do go. but what mean while? what do the people say? as always, that. which fortune do do they fortune inconstancy? they emulate? who fortune love? they love who not. they hate though a man life, his death may well commend, yet do the people hate a man condemn? and yet these people, these self very same, who now cry out upon sejanus name, have yet the goddess he defend? or have the prince life with age be end the () hour wherein the prince have die. god ^^e sejanus, have the people cry. he have be make augustus, he alone have have the people acclamation, but since it be not now as erst of old, since now the people voice be not sell. indeed, they once do give the empery the legion and each dignity, but now they leave and lay. aside this care and with their bread and sport content, be mean, while some of the people herewithal begin to fear to see sejanus fall, it be say, say one, there be more than he proscribe. nay, it be too true. a mighty fire be provide. as i come by, i meet brutidius at mars, his shrine, who look most piteous. o how i fear lest caesar shall pretend that we, the people, do he ill defend whereof accuse to escape a great ill with ajax, many a one himself will kill. come then and let we, while his body yet lie on the shore, trample it under foot and let our slave look on, lest they deny and bring their master into jeopardy. thus seian ' fall. and thus the people speak, thus: fortune, frown, ambition, neck do break. and will thou now, since this be come to pass, desire to be, salute as he be, to have his wealth, his chief seat of all over the army, to be general, the prince guide, who, out of rome, do sit with caldie wizard, practise his wit. thou fain will have be not thy mind. so bend his lance, his troop, his horse, his stately tent. thou wish these might fall unto thy lot. this thou do ask and say, why shall i not for some there be which will not kill their foe, which wish yet to be able to do so? but in this world, what can so happy be? what hope from fear? what state from danger free, our honey sweet with bitter gall be blend, and all our joy with sorrow be attend. which of these two then have thou rather be? or great sejanus in his surquedry, or else some officer, some simple man, awe the fiden and the gabian clerk of the marquet like a judge to sit, break their measure as thou think fit. sure thou will say he be wood who wish and have but wist not what be good. he which to too much honour do aspire and not content do too much wealth desire. he raise a turret overtop all the high. it be the great. be his fall fortune that raise. he throw, he down again, and when he begin to fall, he fall. amain, what overthrow crassus and pompey state and he which do the roman subjugate but honour thirst by proud ambition wrought while as the god vouchsafe they all they seek. few king do die which be not murder. seldom a tyrant die in his bed, since honour fall then be so violent. another wish to be eloquent, famous as tully or demosthenes, wherefore he pray, it may minerva please, and therefore celebrate she five day feast and buy minerva picture, at the least, which in a casket he do trim. keep that he may have their eloquence so deep, but out, alas, they both give such offence that both do perish by their eloquence each. of. they have a fluent tongue indeed, but this alone do both their mischief breed tully own wit. cut off his head and hand a mean orator secure. stand all day at bar and plead the best he can, and no man seek to hurt the honest man. when i be consul, rome, be fortunate, say tully once. but this procure no hate. have all the rest he speak be like to this. he may have scorn a world of anthony, but it be not so that which his throat do stick, be his so famous second philippicke. thus, he who athens do so much admire, who word do set his auditor on fire, who in the theatre the reins do hold and lead the common people as he will, this mighty torrent of swift eloquence come to his end by his fierce vehemence. hard be his hap and sinister his fate. the angry god make he unfortunate, who father almost blind in both his eye with soot and smoke which from his forge do rise from midst his rust, his hammer and his tool. from vulcan shop he send he to the school. o but the spoil and trophy of the war, the gorget helmet hew with many a scar, the break chariot flag and ancient tear, the captive prisoner look all forlorn these high. renown do noble breast inflame and make they hazard all to purchase fame. this do the worthy roman and the greek. this the barbarian do also seek. this make they fear no danger. this do make they all so many labour undertake so far. the thirst of honour do exceed on learning praise on sacred virtue meed. for who will ever after virtue? look if virtue, guerdon be from virtue, take. yet lust of praise the glory of a few our state and country sometime overthrow. o what a goodly thing it seem to some to see their title grave on their tomb, which yet a fig, a shrub, in little space their take root will ruin and deface. and can a tomb, then fame perpetuate, alas, itself. be subject unto fate. weigh hannibal and see how many pound within this, captain ash may be, find this. be that hannibal who africa which westward stretch to the atlantic sea, eastward as far as nilus, slimy sand to mighty elephands, all which can great hannibal contain? but to these kingdom he unite spain. over the pyrenaean hill he go until he come towards the alpian snow, where nature self will seem to stop his way, but all in vain. nothing can make he stay. he tear the rock and melt the snow with fire and fret out his way with vinegar. and now be he possess of italy where, with his army, he do onward high. all this be nought, say he. yet must we come and break the gate and raze the wall of rome where, in suburra, in the market place, we will ' spread our colour and the roman chase? o, what a martial countenance have he. how brave a sight his picture draw will be when, with one eye, like to a petty god upon a elephant, he proud ride. but what become of all this pomp and state o false vainglory. most unhappy fate, great hannibal be overcome and fly, and for his safety, into syria, hie from thence he get into bythinia and seek for succour of king prusia, where at the court he stand without the gate. and for the king return from sleep. do wait, he which so much disturb the world. with strife from who nor sword nor spear can take his life. he which at can the roman overthrow this man at length, his poison own ring. fly go, mighty mad man, climb the alps again and then come down and rifle all the plain. make matter for each boy to work upon. wherewith to stuff his declamation: one world will not contain great alexander. to find out other world he needs must wander. he have not elbow room but puff and blow. this world want air. it be too straight and close, alas, to alexander it be no more than be the island giare or seripho. and yet this great one for the world, too great at babylon, lie in a narrow seat. death, take we down. death do alone confess how much our body, then our mind, be less it be believe, among other tale of old which lie greece have in her story, tell how cyrus dig down athos, how he come and with his navy overfaild the same. how in the sea, on ship, a bridge he set over which his army and his troop may get, and how the persian soldier pass by, have at one dinner drink whole river dry. he which make land be sea and sea be land, say sostratus, who can his power withstand? and yet this cyrus with his fly fame, what be he when from salamine he come? he which, with whip be wont to scourge the wind, to who great aeolus be far more. kind, he which will lay up neptune fast in chain, or bear he through the ear with gentle pain. can any think the god o monstrous blindness? will any of they do this fool a kindness? how come he back then? only with one boat which among his slaughter man in blood do float. thus glory end and thus end he which seek it. thus be it sell and thus he, dear, buy it. great jupiter, say one, prolong my day. thus, sometime merry, sometime sad, he pray mean while the man that live to be old sustain more misery than can be, tell old age with many sorrow be distress, and those uncessant that it can rest, how foul and ugly it be to look upon full. of disease and corruption. o how unlike a man. it make a man his soft white skin it do like leather tan. it make his cheek hang flag, wrinkle his brow, hollow his eye and make his shoulder bow in tabracena like a old bitch-ape among the tree. so do he rub and scrape among young man, many difference. be he be more fair than this and this than he one. be more swift another strong. be each joy in his proper quality. but old man face all do look as one. his limb do tremble and his voice do moan. he shake his head and like a infant go and cough and drivel through his snotty nose. he sup his meat and soft bread he chaw, alas. a crust will bruise his toothless jaw, a knife he care not for. give he a spoon, feed he with pap and milk and sleep at noon. old man, alas, he be unsavoury unto himself, his wife and progeny. he which will be his heir, can abide he, cossus, he stop his nose and do deride he the relish of his meat and drink be past, for now his palate be quite out of taste. the pleasure he be wont in youth to find be now long since forget and out of mind. he can do nothing now, as heretofore, those day be go. he can do so no more. his body be chill, his lusty blood be cold. alas, put clothes upon he now he be old. if he please other in his youthful time, they shall do well. if now they cherish he, they must not look for former pleasure, still without performance. what avail the will? but now behold another loss appear. the noise of music, please, not his ear. no, though seleucus sing with all his skill, or all his consort with their trumpet, shrill it skill not in the theatre where he sit, cornet or trumpet. he hear near a whit, his boy, which tell he who come in and out and what be? the clock must in his deaf ear shout. the little life which in his pulse do beat, be warm only by a fever heat, a swarm of old disease crawl about he ache and pain within he. and without he who, several name, if any man desire soon i may express, do need require the name of those which have with hippia lie. how many patient themison have slay. how many young man basilus have spoil. how many pupil hirrus have beguile. how many man long maura in one day have swallow quick and bring they to decay. i can in lesser time at large express how many town licinius do possess. who now into the senate house do pass, who erst no better than a barber, be one of his shoulder, this of his loin complain another hip be weak and full of pain. a four have lose both eye and do envy a very blinke that have but half a eye, his pale. wan lip whilom. so cherry red must from another finger now be feed who hungry appetite at time of meal be wont to gape and ring the kitchen peal like a young swallow. wait for her dam. he now sit gape while they do he cram, but which be worst, he turn direct sot his friend and servant name. he have forget they which do sup with he. but yester night before next morning be forget quite. nay, his own child, flesh and blood which come out of his loin breed by he. fie for shame these be unknown. nay he be so mislead that his own heir be disinherit and phiale, that witch, that common whore gull he and turn his child out of door and all. the good. this dote fool ere get must fall at length unto this harlot lot a mischief on it. can it be prosperous when old age dote and must be lecherous? no, no, against nature. this be do to spite she and fortune, certain at length will right she o be. it not brave to see a foul rank goat hunt, traine-sent upon a petticoat, to see a old, deform, crooked ram rage with lust upon a silly lamb. it be odious madness, nature self do hate it and sense and reason do abominate it. yet sense and reason here can do no good. nature dissuade but be not understand. hence she grow malcontent and hang the head and seem to live, but she indeed be dead nature. and sense and reason. hence be go madness and lust predominate alone. when age and lust, dry wood and fire do meet, how can the flame be quench? when do you see it thus to live long and then to be a fool? grant it, o jupiter, to he that wool, but say that sense and wit remain entire and age and wisdom happy conspire, when strength and outward beauty be decline, yet virtue still survive in the mind. be not this length of day to be desire as deep, wish as worthy, admire, yes, certain. and yet this happy age be but a scene upon a tragic stage, while, like a sad spectator, he must see life mix with death, and joy, with misery, he live indeed. to see his kindred die, his brother and his sister, destiny. but this most make he weary of his life. death let he live, but kill his dear wife. this be the pain which long life attend, still to bewail the fortune of its friend, to see one house perpetual to waste and to be spend and quite consume at last. only himself now, like a man, forlorn be. leave alive their funeral to mourn, unhappy he must sorrow all alone for all. his friend, alas, be dead and go. king nestor, if that homer have not lie, do live three hundred year before he die. be he not happy which, from year to year, so long together, can his death defer. count his year upon his finger. end and drink new wine, so oft among his friend. but, mark, i pray a while and nestor cry and do exclaim against the destiny of too long life. how much do he complain when, dear antilochus, his son, be slay? how do he hate to live and wish to die? when, as his son be burn and he stand by, alas, quoth he. and then he turn about and make his moan to all the gaze rout. what have i do? why do the god i wrong, against my will, to let i live so long, antilochus, antilochus, my son, why do i live, alas, what have i do? antilochus, and with that word, amain, his tear, burst out his grief, begin again, so oft his speech. do fail his word, suppress with sigh and sob which can be express only he, wring his hand, lift up his eye and fain will speak, but can speak nought. but why, why? why, say he o, why, nay, tell i, why can he speak more? he will say: do i not die? and thus old peleus live with grief to see his son achilles, mournful tragedy. and thus laerta live to hear man say her son vl^sses ship be cast away. have priam die before the siege of troy. he may have meet assaracus with joy, with great solemnity and festival his child have perform his funeral and hector and his brother have he bear unto his grave. while all the people mourn, cassandra have go weep. all before, and then polyxena with garment tear. o have he die before that paris go to build those ship which he for helen send though this untimely death may he displease yet. have he go into his grave with peace, then have he die. he shall but once have die in length of day. alas, what good be spy, but live long. woe be i. therefore. he live to die, ten thousand death and more. he live to see all spoil and overturn asia with fire and sword, consume and burn, when, like a soldier which with fear do quake, he lay aside his crown and arm do take, he flies, and on great jupiter he call and down before his altar dead. he fall, even as a ox, with age and toil, quite do, under the yoke for weariness, do groan. so age priam, overcharge with woe, faint and fall and can no far go and hecuba his wife, which do survive, till she be turn into a dog. do live. i haste unto our own and will pass by the king of pontus, long-lived misery, and croesus too, to who wise solon say that till the end none can be happy. make marius live long and suffer banishment, cold, iron, durance and imprisonment, and in minturna marsh hide his head and, at the loss of carthage, beg his bread. this man o have he die when he have lead in triumph those who he have conquer, when all his warlike pomp have now be end assoon, as from his chariot he descend nature in earth. rome never have possess a citizen more fortunate. bless campania, do for pompey fame, provide for with a fever. there he shall have die. have not the people prayer then, preserve he, and for a worse after death, reserve he w^th civil war he do the city waste which from his body smite his head. at last, which punishment and death. yet lentulus escape. and catiline and cethegus, they be not cut or cast into the fire, but be dead. their body be entire, for they be hang forsooth their throat be. break and nothing but a halter do they choke. next now, the tender mother on her knee, when she, but venus temple, only see soft. she pray for beauty for her son, but for her daughter she will never have, do they both, forsooth, must bear away the prize and be admire and woo by each man eye. why shall they not? do not fair venus joy to see dan cupid and to buss the boy? do not latona smile and laugh to see how beautiful diana seem to be? yet though, this beauty make the mother glad. so fair a face, as once lucretia. have she doubt to wish she be too fair. alas, her ruin and her death. her beauty be her beauty. it be which. tarquin do admire her beauty it be which set his heart on fire, her beauty, it be which bring he to her bed where, for her beauty, she be ravish which, when she know she so abhor the deed with her own hand she make she own heart bleed. virginia, be as fair as fair, may be as fair as any virgin rome do see, but rutila, a cromp-backt monster be and ill complexioned and deform her face, then she a foul. no where can be find, no beast so ugly live on the ground. and yet how oft do fair virginia wish in her heart she be foul rutila, that she can face change, that she may be as rutila and rutila as she. oh, if that. this can ever have be do and each can have each other face put on. virginia may have live and near be eye nor by her father hand at length have die. but this be her unhappy beauty fate: it be pursur'de with lust far worse than hate. grave appius, her beauty begin to note and in the end must needs upon she dote who will believe it. appius, be a man that be wise and stay, who also wise, can, from his experience, young man advise who say that appius, love virginia. lie, for be not appius old virginia, young, sweet, be virginia breath, but his like dung. she be soft, he be hard. and how can these agree? he may her father, she his daughter be. this appius know, and this so, kill his heart, that to himself scant. dare he this impart from other. therefore, he his thought do hide. he will not for a world it be descry. and yet, for all it be so close pen, his heart must break or he must give it vent, maugre his head. this make he sad moan and with deject eye walk all alone where he do meditate and main plot how for his lust virginia may be get mean while he sigh, look wild and sometime weep forsake his meat and god know how he sleep. token of love he send and pretty gift and use twenty thousand other shift he still pursue she, wheresoever she go, only to talk and look on. she no more. but when he can come unto her, right under her window, than he walk in sight when she be away, how will he look about what pretty trick he will use to find she out? when be find, nought have he else to say. but how do pretty sweet virginia, or tell some tale, or else himself commend, somewhat aloof for fear he may offend his love. he doubt she will not entertain, which make he be afeard of speak plain in a three person. he his tale do tell, lest she, perhaps his rank lust may smell with dear word of love. he do she flatter, but dare not near. come unto the matter whereby much time in idle talk be spend in wanton. court and in complement himself. mean time, grow flag and wax lean, and no man may suspect what this do mean. a silent tongue, he have but speak eye. yet who say: appius love virginia, lie fie, appius, fie, for shame, never be so weak. what be fray unto a girl to speak? how can thou thus endure to live in pain, and where thou will not be deny, complain. the man that spare to speak must spare to speed. who will not speak shall never do the deed. then, appius, speak thy mind and be a man. and so he do. as much as silence can for appius. if you ask, he all deny. who say that appius love virginia. lie. appius be chief of the and life in glitter and authority. he covet mighty that he may please the common people and enjoy his ease. he punish and pardon as he list, but many a fault in silence, yet be hisht to fear and flattery. he do incline, which be the ruin of all discipline, to see a fault and not to reprehend it. do often make a fault but never mend it. hence come disorder, pride and luxury, discord and in the end, a anarchy. rome youth hereby become effeminate and dissolute and scorn the magistrate. how can they choose? let modesty avaunt, as long as appius do use his haunt. if appius love. how can the young fry but live and wallow in foul luxury? why do not appius thus say they and thus, and shall it not be lawful then for we, if appius, his uirginia, must have some liberty as well as he, we will crave. thus, when superior do a fault, commit, the people present do follow it. their ill example hurt a great deal more, for all will follow as they go before mean while the sabine such incursion make that idle wanton rome begin to quake their man and cattle now be drive away, they to their enemy be make a prey to appius. all this harm, some do impute. no marvel. then, if appius walk so mute, barbatus rail upon his government, and this, some say, do cause his languishment, some one and some another tale device. but who say appius, love virginia, lie, alas, poor wench virginia. all this while think appius like herself, without all guile, and therefore bid he welcome and be glad. when appius come, she be sorry when he be sad. good sir, say she. why be you malcontent? where be your story and your merriment, which she do speak with such simplicity, so harmeles, and with such modesty that, though her gentleness, inflame he more yet her chaste, modest look, make he give over, so that when he of purpose will impart his secret thought he dare not for his heart sometime. he therefore know not what to say, but then he will gaze yet will not go away. anon, some idle matter he pretend, some wrong he have. receive from his friend. he do not think they will have use. he so, and such a one, but let that matter go. his answer, like his thought, be tear and rend and interrupt and impertinent. he see she be chaste, and shall he talk of love out of the way, perhaps she will remove. so may he lose her company and sight, and this will kill he and undo he quite, and therefore, to prevent such misery on any term, he will have her company. by this way, then, no good be to be do some other course must therefore be begin, which he so carry in such subtle wise that who say appius, love, virginia lie, but love increase, hatch fearless lust, and lust proceed to. fury. appius must enchant virginia with some philtrous drug and for to second it, look trim and smug. her uncle numitorius must be make hot appius pander, and he must persuade his niece, virginia, to come off and yield thus appius hope at length to win the field. thus must it be, say appius numitorius must first be make, and then virginius and numitorius. he must write or speak, and all the matter to virginia. break perchance. at first the motion will distaste, but yet i doubt not to prevail at last. fair promise and importunity will make her weary of her chastity. and i will pursue, she close at a inch. let she say what she will. i will not flinch. she will say that i be. foggy and too old. her uncle then shall tell she of my gold and of my office, the decemvirate, and what a jointure i will to her state. i be not fair, indeed, nor be i foul, nor do i always smile, nor always scowl. good meat i love and good clothes i put on. she know i be a boon companion and have not many a one more old than i enjoy, as young as she, full merry. why shall i not then hope and hopeful woo and see what numitorius will do? those and a thousand other trick he try yet who say appius love virginia lie, but numitorius be too wise a man and appius here must fail. do what he can. what then be? here a end be appius spend, no, no virginia father must be send unto the war. and then, when he be away, appius assure himself to have the prey for claudius straight. a client of his own he send, and unto he anon, make know his mind, conjure he to secrecy, and then instruct he for the villainy. it be so, say he. i must virginia have, and thou must challenge she to be thy slave and bid she follow thou tut, let she weep. take thou her home, and there thou shall she keep. say that she never be virginius child, but that thou be of she long since. beguile she in thy house, be bear and steal from thence, and until now do never see she. since if she resist, bring she by force to i and thou shall have her home. i warrant thou. now, claudius, have his errand and be go. and with virginia he meet anon, who rude. he begin to apprehend and tell she that it be bootless to contend, whereat her nurse and she, with fear, cry out, which make the people all come in a rout, who, when they have but hear uirginias name, they all cry out on claudius, fie for shame, and round about, they stand in her defence so that she now be safe from violence. say claudius, then i pray, be still, it be so along with i. virginia must go. she be my slave. i do not do her wrong that which i. do. i will justify ere long before the judge. the matter shall be know, and you shall see. i only seek my own forthwith. he bring she, whereas appius sit, and there begin the matter to relate, which appius know sufficient before, and claudius now do earnest implore his aid, crave justice that he may have right and that he be not overbear by. might she be not daughter to virginius, but do belong to, i mark claudius, and if virginius do not say the same, let i be punish then and bear the blame, mean while i say she be my slave and so she ought in reason home with i to go. nay, say her advocate, alas, yet stay her father in the war be now. away within these two day. he may well be here, if any will, but send a messenger, and it be unjust, he absent, to contend that he, his daughter present, shall defend. wherefore they beg of appius that the doom may be defer until her father come and that, according to his own decree, till than virginia may be count free and not to hazard her virginity before she be judge to lose her liberty. say, appius, then the law which you commend, do show how much i have. be freedom, friend, and now, as you desire, i be content that for virginius some man may be send and to defer the sentence till he come, but claudius, mean time, must have she home, so that he promise. to return. she here assoon, as ere uirginius shall appear hereat, alas, virginia begin to cry. the people murmur, but none dare reply at length. her uncle numitorius and he to who she be, betroth, icilius, these hasty come, crowd through the press and call upon fell appius for redress. but appius cry again. take they away, sentence be past, and they have nought to say. nought say, icilius, yes, and mought thou know it be. such a tale shall make thy ear to glow. threat can drive i hence or hide thy lust. who take i hence, do it by force. he must know, appius, that virginia be my spouse and ere that claudius, get she to his house. you, god and man, mark what icilius faith. he will soon lose his life, then break his faith. the people fear lest this, his vehemence, shall hurt virginia and the judge. incense for now the lictor round about he get. yet after all, they dare no more but threat. so powerful be the strength of innocence that it do curb the rage of violence. a wicked conscience, when it be most bold, be but a coward and its courage cold. go to say appius. you, icilius, will seem to patronize virginius, but it be another matter. make you chat. you will be tribune, sir, say, will you not? and to make way to your ambition, you think it best to raise sedition. but you shall fail for once of your intent and for to day claudius. shall be content to leave his right. virginia home shall go, not for your sake, icilius, think not so- but for virginius sake, who absent be, and for the name of father. more than this mean while, icilius, you and such as you, i tell you this, and you shall find it true, if that virginius by to morrow day appear not here, know that i know the way. nor want i mean or power myself alone to crush the author of sedition. thus, for the present be the court, dismiss. he, for virginius may go who list, but appius stay a while till they be go, lest he may seem to have sit for this alone. virginius, friend in send be not slack, appius, mean while plot. how to keep he back icilius brother straight without delay, and numitorius son do post away. but what do appius now? he do not sleep. he write to his colleague that they shall keep virginius there. nor give he leave to part till they do hear from he this be his art. but this, as it fall out, do not succeed. his letter come to late to do the deed for at first. watch virginius go his way. but appius letter come not till next day when, as virginius so fast do wend, that by this time he be at his journey end where he do find his lovely daughter fate in mourn habit, all disconsolate with grief and thought. so pine away and wear that now she. seem not what she be beforue. she that be erst so fair with grievous moan, now look like death. she be nought but skin and bone her meat. and sleep she do forego, and why? because she will not live but fain will die, but all in vain. appius by break of day towards his seat of justice, take his way where all the city at the bar do stand and still expect virginius out of hand. the common people love virginius. well, when will he come, say they pray. can you tell, come, come way, virginius quick, come yonder he be, say one i pray. make room whereat the people, every one, look out and, on his tiptoe, cast his eye about each over tother head. do seek and spy if he see any man approach nigh, which, if he do as far as he can see o now he come, say he sure this. be he so soon man credit to affection give for what man wish they willing believe. but appius think he be safe enough for that. when lo, unlooked for opportune, pat in come virginius, appius bend his brow. a mischief, say he on virginius now. but sad uirginius, like a man forlorn with many matron which with he do mourn in sordid and neglect weed do bring his lamblike daughter to the butcher. the doubtful people round about they press and all lament and pity their distress virginius at length. thus weep, say: good sir, i beg not but require your aid for you, your wife and child. in the war, my life i have expose, receive these scar, and for all this shall this be my reward? shall i, my daughter, lose without regard my dear child, the only child i have? shall she by violence be make a slave? thus to the people do virginius cry and make his moan to all as he pass by icilius also, tell they all the same, whereat they weep and murmur and cry: shame. but cruel appius move with no remorse, such be lust. rage become a great deal worse, up to his judgement seat he soon ascend, where he all right and equity pretend and claudius now demand. his slave again, and of their wrong that keep, she do complain, but ere that he can any far high or that virginius can make reply, enrage. appius swell with lust and wrath, do burst in twain and interrupt they both this brawl of you, say he do i offend. take she home, claudius, and there be a end. what, though? virginius and the youth repine: she be thy slave, take she, i say she, be thou. at first. the people, each on other, gaze and at the horror of it, stand amaze, and claudius, bold in his hand, her hent but sad. all the people do lament. virginius, know not what to say, but stand and to the people stretch out his hand who, after he have, weep with sorrow. thus he cry aloud to wicked appius: my daughter, appius, be no slave, but free her have i give to icilius, not to thou, and i have. bring she up still heretofore to be a wife but not to be a whore. what shall we live like beast, promiscuous, without distinction, in foul luxury o^ age and sex? shall no regard be bad. shall each man by his beastly lust be lad. if these, the people here, shall this permit? other, i know, which will not suffer it with this, the woman do together, band and round about virginia. they stand, they drive, marc claudius. away and cry. no^, let she go, she shall have liberty. hear this noise, the crier bid they peace, and appius beckon to they for to cease, which do? and silence make in sullen wise, thus subtle appius to the people. cry, icilius, speak his pleasure yesterday and tell i now what do virginius say? do not he rail and rage as much as he? if not sedition, what then may this be? but more than this, here in the city, they have meet at night. they shame to meet by day, so that i must thus guard hither. come for preservation of the peace of rome. i come not here to wrong the innocent, but to suppress their purpose and intent. lictor, make room, remove the company. and let the master and his slave pass by. this speak he angry, and with that word, back go the people of their own accord, so that virginia can no long stay to lust and violence, she be make a prey herself. poor heart for pity seem to woo her father, know not what to say or do, but down upon his knee, poor man, he fall and weep and cry for help and pity call. now, appius, take pity on my woe. let not my only child thus from i go, forgive my hasty word. i be dismay and in my grief i know not what i say. impute it to the weakness of my age, to my affection, o, let this assuage the rigour of thy. sentence. hear i speak, do not, with sorrow, cause my heart to break. i be the woeful wight that ever do live. i know not what to do. appius, forgive indeed i be too blame, and yet, alas, she be my daughter, i her father, be her father, be what be i not. so still, why do i live? this word? my heart do kill. yet give i leave to take her nurse aside to ask she this by she. i will be. try that. so, if false, i thus term be. i shall then part with she more willing and let the wench go with we. let i die. if so, i do not bring she by and by. i will not go far, hence not out. of sight. i will, but only ask of she. the right appius can not deny this small request. but let they go. virginius, much distress. look about anon. he have espy, a butcher stall, and thitherward he hie, where be come? he cry and weep, amain. look on his daughter and then weep again. my only joy, my dear child, quoth he. what shall i do? how shall i set thou free, shall i? no, no, i be her father, i. but shall she be a slave first, may she die soon. i will murder she while she be chaste, then be the father of a whore at last, but then return to his child again. now, god forbid, say he, she shall be slay. how say sweet. girl. and then he begin to cry. sure, say he the wench, be loath to die. now tell i, pretty heart, which have thou rather, that claudius be thy lord or i thy father? i always love thou dear, do i not? yes, wench, i do. it can be, forget what be the pleasure thou desire most, but i will get it whatsoever. it cost nothing i thought can be too much for thou. for thou be all my heart, felicity. i can tell, if thou to claudius go, whether that claudius will love thou. so say, will thou live with claudius or with i, his slave? he will make thou, but i will keep thou free. the silent girl with fear do tremble, stand and still do. eye, her father busy hand. she answer not a word but sigh and gasp. and in her gripe arm her father clasp into his bosom. she, with tear do fly, as if she say: good father, let i die rather than live with claudius as his slave and loose icilius, which to i you give. the good old man now lay his neck on she and all her bosom. with his tear he blur, and then he kiss she, and then he cry. and then do gaze upon her blubber eye. poor wench quoth he, thou shall not be their slave. i will soon see thou lay full low in grave. yea, that i will. i will my pretty soul, rather than thou shall suffer their control. i. will take such order that thou shall escape. i will deceive they of their wicked rape. o god, say he now, tell i be it not best. and then he weep and kiss his daughter breast. no, no, it be not. be it not. yes, what kill she? yes, rather than these lustful beast shall spill she, but be she not thy flesh and blood, thy child? yes, that she be. but shall she be defil'de? and be she not thy only child, thy heir? look in her face. how say: be she not fair? yes, too, too fair. i will she be not. so her beauty be the cause of all my woe. and who can ever so hard-hearted be as hurt virginia if he do she. see. how then can i, her far, do the deed? i can do it. i can see she bleed. she be all the child, all the joy i have, her health be i, her life, my life do save. where shall i have more child when she be go? or if i can like she, i can have none. she be the best daughter father ever have. she be so pretty o i shall be mad. appius and claudius out you stink goat. o that the people will not cut your throat, you shameless lecher. shall she sit your lust? i will kill she first. o do not, but i must. and with that word he snatch from the stall the butcher knife and stab she therewithal. then turn to the judgement seat. he cry thus: appius, for thy sake, virginia die. upon thy head her blood i consecrate. she shall not be a slave. thy lust to sate before she shall be prostitute to thou, this have i do. thus have i set she free. upon this fact, a hideous cry arise. take, he say, appius, ere he far go. but now virginius, with his knife in hand, so make his way. that none can he withstand away. he fly and get without the gate, and then to apprehend he, it be too late. indeed, the people for he make a lane. they love he, so they will not have he take mean, while icilius, sad icilius, and dead virginia, uncle numitorius take up. the body of this murder wight and lay it out to all the people. sight all pale and ghastly now she look, alas, who erst so beautiful and lovely. be sad be the spectacle, sad be the cry of all the people that be stand by. some do commend, some blame virginius, some pity he, and some icilius, of appius and of claudius, all complain, their rape and lust have poor uirginia slay. for who the multitude so sore lament, as if their tear and plaint will never be spend. alas, virginia, hard be thy fare and thy admire face. unfortunate have thou be soul or not. so pass fair. we need not with cry. thus fill the air. thy beauty it be, which do thou so commend. and it be thy beauty, bring thou to thy end beauty. be a rose who colour? be most fair, who precious odour do perfume the air, yet to itself be neither fair nor sweet, but only unto those who smeled or see it. man, for this cause, pluck rose from the tree, because so sweet and beautiful they be, while as the nettle and the dock do stand and grow untouched by any envious hand. the proper man, they say, the worst luck have, whereas deformity be free from scathe. the fair face boy do make his mother glad, but care and fear of he still make her sad. it be a lovely boy now. god he bless. yet than she weep upon, he nere'thelesse to catch this. prettiness, such bait be lay as always, make the parent heart afraid. beauty and chastity we hardly find together. or a fair face and fair mind, though. parent, bring their child up at home under their eye and never let they roam where ill behaviour they may see or learn. though, like the sabine, they be never so stern. nay, say that nature self with a free hand have. give they wit enough to understand what be good and have dispose they virtuous. give they ablushing cheek, a modest eye, when nature thus have bless they with her store. what can a father, care or love, do more yet than their cocker chick? their tidle son, before he be a man, must be undo prodigious lust become a prodigal, and for to get his purpose spend all. nay. such his confidence be in his coin that he, the parent heart, hope to purloin hereby. he hope they will be both. so awe that he will be the pander, she the bawd. never be tyrant. yet that ere will geld that boy in, who he beauty want. behold, nero. never love that boy who foot be club, who paunch be boast, who scabby fist be scrubd. alas, fair boy, thou, in thy beauty pride do little wot. what danger thou abide. this youth become a know adulterer. and all those threat and punishment do fear, which angry husband, full of jealousy, inflict on those which do they injury wiser than mars, this youth be never, yet that he shall never fall into the net. wherefore then, mars, he must not happy be, and mars be take at his venery. and then this rage, this jealousy, will have more right than law to wrong. yet ever give it murder sometime, and do sometime tear the flesh with whip and rowel without fear. o. but your feat, endymion, never the less, shall be a stallion to some matroness. and if seruilia with crown he woo, although he love she not, he will be she too. for which foul she, rather than. he shall lack will strip and sell her clothes from off her back. what be it which any woman can deny to this fair sir to have his company oppia catulla, be it true, it be still she be a woman and she will have her will the needy woman here, and she that be worst, will in this case be free in bounty first. but what in beauty we no harm can find if there be chastity lodge in the mind. it be true, immodest beauty be a snare where fond affection soon surprise be. the fair beauty, void of chastity be soon convert into brothelry at first such beauty have get fame. be spectacle of love, at last of shame. and modest beauty, scant have better. end, be it not that chastity their fame defend, but otherwise, alas, their fortune still unhappy, be attend with some ill. fair be hippolytus and full of grace, courteous and temperate and chaste he be. thus do believe, and thus he vow to die. he will not lose his maiden chastity, but do this profit he do there, hence grow. ought that be good? no, but his overthrow phaedra. his father, wife and his stepmother do fall in love with he above all other, and woo he oft, and oft his patience try he oft refuse and oft her suit deny, whereat she blush to see herself disdain, but her affection, cunning she feign. she now do wish that she have never speak or that she can again. her word, revoke her love, she now turn into mortal hate and all her thought revenge. do meditate poison she think on, or some murder knife. can she not have his love? she will have his life, which, to effect her busy mind, anon, this subtle stratagem have think upon. she tell her husband how hippolytus, his son, will have abuse. she thus, and thus theseus on this, can not himself contain harmless hippolytus must needs be slay, the father follow and the son do fly. and yet hippolytus scant know why. yet on his horse run, until at last upon a rock, his chariot wheel they brace, whereas himself be drag and tear asunder. he be too fair, too chaste. it be no wonder bellerophon be likewise. in this case, for he be fair and have a lovely face. king, wife that sthenobaea hight, grow fond and in his beauty take delight by circumstance. she at first, do prove. he at last. she plain, say that she do love. he, bellerophon will feign himself. excuse his friend, king, he may not abuse. he modest, deny her foul request. but she conceive, fell vengeance in her breast. she tell her husband how bellerophon will have dishonour. she, he thereupon with letter send bellerophon away, letter which do bellerophon betray. thus these, both woman, when they can not have what they do love with hate, begin to rave. a woman, most of all, be merciless when to her hate shame add maliciousness. silius, be fair in messalina'es. eye so that she dote on silius out of cry. now, messalina be claud, empress, and will not this her love? her silius bless. speak thy opinion which will thou choose: or take her love or else her love (@). silius be peerless, fair, most ver^^^^^, and well descend of a noble house, yet wretched he be, take and make to die in messalina'es presence, in her eye, while she do sit dress in her little veil and like a virgin bride, bid he all hail her costly purple colour marriage bed within her garden. on the ground be spread in dowry as the ancient manner. be there shall be. give a thousand sesterce. he which be marriage join their wed hand. stand by with those which seal. and firm the band which thou do secret think, know, but to few, as if she be ashamed herself to show. no, she will not marry, be but lawful. and why then shall it not be public? now, tell i which thou like, what will thou do if thou yield? not when thus she do, thou woo look to thyself. she, by some wicked slight, will do thou mischief, sure ere it be night. but if thou do without delay, the thing know to the world in claudius ear will ring when this disgracethrough each man mouth have past. alas, good man, claudius shall know it last mean. while do thou thy messalina obey and sport and revel with her night and day, for tie all one now. thou have do the wrong. claudius of force must hear of it ere long, and then be it thou far fair than thou be of his displeasure. thou must feel the smart. thy milk white neck must stoop unto the block and yield itself unto the fatal stroke. thus may we see those thing which man think good be nothing. so if right understand, what then shall therefore man for nothing crave soft. if thou seek, and will my counsel have, doc, thus seek to those heavenly power above, leave all to they, for sure they do we love. let god see first. what do agree with we, what shall be fit and most commodious? god do not give according to our wit, for pleasant thing he give. we what most fit dear be man to he than man can be unto himself. yet, blind and wretched, we carry away by force of our own mind. mighty be lust sense, brutish reason, blind, a woo do we go, but in such sort as if we go unto our brothel sport, red hot with lust rank than any goat or any ship that still in salt do float. with glare eye, we stare upon our love and look they through and through. while lust we move, why shall we not? we hope it be no sin, but love, yea, yea. we ask our heart within at night, our thought, our nose do hunt by day. we talk and talk, and yet we nothing say, a mischief on. this lust, but most of all on lust which honesty itself do call this thought. do gull we, so we think all be well, find fault. who will all be one here. will we dwell this ugly thought, make blush, impudent and honest hour in lustfulness be, spend it, make rank garlike, stink, hoary head, grow green again and live, though almost dead. o that i do that. mould and garden, keep where this foul garlic lust to lodge and sleep. how will i tear it up? how will i rend it blade ere it my garden shall offend. it shall not with his breath my nose disease. it shall not with its sight my eye displease. i shall soon bring its sprout, blade fullow and send it. to some other place to grow away, rank, stink away. get thou to those like to thyself, but grow not near the rose, a mischief on it. can any think it fit that garlic in a rose lap shall sit? garlic must needs overcome and kill. the rose prickle can defend it from such foe. if wed true love, betwixt these ever be. let sweet and sour old age and youth agree, but all in vain. this cleave garlic head, mad with lust, can be answer there. let it grow then, if it needs must be yet pretty rose still shall. i pity thou, for thou must needs be quick wither, and woe be i anon, thou will be dead. then all too late thou will repent the. hour thou have not join thou to some sweet flower, then shall thou see for all thy subtle wit that all that be desire be not fit. woman do husband, man do wife desire, and such and such they earnest require. and when they have they straight without delay, for son and daughter, they begin to pray. god only know, mean time, what c^e we crave, what wife and child. every man shall have wedding and hang go by destiny. and what a man must have, he can fly, but that thou may ask something and obtain it unto the temple get thou never refrain it. look on the entrails of some beast and vow and search the pudding of some slaughter. sow, pray, that within thy body. sound and whole there may be. lodge a sound and wholesome soul. pray for a mind that be brave and valiant, who fear of death as yet can never daunt, who among rich nature great benefit account that time when life and world he quit, know that while he live he still do die. but when he die he live immortal. who in mean time, come whatsoever will or toil or labour, he endure it still. he know not how to chafe. he covet nought. his mind to baseness never can be bring the toil and travel of great horcules he do prefer before dull, stupid ease or wantonness or feast or discourse. sardanapalus, be a beast and worse, but let i show what thou thyself may give. one way there be no more in peace to live. wherein thou may live most content, and that be if thou shall live virtuous fortune avaunt. be man, but only wise. thou have not power on they to tyrannize, and yet a goddess of thou we must make and give thou leave in heaven a place to take. thou be a goddess, and in heaven we place thou, but be man wise. they out of heaven will chase thou. sept 5. 1612.. vet w b.