the second voyage to guiana. mvnday, the 26. of january, in the year of our lord 1595. we depart from portland, ride in the darling of london, have in company the discoverer, a small pinnace, who we lose at sea in foul weather the thursday night next follow, friday, the 13. of february. we fall with the canary land where we expect our pinnace, according to our appointment, seven or eight day. here we take two boat, the one a passenger, we bulge, the other we tow at our ship, stern steer, south, south west for the island of gap verd. there. hence we set sail the 28. of february, keep a west, south west course. in this passage we find very smooth sea, fair weather and steady. wind blow ordinary between the east and north east, point near 300.. league from these land we come into a grow sea. the swell water make a strange noise and hurtle together as if it may be two strong encounter each other. the 12. of march, we sound and have sandy ground in 47.. at midnight in twelve we come to a anchor. the ground sandy oase. sunday, the 14.. towards night, about some six league from the shore, we descry a low land in the bottom of a bay. from the 9 of march until this time we keep for the most part a south, south west course. the water in this place be smooth but muddy and the colour red or tawny. from the westermost of the cap verd land unto this bay, i do the distance to be near 550.. league, it seem to most of our seaman to be the very bank of a shall upon a leigh shore, the rather, because without it in the clean green sea we have but 7.. depth, but after by proof find that there be no sudden alteration in any part of the coast and that the sea be smooth near the land, we always at night seek to anchor in three or four. and doubtless, as the hand of god be wonderful in all his work, so herein his merciful providence be most admirable that upon a leigh shore, subject to a perpetual easterly g^le, neither much wind can endanger. ship by reason that the foul, heavy water be not capable of vehement motion and the soft light oase, if they touch, can bruise they. nor be there any jeopardy in be wind-bound or embay, for the most forcible wind make the great floud-tyde whereby the freshet, when they take their ordinary course of ebb, do grow strong and swift. set direct off to sea against the wind, we by turn go clear of all bay, howbeit in this case, as also in the river, the use of a drove sail seem a good and ready help. the first place wherein we anchor be in the mouth of arrowa^^, a fair and great river. it stand in one degree and forty minute for we fall so far to. the southward by your lordship direction, the bar without have at the least three at the shall place. when it be low ebb, the depth within be eight and ten, the water always brackish. we find not any inhabitant in this place near the sea coast. i omit here to recite the name of the nation that be borderer, their town captain and commodity that their country do yield, as also the sound tide and how the coast lie, etc. think it fit to reduce these disjoin and scatter remembrance to one place. as we pass, we always keep the shore within view and stop the flood still ancor at night in three or four when we come to the north-hed land of this bay which we name. cape cecyl^. we see two high mountain like two island, but they join with the main. in this tract lie north, northwest, near 60. league. there fall into the sea these several great river. we anchor in two not far from these hill and fill all our cask with fresh water by the ship side, for in the sea, 30. mile from the mouth of any river, it be fresh and good. this second bay extend itself above 30. league to the westward and contain within it these river: arcooa, wiapoco, caparwacka, cawo, macuria, cawroor. here leave the ship at anchor, i take into the boat john provost, my indian interpreter, john lynser, and 8. or nine other intend to search some of these river and to seek. speech with the indian. in wiapoco, at the foot of the eastermost mountain where the river fall into the sea, we find twenty or thirty house but not inhabit. we stay there but one night. wanari we overpass because the entrance be rocky and not deep. in capperwacka we sail some forty mile but can see no indian at one of their port under the side of a hill. we take in so much brafill wood as our boat can carry. among other tree, we cut down one for a example which i do very believe to be the same sort of cinnamon which be find in the straits of magellane. from capurwacka we pass to cawo and there meet with a canoe wherein be two indian. it. be long time before we can procure they to come near we, for they doubt lest we be spanish. when my interpreter have persuade they the contrary and that we come from england, they, without far speech or delay, bring we to wareo their captain, who entertain we most friendly and then, at large, declare unto we that he be late, chase by the spaniard from moruga, one of the neighbour river, to raleana or orenoque, and that have burn his own house and destroy his fruit and garden. he have leave his country and town to be possess by the arwaccas, who be a vagabond nation of indian which find no certain place of abode of their own, do for the most part serve and follow the spaniard. he show i that he be of the nation of the iaos, who be a mighty people and of late time be lord of all the sea coast so far as trinidado, which they likewise possess, howbeit that with a general consent. when the spaniard first begin to borrow some of their wife, they all agree to change their habitation and do now live unite for the most part towards the river of amazon. but the especial cause of his present remove be because, two or three year past, twenty spaniard come to his town and seek to take his best wife from he, but before they carry she away, he, at time and place of advantage, kill half of they. the rest flee, most of they sore hurt. now, in this case, he think it best to dwell far enough from they. your indian pilot, ferdinando, who conduct you by amana and now abide near the head of dessekeebe, be one of this man subject by who, as it may seem, he have take good notice of our princess and country for he descend more particular to inquire what force be come with. we assure i of the spaniard be in. trinidado and that the indian, our friend betwixt, hope and fear have earnest expect our return from england these four or five month. when i have, answer he that at our departure we leave no spaniard alive to annoy they, that we now come only to discover and trade with they, and that if her majesty shall have send a power of man where no enemy be to resist, the indian may perhaps imagine that we come rather to invade then to defend they. he reply that this course very well sort with the report which they have hear of our princess justice, rare grace and virtue, the fame of who power in be able to vanquish the spaniard and singular goodness in undertake to succour and defend. the afflict indian be now so general that the nation, far and near be all agree to join with we and by all mean possible to assist we in expel and root out the spaniard from all part of the land, and that we be deceive if we think this country not large enough to receive we, without molestation or intrusion upon the indian who want not choice of dwell place if they forsake one to live in another, but stand in need of our presence at all time to aid they and maintain their liberty, which to they be dear than land or live. he then far desire that he, with his people, may have our favour against the arwaccas who, not be content to enjoy their ground and house have take from they many of their wife and child. the best of who fortune be if they live to live in perpetual slavery under the spaniard. we put he in good hope and comfort thereof and he, to deserve some part of this friendship, commend unto we a elderly man to be our pilot in. bring we to raleana when we be ready to depart. brasil wood, he demand whether we want any vrapo, which be the wood that be usual, carry from these part to trinidado in canoe and be there sell to the french for trade, he offer if. we will bring our ship near his port to put in her lade thereof. but because most of our cask be not iron bind and in make stowage way to remove it will have be the loss of our cider and other drink. i therefore refer the take of any quantity to fit opportunity, think it sufficient at this time to have only my boat lade thereof which afterwards, in extremity of foul weather, before we can get aboard our ship, we be enforce in a dark nigh to heave all overboard. think ourselves happy to have recover thither at seven day end, with safety of life only, all which time we can no where set foot on shore but rest day and night, wet and weather beat. in our covertles boat which be sometime ready to sink under. we, for we have in this place, without comparison, more rain, wind and gust then else where, at any time- to be brief- my man become weak and sick, and if we have stay any long time out i doubt whether the great part of we have ever come aboard again. i afterward understand by my indian pilot that this weather be for most part of the year usual near the island oncaiarie, which lie north from the river capurwacka, some six league into the sea, and that they hold opinion this island to be keep by some evil spirit, for they very believe that to sleep in the day time near it, except it be after. much drink be present. death. the only season wherein little rain do fall there be, as i gather by their speech, they divide all time by their moon. at our winter solstice, the mother wind of this coast be for the most part to the northward of the east, except when the sun be on this side of the equinoctial, for than it often year southerly, but most in the night, this our guide be of the iaos, who do all mark themselves thereby to be know from other nation. after this manner, with the tooth of a small beast, like a rat, they raze some their face, some their body after diverse form, as if it be with the scratch of a pin, the print of which rasure can never be do away again during life. when he have some time, converse with our indian that go from england with we, he become willing of himself to see our country. his sufficiency, trustiness and knowledge be such that if the pretend voyage for the guiana do take place, you shall, i doubt, not find he many way able to steed your lordsh in your design and purpose. for beside his precise knowledge of all the coast of the indian town and dwelling, he speak all their language. be breed in guiana, be a swear brother to putima, who slay the spaniard in their return from manoa, can direct we to many gold mine and in nothing will undertake more than he assure will perform. to the westward, this bay have many good road, under small island, whereof the great name, gowateri, be inhabit by the shebato and beside the plenty of foul fish, fruit, wild pork and dear which be there to be have where caiane fall into the sea for it stand in the mouth of and it yield, say, and good harbour in four and five for ship of great burden, on all that coast we find not any like it. we therefore honour this place by the name of port howard. the road under triangle land, which be the westermost from the rest and stand in 5. degree, which have also store of fish, foul dear and iwanas be good but not comparable with this other where in all wind and weather, ship though they be, many may all ride secure. the hill and high land be limit to this bay on each side, for to the eastward, beyond it appear none at all, and to the westward of mount hobbeigh very few. where the mountain fail. there, brasill wood be no far to be seek for, but in all part cotton, pepper, silk and balsamum tree do grow in abundance. the root of the herb, wiapassa be. here most plentiful. i find they in taste nothing different from good ginger and in operation very medicinable against the flux and headache. these river, as also other near raleana, do all fall out of the plain of the empire, over rock, as the river caroli do into raleana and in most place within the utmost hedge of wood. the land within be plain, void of tree and bear short grass like arromaiaries. country next adjoin unto these be the river cunanamma, vracco, mawarparo, amonna, oncowi, wiawiami, aramatappo, shurinama, shurama, cupanamma, inana, curitini, berbice, moruga, waini, barima, amacur, raleana. from cape cecyll to raleana, the coast trend 200. league next hand, west, north west. in this variety of goodly, river amonna, among the rest, pour himself into the sea in a large and deep channel. his swiftness suffer no bar nor refuse any ship of what burden soever they be within his mouth. for good and hopeful respect, be port burley place, the inhabitant that dwell eastward, do never pass low than berbice to trade above curitini. in the wood they gather great quantity of honey. farther to the eastward, then dessekebe, no spaniard ever travel. in which respect, and that no sea-card that i have see at any time do in any sort near a truth describe this coast. i think the liberty of impose english name to certain place of note of right to belong unto our labour, the rather because occasion thereby offer itself grateful to acknowledge the honour due unto they that have be, and i hope will still continue, favourer of this enterprise: the indian, to show the worthiness of dessekeebe, for it be very large and full of land in the mouth, do call it the brother of orenoque. it lie southerly into the land and from the mouth of it unto the head they pass in twenty day, then take their provision. they carry it on their shoulder one day journey afterward they return for their canoe and bear they likewise to the side of a lake which the iaos call. the carib parime, which be of such bigness that they know no difference between it and the main sea. there be infinite number of canoe in this lake and, as i suppose it be no other than that, whereon manoa stand in this river, which we now call devoritia, the spaniard do intend to build they a town in moruga. it be that they hunt wareo and his people in september, about half a year since arromaiarie, who win so great credit by overthrow the tiuitiua of amana and make free the passage of that river, but now again live in disgrace by reason that the carib of guanipa have kill most of his follower and burn his town. be present with they and take away many of the woman of that place. another indian of the nation of the arwaccas inhabit in barima, be likewise present and conduct the spaniard to all the indian dwelling. they be not of anthony de berreo, his company, that follow this chase, but be the spaniard of marguerita. this spaniard understand the guiana language and be repute a very sufficient man. and the caraccas, with who santiago forsake his governor, berreo join himself, for which fact he now lie in fetter at trinidado every day, expect sentence of death. the occasion hereof grow as follow: when berreo have lose his man, be leave with fasshardo at cumanaw, all alone as forlorn and never likely to compass his intend conquest of guiana. the governor of the caraccas and marguerita consult together, send with all speed into spain to advertise their king that berreo be utter unable to follow this enterprise, that he have give it over and do now sojourn in his old day at fasshardo, his house mind nothing else but his solace and recreation. they far declare of how great importance this matter be and that a english gentleman of such reckon as they name your lordship to be, have be in the guiana and understand so much of the state thereof and the nation thereunto adjoin as topiawarie be, both old and wise, can inform you of who, also in confirmation of friendship, have give you his only son, to who the inheritance of the country do belong. after he, there be no other likelihood but that you, who adventure so far, and in such sort as you do, only to see and know a certainty, will leave nothing unattempted to possess so rich a country and without all doubt, will return present that mean time you have leave this age. sire alive, to be a block in their way to who, after his decease, this enterprise by patent do belong, and to be a weak adversary against yourself who, at all time, you know easy how to distress. and that therefore, it may be behooveful for his majesty to revoke berreo, his grant, and to use their service who be ready and willing without any delay to undertake the charge. these news be at large, amplify and deliver to the king domingo bereo, his camp master, who be send into spain five month before your arrival to trinidado with a sufficient quantity of gold. get out of guiana to levy and furnish 500 man. have get knowledge of this practice. so solicit this cause in bereo, his behalf. that present order be give for the victual and man of ten ship to be send to bereo and far. this gold bear such weight that the king command other 18. of his ship to stop at trinidado and not to follow their other direction before they see that place secure from enemy berreo. suppose that these governor in send with such speed into spain, mean he no good, to approve his care and constancy, and that he never will yield under the burden of his adverse fortune. give no time or breath to his adversary, nor himself return forthwith to carapana, his port, only with fifteen man. be the scatter remnant of those who you late dispossess of trinidado, these governor follow he and assure themselves of. present employment from their king, preoccupate the time of their direction to be, return from spain, enter the guiana with their man, with full determination to murder bereo and to dispatch all his company. they indeed kill two or three, but bereo flee towards caroli, where he stay, hope for succour from his son, anthony de cemenes. to come down the river from nueuo reyno de granado, the margueritane with their accomplice, busy themselves, some in search the country, other in purvey of victual out of the river that do lie eastward of which number these be that, enter into moruga with 20. canoe, santiago, pass up into topiawarie country and there take francis sparrow, sir george gifford, his man prisoner who, with plenty of gold, ransom his life and be now abide in cumanaw. this do they all return to trinidado and begin to build their town there when, unhaphappilie, to their small comfort, the 28. sail arrive and take santiago, prisoner, the other actor in this interlude vanish, and in canoe recover marguerita and cumanaw again. eighteen of the say ship leave all thing in good order, depart from trinidado to follow their other direction. ten do yet remain fortify at conquerabia and expect our come. this particular relation i have from a indian servant to berreo that can speak spanish, who i take in the river he be. of the nation of the iaos and from a child breed up with berreo. i give he trade to buy he a canoe to return into his country and so leave he, glad that he have meet with we. now the indian of moruga be chase from their dwelling, do seek by all mean possible to accord all the nation in one, so to invade the arwaccas who be guide to the spaniard in, show their town and betray they, for they be full persuade that by drive these arwaccas who serve the spaniard for a great part of this nation do also hate or not know they out of their territory. and trinidado, the spaniard, for want of bread, will be enforce to seek habitation far of. or at the least in time consume and be waste. the 6. day of april we come to a anchor within the mouth of the river raleana. have spend twenty and three day in discovery upon this coast. the channel of this river have six or seven depth, nine or ten mile off at sea the bar lie far out and at low water have not full two it highe, not above five foot, except at a spring tide. we anchor in ten the first night. the next morning twelve canoe come unto we furnish and provide of victual after their manner for the war. their captain name be anawra and aparwa, these cassique, when the spaniard make the last inroad in those part be in the inland. among the iwarewakerie their neighbour, by which occasion have lose some of their wife. for, notwithstanding their profession of christianity, some of these spaniard keep ten or twelve woman, think themselves well and sure, bless, howsoever they live, if their town and house be religious cross. they keep together thirty canoe hope at our come, which they have now long expect to recover this loss upon they and the arwaccas who, in their absence, have do this wrong. they show i this their purpose and require to be join in league of friendship with we against our enemy, when of they i have learn so much of the present estate of the country as they do know, they demand whether we have bring no more force with we. but only one ship. i answer they as before i do the other, that we now come only to trade, not know until this present that any spaniard be in the guiana, that upon our return our whole fleet will hasten to set forward and that in the mean time we will now visit our friend and help they so far as we can in any thing that we shall find needful present to be do. after long discourse for their chief man stay with i all night when he have cause i to spit in my right hand with many other ceremony which they use in confirm friendship, he go to the shore and one of his canoe he send to bring forward the other twenty one. other he cause to go up the river before we to bring intelligence. then call together the chief of his company, they make small fire and sit in their hamaccas, each one sort himself with a companion, recount among themselves the worthy deed and death of their ancestor, execrate their enemy most despiteful and magnify their friend with all title of praise and honour that may be devise. thus they sit, talk and take tobacco some two hour, and until their pipe be all spend, for by they they measure the time of this, their solemn conference. no man must interrupt or disturb they in any sort- for this be their religion and prayer, which they now celebrate- keep a precise fast one whole day in honour of the great princess of the north, their patroness and defender, her majesty. their canoe being make ready, they accompany we and, in the way, show we where the shoal of the river do lie. by this captain, i learn that muchikeri be the name of the country, where macureguerai, the first town of the empire of guiana that lie towards raieana, be seat in a fair and exceed large plain below the high mountain that bear northwesterly from it. that it be but three day journey distant from carapana, his port, and that monoa be but six. day far, that they themselves do pass, in three day, into the country of the iwarewakery, by the river which, though it be not the direct yet be it the ready way to macureguerai, for that which lead by carapana, his dwelling be in some place difficult and mounteynous. that a nation of clothe people call cassanari do dwell not far from the place where the river do first take the name of orenoque, and that far within they border upon a sea of salt water name parime. that a great river call pass through their country into orenoque. that manoa stand twenty day journey from the mouth of wiapoco, sixteen day from barima, thirteen day from amacur and ten day from aratoori. that the best way unto it be not by macureguerai, because it be in some place cumbersome and rocky. that of all other. the carib that dwell high up in orenoque know most of the inland and of those nation and that they speak no other language than such as john, your interpreter do well understand. he certify i of the headless man and that their mouth in their breast be exceed wide the name of their nation in the carib language, chiparemai. they have eminent head like dog and live all day time in the sea. they speak the chari^es language and the guianian call they ewiapanomos. what i have hear of a sort of people more monstrous i omit to mention because it be no matter. of difficulty to get one of they and the report otherwise will appear fabulous. last he tell i of a inland river name cawrooma, adjoin to aratoori, and that the cuepyn mountain, where carapana dwell, be hardly accessible, that the amapagotos have image of gold of incredible bigness and great store of unmanned horse of the carackas breed, and that they dwell five day journey up the river about caroli. we with our fleet of canoe be now not far from carapana port when our intelligencer return and inform we that ten spaniard be late, go with much trade to barima, where these indian dwell to buy bread, and that within one day two other canoe of spaniard be appoint to come by the river amana to carapana. his port. upon this occasion they take counsel and in the end desire to return to their house, lest the spaniard find they from home and imagine that they do purposely absent themselves, shall take away their wife and spoil their dwelling. they far resolve, if it be possible, to cut they off, which afterward they do perform, for when they be disperse in their house, seek cassava, sudden, at one time, in all place they be assault, and not one of they escape. carapana, who hand be in lay this plot? send we this news as we return down the river, the two other canoe that come from trinidado by amana, notwithstanding that, we keep a league before the ship with our boat. see the ship before. we have sight of they and present, with all speed go to berreo to advertise he of our come he forthwith. dispatch two or three messenger to trinidado, one of his canoe, meet with our spy who the indian of barima have leave to go with we. they rifle he of his victual, give he knife and dismiss he in 8.. day sail still before a wind, we arrive at topiawarie port, in all which time no indian that we know come aboard. we, for the time of our return, promise at your lordship departure from thence be expire they, in despair, sever themselves among the other nation. here the spaniard have seat their rarceria of some twenty or thirty. house the high rocky island that lie in the midst of the river against the mouth of caroli be their fort or refuge when they misdoubt safety in their town or have notice of any practice against they. but now leave both town and island. they join themselves altogether and retire to the mouth of the river caroli, place there a secret ambush to defend the passage to those mine from whence your oar and white stone be take. the last year, we all not without grief to see ourselves thus defeat and our hungry hope make void, be witness of this, their remove as we ride at a anchor within musket shoot of their town. a indian come unto we with lean cheek, thin hair and a squint eye to inform we that they be very strong, that berreo his son be with he, that they have but two small pinnace at trinidado, which they daily look for to come up the river and last to view our ship. well, and our provision, but especial, to learn whether topiawarie his son be with we. this informer very countenance, give he to be suspect and therefore, partly by threaten, partly by promise of reward, we win he to confess the truth, which he do, assure we that berreo have not full 55. man with he, whereof twenty come late from trinidado, twenty from nueuo reyno and the rest he bring with he about six. month since, when he flee from carapana, his port, and be drive with his small company to keep the foresay island near caroli, and that though now his number be thus increase yet, dare he not adventure at any time to leave the fast wood and to go but half a league from his hold into the plain that some few of the arwaccas be abide with. he that he daily look for his son from nueuo reyno, for his campe-maister from trinidado and for horse from the that topiawarie be dead. the indian of that coast all flee and disperse, except the son of one curmatoi and another woman of account who the spaniard hold prisoner for consent to the death of their nine man and the. holy friar in morekito, his time, this curmatoi be flee towards guanipa and be a man of special note among the indian. that iwiakanarie, topiawarie, his son, his near kinsman, have hold the country to his use by his father appointment, ever since your be in the river, that there be ten ship and many spaniard at trinidado. that the indian, our friend, do fear lest you with your company be all slay and your ship sink at cumanaw, for so the spaniard noise it among they. that some of his friend with putijma be in the mountain not far from the hill, and that berreo have send for six piece of ordinance which he mean to plant where they may best command the river, when we have. stay here two day. consider that where no hope be leave of do good, to abide there in harm way, do nothing will be bootless. i resolve to seek putijma in the mountain and turn down the river with the force of the stream, some twenty mile in six hour. the next morning, with ten shot, i go ashore, intend, if the indian shall think themselves too weak, with our help to displant the spaniard, to set some of they on work for hatchet and knife, to return we gold grain and white stone from such place as they shall be direct unto when we come to the place of their usual abode. we see that they late have be there but can speak with none of they. it may be that fear, which be easy of belief, persuade they that we- be spaniard gilbert, my pilot here- offer to bring we either to the mine of white stone near winicapora or else to a gold i which putijma have show he be but one day. journey over land from the place where we now stay at a anchor, i see far off the mountain adjoin to this gold i and have measure their path near the same place this last year, can not judge it to be fit even mile from we. i do well remember how come that way with putijma the year before he point to this same mountain, make sign to have i go with he thither. i understand his sign and mark the place, but mistake his meaning. imagine that he will have, show i the overfall of the river curwara from the mountain, my indian. show i in what sort, without dig they gather the gold in the sand of a small river name that spring and fall from the rock where this mine be. and far tell i that he be with putijma at what time morekito be to be execute by the spaniard, and that then the chief of morekito, his friend, be in consultation to show this mine unto they. if so, they may redeem their captain life. but upon better advice, suppose they in this case to be implacable and that this may prove a mean to lose not only their king, but their country also. they have to this day conceal it from. they be of all other, the rich and most plentiful the age sort to keep this from common knowledge have devise a fable of a dangerous dragon that haunt this place and devour all that come near it. but our indian, if when we return we do bring store of strong wine, which they love beyond measure, with it, will undertake so to charm this dragon that he shall do we no harm. ay that for this end come from home and in this journey have take much more pain to less purpose, will very glad, from this mountain, have take so good a proof to witness my be in the country, but withal consider that not one indian of our know friend come unto we that don juan, the cousin of who live here, a evolt from the spaniard, be now in election to be chief commander of all the indian force in those part. can, in policy for his sake, who inheritance he seek to usurp, be a fast friend unto we that the spaniard abide in, for there be ten may well, before we can do any thing and return, cause some other of berreo, his man, to join with they in the way to intercept we, and forethink withal that there be no mean but by ourselves to make know our discovery. if we return, not in our misfortune, the hope of follow this voyage will be bury. but beside all this and the respect of such spyal as the spaniard keep to observe our do foreknow that if the enemy shall, by our linger, stop our passage, which, in one or two place of advantage, few of they may. easy do. it will be a question how, with our ship, to get out of the river, except first we can remove they. i think it best, all other possibility set apart to seek in time to be free from the hazard of the foresay evil passage. while we be search at the shore for the indian, my barge take a canoe with three man in she, the one a servant to berreo, as before be mention, the other two merchant of cassava. they have a letter send from the governor to be convey to trinidado, which i receive. there be also a great hatchet and twenty knife wherewith this indian servant shall buy a canoe and hire indian to carry she up the river towards nuevo reyno. this canoe, forsooth with four other, be to be send to bring down berreo, his son, with all his force, which now have be, i think, full three year in prepare, if five such boat be sufficient to convoy he, his man and all their provision. it may seem he come with no great strength, this servant, as he be a man of especial trust and near berreo, so appear he to have some insight in his proceed. he show, i, that the indian who, with these knife, shall be hire, be to pass up so high as where some of the cassanari do dwell, in small village, that berreo his purpose be, when they come thither, to leave they there and make they his chief officer over. the other indian, and in their place some of the cassanari shall return, who likewise shall be make justice and constable over they of guiana. that from trinidado he mean to remove most of the old inhabitant that will be tractable and interpose they among the cassanarians of guiana and the guianian of the cassanari. that the arwaccas shall whole possess trinidado and the river side of raleana. that they already be provide of threescore negro to work the mine in these place, and that by this mean berreo hope to keep these several nation in mutual enmity each against other, all to serve his turn and never to become strong or likely to join themselves against he. he far show i that topiawarie soon after our departure. from the river, flee into the mountain, carry hugh godwyn with he and leave a substitute in his country, as aforesaid, and that the next news they hear of he be that he be dead and the english boy eat by a tiger. that the spaniard believe neither the one nor the other. that about the end of june, when the river shall be impassable, the ten ship shall depart from trinidado and that berreo, ever since his come to guiana, have spend his time altogether in purvey of victual, whereof there be such scarcity by reason that the indian forsake their house, have not, this half year, plant any of their ground that the spaniard be enforce to seek their bread far off and content themselves to. live with little. in sail up the river, we pass by toparimacko, his port, which in one place be very shall the channel lie close aboard the shore. we return, therefore, another way, by the main river on the south side. this branch we find large, deep and without danger. when we be come near carapana, his port, he send five or six, several canoe, promise this day and the next that he will come and speak with we. thus we linger six or seven day, but he come not. in the end he send one of his age follower to certify we that he be sick, old and weak, that the way near his dwell be not easy and that therefore, he desire we to hold he. excuse for not come this old man dilate unto we that carapana, in hope of our return, have ever since your lordship, be in that country. keep the mountain where the spaniard can hardly any way enforce he that they have take from he and his people many of their wife, because they refuse to furnish they, weekly with a certain proportion of bread and victual that don juan, otherwise call eparacano, have the commandment of all his subject, except only a choice guard of man sufficient to keep the place he now dwell in that it repent, he, of his ambition ever to have seek by the spaniard mean to have enlarge his country and people, for true it be that from the beginning he be a lord of no other than ordinary power among they, until he have enter into frinedship with berreo, for then the indian on all side leave some. their habitation and many their commander to become his subject. that so they may have the privilege to trade with the spaniard for hatchet and knife, which be rare jewel of great price among they. that he now see no other choice but that the indian must, if they will do well, without far dissemble of their necessity. either entertain we, their friend, or else give place to the spaniard, their enemy, for the plenty of gold that be in this country. be now know and discover there be no possibility for they to keep it on the one side. they can feel no great misery, nor fear more extremity than they be sure to find if the spaniard prevail. who perforce do take all thing from they. use they as their slave, to run to row, to be their guide, to carry their burden and, that which be worst of all, to be content, for safety of their life, to leave their woman. if a spaniard chance but to set his eye on any of they, to fancy she on the other side, they can hope for, nor desire no better state and usage than her. majesty, gracious government and princely virtue, do promise and assure unto they. for, say he, when the other year we flee into the mountain and measure your do by the spaniard in like case, make no other account but that your commander, be able as he be, will doubtless have persecute we to the uttermost as the only maintainere. and supporter of your enemy and will, at the least, if he can not reach we, take our town and make we ransom our wife and child. we find it far otherwise, and that none of your well govern company dare offer any of we wrong or violence. no, not by stealth, when unknown they may have do it. we then believe it to be true that your grand captain, report of his princess, take this for a good proof of her royal commandment and wisdom that have frame her subject to such obedience, and of your happiness that enjoy the benefit thereof. that carapana weigh the good and friendly course of our proceed. do humble crave of her majesty for himself and his people that with the rest of the indian, which whole depend on her princely regard towards they, he also may enjoy her favourable protection. that he do this not as a man leave unto himself and forsake by the spaniard, but as one that know their injustice, hate their cruelty and take it fo his best choice utter to disclaim their friendship. it may be pertinent, as sure it be a thing worth the note, to consider how this precedent of your moderation and good order, which to we seem a matter but of small and ordinary respect, have both alienate their heart altogether from the spaniard and stir up in they true love and admiration thereof. for as government be the only bond of common society, so to man, lawless that each one to another be. to man i say that live in daily tumult, fear, doubt, suspicion, barbarous cruelty, never sleep, secure, but always either drink or practise one another death. to such man as these be, who want discipline, justice and good order, to confirm they in a quiet and peaceable course of live, know not where to find it. the sense and sweetness thereof be as the dew of hermon, it be as the harmony of a well tune instrument. to be brief, it carry in itself not only a due and worthy commendation, but be available without stroke strike to gain a kingdom for the indian in all part, within and near the guiana. do offer their service and promise to provide victual and what else their country yield. desire only that some force of man may remain with they to deliver they from oppression and tyranny, and now by general consent, though hatchet and knife. be the only thing of request and useful unto they. they have agree by no mean to trade with the spaniard for any thing. far this old man show i, whence most of their gold come, that be form in so many and diverse fashion, whence their spleenestone and other of all sort be to be have in plenty. where gold be to be gather in the sand of their river, from what part the spaniard, both by trade and otherwise, have return much gold. this he utter, with carapana, his consent. i doubt, not hope, thereby to induce we to return again, for, contrary to their law of secrecy- which in this case they do all general observe- sharp punish the breaker thereof as enemy unto their native country. i find this man no whit scrupulous, but very free and liberal of speech in all thing, and because we may know that we shall not want hand or help in this or any other our enterprise, if perhaps we shall find cause to pass up to the head of this river. he declare that the spaniard have no indian to trust, unto but some of the arwaccas which, since they be not many, can be but of small force. that the carib of guanipa, the crawanna among the tiuitiua, the shebaios, iaos, etaiguinams, cassamari, with the rest of the nation far and near, be all ready, on what side soever the spaniard shall stir to fight against they. that the through who country they must first pass be alone sufficient to encounter they, such be the strength of their country and the valour of the man. the indian hold opinion that they be notable, sorcerer and invulnerable. in the mountain where they dwell, white stone be find of such hardness that by no art or mean they can be. pierce. they imagine that these pariagotos become invulnerable by eat these stone. the fable omit, happy they may prove good diamond. then he show how the iwarewakeri have nourish grass in all place where passage be these three year, and that it be at this present so high as some of the tree which they mean to burn so soon as the spaniard shall be within danger thereof. last, he show i that wariarimagoto, the emperor, chief captain for those part, have gather together many thousand of the epuremai to keep the border of the empire, and that he lie now on the south side of the mountain, some one day journey, or little more from the spaniard. to be short, he certify i that they all be. resolve not to seek upon they, for indeed they fear their shot, but to defend their own and to expect our come. in the mean time, they take opportunity, when they find any of they straggle or divide from their strength by little and little, to lessen their number. the place where we be at a anchor be but one day journey from carapana. i therefore make motion to this captain to stay with two or three of his company aboard the ship and to cause his man to bring i with my interpreter to carapana, his dwell. he answer that it be not good so to do, lest perhaps some spy may inform the spaniard thereof, whereby danger will grow to carapana, for they have many time. use many mean to reconcile he unto they, but he, from time to time, have dally with they. neither profess himself their enemy nor, in aught, show they any friendship. now, say he, if the spaniard shall by any mean come to knowledge that you have confer together, they will take this occasion to persecute he with all extremity as their open enemy, who they now neglect or at the least fear not, as be a harmless old man and for this cause only have carapana forbear to come unto you. by this i perceive that to stay long for he, though glad i can have be content to spend one seven-night more to speak with he, will be purposelesse, wherefore have assure so many of the indian. as at any time come unto we of our speedy return. promise they plenty of knife, bead and hatchet if they will reserve their cassava and provide store of their piece of gold for we. i desire this captain to be a mean that our friend of trinidado may understand of our be in the river and that we mean to relieve they so soon as convenient may be. he promise in carapana his behalf that this shall not be forget. one of the captain of the cyawanna who do now dwell in the river arawawo near trinidado. undertake also, without fail to ascertain they thereof. i be the more careful herein, because so many ship be there, i doubt lest they will take order that no indian. shall speak with we, for so indeed it fall out. this captain of the cyawanna come likewise to join with we and have provide fifteen canoe for that purpose. their dwell be late in macureo, where the spaniard one night steal on. they kill twenty of their man and burn their house because they refuse to trade with they for certain image of gold make with many head which they have get out of the guiana. i send a present of iron to carapana and then set sail in turn down the river. we spend eight day in many place where the channel lie. we find twenty depth. where it be, shall we have two and a half and that, but in one or two place? of the worthiness of this river, because i can say enough, i will speak nothing. we have presume to call it by the name of raleana, because yourself be the first of our nation that ever enter the same, and i think it nothing inferior to amasones, which be best know by the name of oreliana, the first discoverer thereof, by turn. only without help of ower, to pass so long a way in so short a time against the wind may sufficient prove that the channel be very large, good and likely to second our hope in all that we can desire. without the mouth of this river. our pinnace, the discoverer who we lose near the coast of england, come unto we. she fall with this land somewhat to the southward of cape cecyll and have spend three week and odd day in range alongst the coast. when she meet with we, william down the master inform i that they enter and search these four river in wiapoco. they sail so far until the rock stop their passage. in caiane they go up one day journey in cunanama. they find many inhabitant, curitini be the last river they have be in, whence have no other mean to find raleana, they be enforce to borrow a pilot against his will, who afterward i will have return with reward to his contentment, but he will not. our english that to steal the first blessing of a untraded place will perhaps secret hasten thither may be. behold to i for this caveat. if they take notice thereof, they may be assure that this people, as they no way seek our harm but use our man with all kindness, so be they impatient of such a wrong as to have any of their people perforce, take from they and will doubtless seek revenge. the example of the like practice upon. the coast of guinea in the year 1566.. and again at dominica, where alderman wats his ship hardly escape. be take may serve for our warning in like case, to look for no good before they be. satisfy for this injury. when we have take aboard, we, such victual as be in the pinnace we set fire in she for her rudder can serve she to no long use and stop. the flood ply to windward with the ebb near the shore until we be sixteen league to the eastward of the river mouth and then stand off to sea. we fall in 24. hour sail with punto, the northeastermost part of trinidado, but have tobacco island in sight, we first go thither. this island be plentiful of. all thing and a very good soil, it be not now inhabit because the carib of dominica be evil neighbour unto it. they of trinidado have a meaning and purpose. to fly thither when no long they can keep trinidado. their only doubt be that when they be seat there the spaniard will seek to possess it also. the governor of marguerita go late in a pinnace to view this island. gilbert, my pilot, who sometime live there, note it for the best and fruitful ground that he know. thence we return to punto and anchor in ten under the northside of the island, some five or six mile from the say point. the floud-tyde strike alongst the coast to the eastward very strong. we discharge a piece. of ordinance and afterwards go to the shore in our boat, but no indian come unto we. i will have send john of trinidado to procure some of they to speak with we, but he be altogether unwilling, allege that their dwelling be far within the mountain and that he know no part of that side of the island. fron this place, we set sail for s luce, but fall with the granadas which we find not inhabit s vincent. we hardly recover by turn under the liegh of the island. the tobacco of this place be good, but the indian be cannibal. promise we store and delay we, from day to day, seek only opportunity to betray, take and eat we, as late they have, devour the. whole company of a french ship. this their treachery be by one of their slave, reveal from thenceforth they do all forbear to come unto we to sit down on their low stool when they, by offer such ease, will seem to show courtesy. abode death to stranger that shall trust they. at matalino, we find not any inhabitant. last we come to dominica, where we can get no good tobacco but have intelligence of a spanish ship that be take in of fresh water. at the northwest side of the island we weigh anchor to seek, he, he descry, we steal away by night. the indian of this place have determine to remove and join with they of guanipa against the spaniard who, late, dispeople one of their land and at our be there one of their canoe, return from guanipa and certify we that the ten spanish ship at trinidado do ride, some of they at conquerabia, the rest at the small island near the difimboge place. herehence we steer north and by east, take the direct course to shorten our way homeward. thus have i empty your purse, spend my time and travel in, follow your lordship direction for the full discovery of this coast and the river thereof. concern the not make of a voyage for your private profit. i pretend nothing. sorry i be that where i seek. no excuse by the spaniard be there. i find my defect remediless and for my own part, i do protest that if the consideration of the public good that may ensue have not over-poysed all other hope and desire, i will rather have adventure by such small and weak mean as i have to do. well, with danger then, to return only with safety. now, although in a cause not doubtful, my allegation be no way needful yet, because the weightiness thereof and the expectation of other seem of due and right to claim something to be say by i, who your especial trust and favour, have credit and grace with this employment. pardon it, i beseech your honour if where my lamp have oil, it borrow light. also, and my speech, which be altogether unsavoury, season itself with some of the leaven of your own discourse. touch, this discovery, the particular relation of some certain thing i have reserve as proper, belong to yourself, who only, as know most, can make best use thereof. so much, in general. be here, touch, as i hope may serve to refresh the memory of this worthy enterprise in those who it may concern, and testify your care and expense in follow the same that, in a second age, when in time truth shall have credit and man wonder at the richesse and strength of this place which nature herself have marvelous fortify as her chief treasure house, shall mourn and sigh to hold idle cickle while other reap. and gather in this harvest. it be not say that sir walter ralegh be, of all man live in his day, most industrious in seek, most fortunate in attain to the fullness of a inestimable public good, if know that for envy and private respect his labour be lessen, his information mistrust, his proffer not regard, and the due honour of his desert impart to other. if i say see, know and bear all this, he with patience have persist in so good a way of do his princess and country service and have but perfect his first discovery by send a ship or two for that purpose. for then sure all let and doubt be remove. and so large a kingdom, so exceed, rich, so plentiful of. all thing, as this by his discourse appear to be, be offer. no device and vain surmise can have take place. no illusion can have prevail. it have be blindness and deafness in those that be near her majesty, do spend their day in serve the common weal. not to see and know. in so weighty a matter, it have be malicious obstinacy, impotency of mind and more than treason to the common wealth. the matter stand only upon acceptance. to seek either to foreslow, so fit a occasion, or forsake, so general a blessing. this if be now cut off through a singular and incomparable temper in overcome evil with good. this, your second discovery- have not only find a free and open entrance into raleana, which the natural call orenoque, but moreover yield choice of forty several great river, the lesser i do not reckon be for the most part, with small vessel navigable for our merchant and other that do now find little profit in set forth for reprisal to exercise trade in to, such as shall be willing to adventure in search of they. i can propose some hope of gold mine and certain assurance of piece of make gold, of spleen-stone, kidney-stone and other of better estimate. but because our belief seem to be mate in these great matter and a certainty of small profit be the ready inducement to quicken our weak hope, i. not go so far as i own eye may warrant. i do only promise in theafore, say, river brasil, wood, honey, cotten, balsamun and drug to help defray charge and far, because without a beginning there can be no continuance of these benefit unto our country, to any that shall be the first under taker hereof. i be glad, content to give such light and knowledge as, by conference with the indian, i have attain unto myself, and the remain of my few year i have bequeath whole to raleana, and all my thought live only in that action, the prosecute whereof be in itself just, profitable and necessary, just because it be intend for the defence of harmless people who fear thraldom and oppression, desire to protect. themselves and their country under her majesty, tuition, profitable as may be gather not only by many spanish letter intercept but also by the proof mention in the discourse, of the first discovery and since that, by the indian own voluntary relation and last, by the provision that the spaniard do make to acquit we thereof, necessary it be as be the only help to put a bit in the mouth of the unbridled spaniard, the only way to enter into his treasury of nuevo reyno and peru, the only mean to animate the wrong indian, with our assistance, to seek revenge for the extreme murder and cruelty which they have endure and to ruinate his naked city in all those part of the inland who foundation have. be lay in the blood of their parent and ancestor. the force that the spaniard have already send to trinidado to fortify there and keep the passage of this river, be a evident argument that the king fear and doubt the sequel of this discovery. for can it be a small matter, or have he so waste employment for his man and ship that upon no ground he will send 28.. ship to keep we only from tobacco. for what else, that good be can trinidado yield we? no, doubtless, if the return of berreo, his campe-maister, with ten of these ship be compare with precedent advertisement concern he, it will appear more than probable that the guiana gold wage these man and ship and that they be. now more careful to obtain this place, then to keep other, which they have already get, which, note, except in matter of extraordinary account, be not incident to their policy and proceed again. it can be think but that either it be senseless madness in the governor of marguerita and the caraccas to bring their state and life in question by seek, contrary to their king order, to enter the guiana and kill berreo with his, his follower, or else the abundance of pearl in marguerita and the gold mine in the caraccas seem matter of small account. the guiana only be, in their judgement, rich, plentiful and able of it self to redeem their trespass and offence, how great soever it shall be. the sundry attempt and overthrow of the spaniard be man of power and honourable place in labour, these 63. year and upward, to enlarge the kingdom of spain with this mighty and great empire do plain show that they long time seek a path where, in one month, a high way be find that the loss of their life witness their desire and the worthiness of the thing, where to we the easiness of obtain discredit the greatness of the attempt and that if now, at the last, they do prevail, they must hold by tyranny that which they get by the. sword. where then our return? nothing by the indian be more. wish for nothing expect more earnest those objection which have be make by many seem wise and the impediment likely to arise, as they have suppose, be best answer by the unreproved witness of these man action. some have term these discovery fable and fantasy, as if there have be no such land or territory. other, allow both of the place and that such a kingdom or country be discover, make conclusion that if it have be so rich as we have, suppose that no doubt the king of spain will by this time have possess it, but if they consider that the spanish-nation have already conquer the two empire of mexico and peru with so many. other kingdom and province. we may very well answer that his power be not infinite and that he have do well for the time, and yet it be manifest that this very empire have be by all those several spaniard, the catalogue of who name be by itself hereunto annex at sundry time undertake and never perform. howbeit the world have reason to admire their constancy and their great labour, and we may well blush at our own idle, dispairefull and loiter disposition that can find ability in another barren and starve nation to possess so much of the world and can do nothing but frame argument against ourselves as unfit and powerless to possess one province already discover and of which our nation have assurance of the. people love and that all the chieftain and principal have vow their obedience and service to her majesty. the navigation be withal, so short, dangerless and free from infectious sickness. if doubt of peril may moderate the mind of man once move with steadfast hope that gold shall be the reward of their travel, it may easy be perceive that all those let and hindrance that can any way be allege or wrest so much as but to touch. we do deep and near concern the spanish king, and in a manner violent, withhold he from that which, he notwithstanding, carry with success. while we, out of season, do affect the bare style to be name man stay and circumspect in our proceed. it be report that calanus. the indian throw down before alexander the great a dry, sere piece of leather and then put his foot on one of the end of it. the leather be tread down on that side, rise on all part else. by this the wise man do show unto he a figure and similitude of his kingdom, which be exceed large, must of necessity, in all other part, except the place of the king residence, be always full of stir, tumult and insurrection. the end afterward confirm that this empire consist of sundry nation can not keep itself from dissolution. no potentate live, have or can have so faithful and incorrupt counsellor as be the example and history of forepass age. we may therefore be bold to think that the governor of the spanish affair shall mind it that their king lustful desire and ambitious thought to establish over all europe one law, one lord, one religion be build and erect on a dangerous, ungrounded resolution. consider that many of the neighbour kingdom be of equal force in man or great than he can make, be settle in a long, continue estate, be entire within themselves and hate to hear the voice of a stranger. it be not unlikely that they, in this case, shall lay before their king the fatal destiny of many worthy that have be constrain for want of sufficient number of their natural subject. after many year spend in the war to retire to their own country and have be glad, peaceable, to hold their own signiory at home, resign all that unto other, which they have get abroad by hard adventure and much effusion of blood. the king of spain can but discern that his spacious empire and kingdom, be so many and so far, divide one from another, be like the member of a monstrous body tie together with cable only for take away the traffic of unnecessary commodity transport out of spain, those huge country of. the indies have no common link of affinity, law, language or religion and be of themselves, able to maintain themselves without foreign commerce, be not so simple as not to know their own strength and to find that they do rather possess spaniard, then that they be possess by they. he can be ignorant that spain itself be on all side environ with many puissant enemy, mighty and great prince who know it to be rich without man, confident without reason, proud and adventurous without mean sufficient. may happy confederate to chastise he, as a insolent intruder and disturber of all quietness and go no far than spain itself. may, even there, shake the foundation of his long contrive device and, in one act, redeem the time control. his aspire humour and break the band in sunder that import servitude and subversion to all the dominion of christendom. again, his counsel may well inform he that to dispeople and disable himself at home, in hope to obtain the guiana, be a country strong of itself and defend with infinite multitude of indian enemy, be rich and by the inhabitant offer unto the english, his contempt towards we will seem so intolerable and despiteful as may be sufficient to provoke we, though otherwise we have no such inclination. if he, unprovided of able help to effect it, shall rest himself on a careless presumption that we can, we dare not, we will not stir in a matter that promise we so great benefit and may so high. offend he he may be, persuade that to leave no other succour or safety to his nakedness but the old, stale practice of spread rumour and give out false intelligence, of preparation to invade england, thereby to keep we at home, or else of hire and suborn some machavilian under hand by secret conveyance to stop the course of our proceed, or last, of procure some wild outlaw to disquiet our tranquillity. be but a poor, weak and uncertain stay to uphold his estate by, and yet set such like drift aside, what can be imagine likely to hinder we from prevail in the guiana, rather than he who disadvantage it be to be encumber with the self same and manifold more impediment, then can any way be. suppose with good cause, to impeach or divorce we from so profitable a attempt. all this notwithstanding, if the spanish king not be able to dissemble his desire or bear the loss of this one kingdom, put himself out of his strength at home and expose his people to the hazard of all casualty abroad, be resolve whatsoever shall happen, not to relinquish the guiana but to keep this one iron more in the fire, on no other assurance but a peremptory disdain of prevention if he appear so eager, bend for the guiana, as if it be enact for a law among themselves to thrust for it and not to hear, conceive or believe any thing that may dissuade or deter they from the conquest thereof it. than appertain unto we not to enforce those objection against ourselves which he, with less reason, reject as frivolous, since by how much the more earnest he be in follow this purpose, by so much the less cause have we to be divert from it to, such as shall be willing far to wade in this argument. fos brevity sake, i do propose only this bare assertion that england and the guiana conjoin be strong and more easy. defend then, if england alone shall repose herself on her own force and poerfulnesse. the reason that may be infer to prove this need no rational discourse. they be all intimate in the only example of spain itself which, without the indies, be but a purse without money or a paint sheath without a dagger. in sum, it seem unto i that, whereas the difficulty of perform this enterprise have be produce for a discouragement, it be a dull conceit of strange weakness in ourselves to distrust our own power so much, or at least our own heart and courage as value the spanish nation to be omnipotent or yield that the poor portugal have that master spirit and conquer industry above we, as to be able to seat himself among the many mighty prince of the east indies to frontier china to hold in subjection the philippines, zeilan, calcutta, goa, ormus, mozambique and the. rest the navigation be so tedious and full of peril to suffer ourselves to be put back for worthless cipher, out of place without account, all which region be now also by the late conquest of portugal, entitle to the spanish king, to who the coleny of those part do yet, general, refuse to swear. fealty and allegiance and the care depend on he not only of govern, they in the east so far off, but also of order and strengthen of those disunite, scatter and ill guard empire and province in the west. it may very well be allege to the, say, spanish king that it be more wisdom for he to assure and fortify some part of those already. get, then to begin the conquest of. guiana, so far separate from the rest of his indies, in which he have have so many misfortune, and against who the natural people be so impetuous, bend and oppose. be it not that it exceed all the rest in abundance of gold and other riches. the case then so stand. be it not mere wretchedness in we to spend our time, break our sleep and waste our brain in contrive. a cavil false title to defraud a neighbour of half a ^kor of land, whereas here whole shyere of fruitful, rich ground, lie now waste. for want of people do prostitute themselves unto we like a fair and beautiful woman in the pride and flower of desire year. if we do but consider how unhappy berreo, his affair with his assistant have, of late year, in our own knowledge, succeed, who can say if the hand of the almighty be not against they and that he have a work in this place, in steed of papistry, to make the sincere light of his gospel to shine on this people, the effect whereof shall be a royal crown of everlasting remembrance to all other, blessing that from the beginning. the lord have plentiful pour on our dread sovereign in a eminent and supreme degree of all perfection. if the castilian pretend a religious care of plant christianity in those part, have in their do preach nought else but avarice, rapine, blood, death and destruction. to those naked, sheeplike creature of god, erect statue and trophy of victory unto themselves in the slaughter of million of innocent. do not the cry of the poor, succourless ascend unto the heaven. have god forget to be gracious unto the workmanship of his own hand. or shall not his judgement, in a day of visitation by the ministry of his *? * (@) maie^^^^, choose servant, come on these bloodthirsty butcher like rain into a fleece of wool to leave this. digression. it be fit only for a prince to begin and end this work. the maintenance and order thereof require sovereign power, authority and commandment. the river of raleana give open and free passage. any provision that the spaniard can make to the contrary, notwithstanding, for once yearly the land near the river be all drown to convey man, horse munition and victual for any power of man that shall be send thither. i do speak it on my soul health as the best testimony that i can in any cause yield to aver a truth that have now, the second time, be in this country and, with the help of time and leisure, well advise myself upon all circumstance to be think on. i can discern no. sufficient impediment to the contrary, but that with a competent number of man. her majesty, may to she and her successor enjoy this rich and great empire and have once plant there. may for ever, by the favour of god, hold and keep it subject, i doubt not. may, through her majesty, gracious sufferance join their strength together, invade, spoil and overrun it, return with gold and great riches. but what good of perpetuity can follow thereof? or who can hope that they will take any other course than such as tend to a private and present benefit? consider that a empire once obtain be of congruity, how and wheresoever the charge shall grow to be annex unto the crown, the riches of this place be not fit. for any private estate, no question. they will rather prove sufficient to cross and countervail the spaniard his proceed in all part of christendom where his money make way to his ambition. if the necessity of follow this enterprise do nothing, urge we, because in some case better a mischief than a inconvenience, let the conveniency thereof somewhat move we, in respect both of so many gentleman, soldier and young brother who, if they for want of employment, do not die like cloy cattle in rank easefulnesse be enforce for maintenance sake sometime to take shameful and unlawful course, and in respect of so many handicraftman have able body that do live in cleanness of tooth and poverty to sacrifice the child of the common weal unto beliall. be not to defile the land with blood, because the law of god do not prohibit it and the execution of justice require it to be so. but yet, if the water-boughe that suck and feed on the juice and nourishment that the fruitful branch shall live by be to be cut down from the tree and not regard lucky and prosperous be that right hand that shall plant and possess with a soil where they may fructify, increase and grow to good, thrice honourable and bless be the memory of so charitable a deed from one generation to another. to conclude, your lordsh, have pay for the discovery and search, both in your own person and since by i, you have frame it and mould it ready. for her majesty to set on her seal. if either envy or ignorance or other devise frustrate the rest, the good which shall grow to our enemy and the loss which will come to her majesty and this kingdom will, after a few year, show itself. we have more people, more ship and better mean, and yet do nothing. the spanish king have have so sweet a taste of the riches thereof as, notwithstanding that he be lord of so many empire and kingdom already, notwithstanding his enterprise of france and flaunders, notwithstanding that he attend this year a home invasion, yet he send twenty eight sail to trinidado, whereof ten be for that place and guiana, and have some other ship ready at cade, if the same. have not be by my lord, her majesty general, and your lordship, set on fire in one word: the time serve. the like occasion seldom happen in many age. the former repeat consideration. do all joint together, importune we now or never, to make ourselves rich, our posterity happy, our prince every way strong than our enemy, and to establish our country in a state flourish and peaceable. o, let not then such a indignity rest on we as to deprave so notable a enterprise with false rumour and vain supposition, to sleep in so serious a matter and renounce the honour, strength, wealth and sovereignty of so famous conquest to leave all unto the spaniard. here follow the name of those worthy spaniard that have seek to. discover and conquer guiana. extract out of the writing of juan de castellanos, who compile the book entitle primera varone, india. 1. the enterprise of guiana be undertake by diego de ordas of the kingdom of leon in the year 1531. he be one of the captain of cortes in the conquest of mexico. this ordas make his entrance by the river of amana, by which we enter, and spend fifty day, before he come to the river of orenoque, which we pass in fifteen. he name the river by which he enter viapari, which name it still retain in the spanish description. it lie south from trinidado, some five league. he transport out of spain a thousand soldier. he die afterwards at sea in return for spain. 2. i^an gorteso arrive at the river of amazon, or oreliano, with three hundred man. he march up into the country but neither he nor any of his company do return again. 3. gaspar de sylva with his two brother depart from tenerife, accompany with 200. man to assist diego de ordas. they seek el dorado by the river of amazon but stay there a short time. they fall down to trinidado where they all three be bury. 4. juan gonzales set sail from trinidado to discover the guiana. he repose himself more on the faith of his guide, the, on his small number of man. he, by trial, find the confine of guiana so far as he enter to be populous, plentiful of victual and rich in. gold upon such proof as he bring with he, to make good his report, many other adventure to follow his step. 5. 6. philip de vren, and after he pedro de limpias, who both successive command the almain, be leader in this action. limpias be slay by a indian cassique name. 7, jeronimo de ortall, undetrooke it by the way of marecupana. after great travel and his substance all spend, he die on the sudden at s domingo. 8. 9, ximenes, brother of don ximenes de quesida the lantado, and pedro de osuq, be both at sundry time in the same quest. 10, father jala, a friar, take with he only one companion and some indian guide pass into the province of guiana. he return with good intelligence. and bring with he eagle idol and other jewel of gold, an 1560. he assay the second time to pass in like manner but be slay by the indian. 11. hernandes de serpa also undertake it. the indian of cumanawgoto, kill he and defeat his army. 12. afterward diego de vargas and his son don juan follow this enterprise and at their first set out, be slay by the indian. 13 caceres undertake this discovery from nueuo reino de granada. he come no near to it than matachines which border upon the say kingdom of granada. he rest there and people that place. 14 it be also attempt by alonzo de herera at two several time. he endure great misery but never enter one league into the country. he seek it by wiapari or amana and be at last slay by a nation of indian call 15. it be also undertake by antonio sedenno, with who herera and augustine delgado join in the conquest of trinidado against bawcunar, a famous king of that place. he pass by marecupana in the year 1536.. to discover el dorado with 500 choose man. in this journey, he get much gold and take many indian prisoner who he manacle in iron. many of they die as they be lead in the way. the tiger be flesh on those dead. carcase assault the spaniard who, with much trouble, hardly defend themselves from they sedenno be bury within the precinct of the empire near the head of the river tinado. most of his people perish. likewise, 16 augustine delgado search the country to the southward of cumanawgoto with 53. footman and three horseman. the war that be then between the indian of the vale and those of the mountain serve well for his purpose, by which occasion he find mean to pass so far, until he come to a indian cassique name garamentall, who entertain he with all kindness and give he for a present some rich jewel of gold, six seemly page ten young slave and three nymph very beautiful, which bear the name of three province, from whence they be send to garamental, chief commander of all that country. their name be guanba, gotoguane, and these province be of a excellent temperature, very healthful and have a admirable influence in produce beautiful woman. the spaniard afterward, to requite the manifold courtesy that they receive in that country, take and carry away, beside all the gold that they can get, all the indian that they can lay, hold on. they convey they in iron to cubagua and sell they for slave. delgado afterward be shoot in the eye by a indian, of which hurt he die. 17. diego de losada succeed in his brother place. he have many more man who in the end waste themselves in mutiny. those that live return to cubugua. 18 reynoso undertake this journey but have endure, exceed trouble in the discomfort of. his mind. he give it over and be bury in hispaniola. 19, pedro de vrsua in the year 1560.. seek it with 400 spaniard, by the river oreliano, he embark his man in the country of the moti^ones. as they pass down the river, they find cinnamon tree, his man, murder he and afterward the say rebel, behead lady anes, his wife, who forsake, not her lord, in all his travel unto death. 20, friar francis montesinos, be in the province of marecupana with 100 soldier, bind for the guiana when lope aguirri the tyrant, make insurrection in all those part of the indies. what become of this intend journey be not express in the discovery of guiana? you may read both of oreliano who discover the river. of amazon, an 1510.. and of berreo, with other that have tread this maze and lose themselves in seek to find this country. a advertisement to the reader. in this breviary, the name only be comprise of such as be lead with the general fame of guiana, have endeavour to discover and possess it. the whole history be long and can sudden be translate or english at large, as we, in these elegy, find they. it may perhaps seem strange and incredible that so many cavaleros shall all fail in this one attempt, since in many part of the indies, far small number, in short time, have perform as great matter and subdue mighty kingdom. i have therefore think it good here to allege those reason which, by circumstance, may be gather to have be chief impediment to the spaniard in this intend search and conquest. the first may be the remoteness or distance of their place of rondevow from the dorado, which appear to be four, reyno, the mouth of amazon, or oreliano, cubagua, or the coast of the carackas and trinidado. 1. from moisbanda, where oreliano have his headspring to his mouth. the spaniard account it 2000, league raleana rise near the say mountain in moiabanda and tribute his water to the sea not far from the other guiana. be environ with these two fresh water sea, where their distance be great from their rise, and be beside guard with impassable mountain which in close and defend it on all part except topiawarie country. it be no marvel then if the vigour, heat and life of those spaniard who seek it from nueuo reyno be allay and spend, before they come never it in those long, desolate and uncomfortable way. 2. from cubagua to seek it by sea, in vessel of any burden be a work of far great labour. then, to sail direct from spain and to pass overland be a matter of great difficulty by reason that the indian nation inhabit between the coast of the carackas and guiana. be weary and harry with the daily incursion of the spaniard, have now turn their abuse patience into fury, refuse to suffer any force of man to be lead through their country. for the spaniard travel in those part when they find not gold answerable to their expectation, overlay they with cruelty, tyranny and thraldom, forbear neither man, woman, friend nor foe. which manner of deal, though in some sort it satisfy their desire of present profit, yet have it otherwise do they much harm in harden and drive those nation to desperate. resolution. 3 from the mouth of oreliano, to seek entrance with any number of man and to bear a hole through the mountain, be all one. neither find we that any seek it that way have at any time boast of their gain or pleasurable journey 4 from trinidado. as the course be short, so do it promise best likelihood of success, howbeit impossible it be with any vessel of ordinary burden by that way to recover the river of raleana. the second, the spaniard have be so far from further and help on another or admit partner or coadjutor in the guiana cause, that among so many attempt from the begin to the last, i can find any one when they be otherwise likely to prevail free. from discord, mutiny and cruel murder among themselves. three, the spaniard in this place have miss that advantage. which else where have stee they in all their conquest? namely the dissentition and mutual war of the indian among themselves, which, of what force it be, may be gather by the example of a^awcania in peru, for the indian of that one province contain in circuit not above 20.. league have maintain war above these 30. year against all the spaniard and in despite of they have keep their own country, oftentimes discomfort their enemy in many set battle, burn and destroy some of their strong town. the chief reason whereof i take to be because no indian nation be enemy unto they and howsoever the spaniard vaunt of. their redoubt exploit in the indies. yet do their own writing in effect testify that without the aid of the indian divide among themselves, mexico, peru and the rest have never be spanish last? i can impute it to no cause so right as immediate to the divine providence, for by he prince reign, and in my belief except we will look to be warn by miracle from heaven. we need no far assurance than we already have to persuade ourselves that it have please our god of his infinite goodness in his will and purpose to appoint and reserve this empire for we.