francia, the three late voyage and plan tation of mont, of monsieur du pont and of poutrincourt into the country call by the frenchmen cadia, lie to the south-west of cap breton, together with a excellent several treaty of all the commodity of the say, country and manner of the natural inhabitant of the same chap, i, the patent of the french king to mont for the inhabit of the country of la cadia, canada and other place in new france. henry, by the grace of god, king of france and naturre, to our dear and well-beloved the lord of mont, one of the ordinary gentleman of our chamber, greeting as our great care and labour be and have always be since our come to this crown to maintain and conserve it in the ancient dignity, greatness and splendour thereof, to extend and amplify as much as lawful may be do the bound and limit of the same. we be of a long time inform of the situation and condition of the land and territory of la cadia, move above all thing with a singular zeal and devout and constant resolution which we have take with the help and assistance of god, author, distributor and protector of all kingdom. and estate to cause the people which do inhabit the country, man, at this present time, barbarous, atheist, without faith or religion, to be convert to christianity and to the belief and profession of our faith and religion and to draw they from the ignorance and unbelief wherein they be have, also, of a long time, know by the relation of the sea captain, pilot, merchant and other who of long time have haunt, frequent and traffic with the people that be find in the say place, how fruitful, commodious and profitable may be unto we to our estate and subject the dwell possession and habitation of those country for the great and apparent profit which may be draw by the great frequentation and habitude which may be. have with the people that be find there and the traffic and commerce which may be by that mean, safe, treat and negotiate. we, then, for these cause, full trust on your great wisdom and in the knowledge and experience that you have of the quality, condition and situation of the, say, country of cadia, for the diverse and sundry navigation, voyage and frequentation that you have make into those part and other near and border upon it, assure ourselves that this our resolution and intention be. commit unto you. you will attentive, diligent and no less courageous and valourous, execute and bring to such perfection as we desire, have, express, appoint and establish you, and by these present sign with our own hand, do commit, ordain, make. constitute and establish you our lieutenant general for to represent our person in the country, territory, coast and confine of la cadia, to begin from the 40 degree unto the 46. and in the same distance or part of it, as far as may be do, to establish, extend and make to be know our name, might and authority, and under the same, to subject, submit and bring to obedience all the people of the say land and the borderer thereof, and by the mean thereof and all lawful way, to call, make, instruct, provoke and incite they to the knowledge of god and to the light of the faith and christian religion, to establish it there and in the exercise and profession of the same. keep and conserve the say people and all other inhabitant in the say place and there, to command in peace, rest and tranquillity, as well by sea as by land. to ordain, decide and cause to be execute all that which you shall judge fit and necessary to be. do for to maintain, keep and conserve the say place under our power and authority, by the form, way and mean prescribe by our law, and for to have there a care of the same with you. to appoint, establish and constitute all officer, as well in the affair of war as for justice and policy, for the first time and from thence forward, to name and present they unto we for to be dispose by we, and to give letter, title and such proviso as shall be necessary and, according to the occurrence of affair, yourself, with the advice of wise and capable man, to prescribe, under our good pleasure, law, statute and ordinance conformable as much as may be possible unto we special in thing and matter that be not provide by they to treat and contract to the same effect peace, alliance and confederacy, good amity, correspondency and communication with the say people and their prince or other have power or command. over they to entertain, keep and careful to observe the treatise and alliance wherein you shall covenant with they, upon condition that they themselves perform the same of their part and for want thereof, to make open war against they, to constrain and bring they to such reason as you shall think needful for the honour, obedience and service of god and the establishment, maintenance and conservation of our, say, authority among they, at least to haunt and frequent by you and all our subject with they in all assurance, liberty, frequentation and communication there to negotiate and traffic love and peaceable, to give and grant unto they favour and privilege, charge and honour, which entire power abovesaid. we will likewise and ordain that you have, overall, our say subject that will go in that voyage with you and inhabit there, traffic, negociate and remain in the say place to retain, take reserve and appropriate unto you what you will and shall see to be most commodious for you and proper to your charge: quality and use of the say land. to distribute such part and portion thereof, to give and attribute unto they such title, honour, right, power and faculty as you shall see necessary, according to the quality, condition and merit of the person of the same country or other chief, to populate, to manure and to make the say land to be inhabit as speedy, careful and skilful as time, place and commodity. may permit to make thereof or cause to be make to that end, discovery and view along the maritime coast and other country of the main land which you shall order and prescribe, in the foresay space of the 40 degree to the 46 degree or otherwise, as much and as far as may be, along the say coast and in the firm land, to make careful to be, seek and mark all sort of mine of gold and of silver, copper and other metal and mineral to make they to be dig, draw from the earth, purify and refine for to be convert into use, to dispose, according as we have prescribe by edict and order which we have make in this realm, of the profit and benefit of they by you or they who you shall establish to that effect. reserve unto we only the ten penny of that which shall issue from they of gold, silver and copper. leave unto you that which we may take of the other, say metal and mineral, for to aid and ease you in the great expense that the foresay charge may bring unto you will, in the mean while, that as well for your security and commodity as for the security and commodity of all our subject who will go inhabit and traffic in the, say land as general of all other that will accommodate themselves there under our power and authority, you may cause to be build and frame one or many fort, place, town. and all other house dwelling and habitation, port, haven, retire, place and lodging, as you shall know, to be fit, profitable and necessary for the perform of the say enterprise, to establish garrison and soldier for the keep of they, to aid and serve you for the effect above say, with the vagrant, idle person and masterless as idle and banish man employ in this business, well out of town as of the country, and with they that be condemn to perpetual banishment or for three year at the least, out of our realm, provide always that it be do by the advice, consent and authority of our officer over and beside that which be above mention and that which be, moreover, prescribe, command and ordain unto you. by the commission and power which our most dear cozen, the lord of ampuille, admiral of france, have give unto you for that which concern the affair and the charge of the admiralty in the exploit, expedition and execute of the thing above say to do general whatsoever may make for the conquest people inhabit and preservation of the, say, land of cadia and of the coast territory adjoin and of their appurtenance and dependency under our name and authority, whatsoever ourselves will and may do if we be there present in person, although that the case shall require a more special order than we prescribe unto you by these present, to the content whereof we command, ordain and most express, do enjoin all our justicer, officer and subject to conform themselves and to obey and give attention unto you in all and every the thing abovesaid, their circumstance and dependency, also to give unto you, in the execute of they all, such aid and comfort, help and assistance as you shall have need of and whereof they shall be by you require, and this upon pain of disobedience and rebellion and to the end. no body may pretend cause of ignorance of this our intention and to busy himself in all or in part of the charge, dignity and authority which we give unto you by these present. we have, of our certain knowledge, full power and regal authority: revoke, suppress and declare void and of none effect hereafter and from this present time, all other power and commission letter and expedition give and deliver to any person soever for to discover people and inhabit in the foresay extension of the say land situate from the say 40 degree to the 46, whatsoever they be. and furthermore we command and ordain all our say officer, of what quality and condition soever they be, that after these present or the duplicate of they shall be due examine by one of our belove and trusty counsellor, notary and secretary or other notary royal. they do, upon your request, demand and suit, or upon the suit of any our atturneis, cause the same to be read, publish and record in the record of their jurisdiction, power and precinct. seek as much as shall appertain unto they to quiet and appease all trouble and hindrance which may contradict the same. for such be our pleasure give at fountain-bleau, the 8 day of november, in the year ofour lord 1603 and of our reign, the 15. sign, henry, and underneath by the king potier, and seal upon single label with yellow wax. chap 2: the voyage of mont into new france. what accident happen in the say voyage? the cause of the icy bank in new find land? the impose of name to certain. port, the perplexity wherein they be by reason of the stay of the other ship, mont, have make the commission, and prohibition before say, to be proclaim through the realm of france, and especial through the port and maritime town thereof, cause two ship to be rig and furnish, the one under the conduct of captain timothy of new-haven, the other of captain morel of honfleur. in the first, he ship himself with good number of man of account as well, gentleman as other, and forasmuch as poutrincourt be and have be of a long time desirous to see those country of new france and there to find out and choose some fit place to retire himself into with his family, wife and child, not mean to be. the last that shall follow and participate in the glory of so fair and generous a enterprise will needs. go thither and ship himself with the say mont, carry with he some quantity of armour and munition of the set forth out of new-haven war, and so weigh anchor from new-haven the seven day of march 1604.. but be depart somewhat too soon. before the winter have yet leave off her freeze weed, they find store of icy bank against the which they be in danger to strike and so to be cast away. but danger god, which hitherto have prosper the navigation of these voyage. preserve they. one may wonder, and not without cause, why, in the same parallel, there be more ice in this sea than in that of france, whereunto i answer that the ice that be find in those sea be not originary from the same climate, but rather come from the northerly part, drive without any let through the vast of this great sea by the wave, storm and boisterous flood which the easterly and northerly wind do cause in winter and spring time, and drive they towards the south and west, but the french sea be shelter by scotland, england and ireland, which be the cause that the ice can fall into it. another reason also may be allege, and that be the motion of the sea which bear more towards those part, because of the large course that it make towards america, a perilous storm, than towards the land of these, our part. the peril of this voyage be not only in the meeting of the, say bank of ice, but also in the storm that vex they, one of they, they have that break the gallery of the ship, and in these turmoil a joiner be carry away by a sea or flash of water to the next door of death overboard, but he hold himself fast at a tackle which by chance hang out of the say ship. the voyage be long by reason of contrary wind, wind. common good in march for the new find land, the i will of sablon or sand, which seldom happen to they. that set out in march for the new find land, which be ordinary, carry with a east or northern wind fit to go to those land and have take their course to the south of the i will of sand or sablon or sand, for to shun the say ice, they almost fall from charybdis into scylla, go to strike towards the say isle during the thick mist that be frequent in that sea. in the end, the six of may, they come to a certain port where they find captain rossignol of new-haven, who do truck for skin with the savage, contrary to the king, inhibition. which be the cause that his ship be port du rossignol, confiscate this port, be call du rossignol, have in this his hard fortune. this only good that a good and fit harborough or port in those coast bear his name. from thence coast and discover the land they arrive at, another very fair, which they name du moutton by reason that a mutton or weather port moutton have leap overboard and drown himself, come aboard again and be take and eat as good prize by such accident. many name have ancient be give on the sudden and without any great deliberation. so the capitol, capitol of rome, have his name because that in dig there a dead man head be find. so the city of milan, milan. have be call mediolanum, that be to say half wool for that the gaul cast the foundation thereof, find a sow half cover with wool, and so of sundry other be. at the port moutton they cabane and lodge themselves after the savage fashion, expect news of the other ship wherein be the victual and other necessary provision for the food and entertainment of they about 100 planter, that be, to winter, there be about a hundred man in number in this port. they tarry a month in great perplexity for fear they have that some sinister accident have happen to the say other ship who set out the ten of march, wherein be du pont of honfleur, and the say captain morel, and this be so much. the more important for that of the come of the say ship depend deliberation upon the return into france the whole success of the business. for even upon this long tarry it be in question whether they shall return into france or no. de pourtrincourt be of advice that it be better to die there whereto the say mont conform himself. in the mean, while many go a hunt, other to fish for, to store the kitchen, near the say moutton, there be a place, store of coney so replenish with rabbit and coney that they almost do eat nothing else during that time, champlein be send with a shalloup to seek, far off, a fit place to retire themselves at which exploit he tarry so long that, deliberate, upon the return, they think to leave he behind for there be no more victual, and they serve themselves with that that be find in the say rossignols ship, without which they have be force to return into france and so to break a fair enterprise at the very birth and beginning thereof, or to starve have, end the hunt. of coney which can not still continue now the cause of the stay of the say du pont and captain morel, be two, the one that want a cockboat, they employ their time in the build of one in the land where they arrive first, which the english port be the english port, the other that be come at campseau port. they find there four ship of baske or man of saint john de luz that do truck with the savage. contrary to the say inhibition from who, they take their good and bring the master to the say mont who use they very gentle, three week be expire and the say mont have no news of the ship he look for, he deliberate to send along the coast to seek for they, and note here the good nature and diligence of the savage. for that purpose, dispatch some savage to who he give a french man for company. with letter, the say savage promise to return at the time, prefix be eight day, whereof they fail not, but as the society of man and wife agree, well together. be a powerful thing. so these savage, before their departure, have a care of their wife and child and require victual for they which be grant and have hoist up sail within few day after they find those that they seek for at a place iles call isle, who be themselves in no less fear or grief for the say mont than he of they, because they find not, during their voyage, those mark and sign that be agree upon between they, which, be that mont shall have, leave at the ice, come far to the south than campseau. campseau, some cross on a tree or letter there fix which he do not have. far overjoy the say campseau by reason that for the say ice bank he take his way somewhat far on the south, as we have say. so have read the letter. the say du pont and du pont go to canada to trade for fur. captain morel, give up the victual and provision that they have bring for they that shall winter there, and so return back towards the great river of canada for the trade of skin or fur. chap 3: the leave of port du moutton, the accident of a man, lose in the wood, the space of sixteen day bay francoise or french bay, port royal, the river of l'equille, a copper i, the mischief of golden, mine of diamond, turkey, stone, all new france. in the end be contain in two ship. they weigh anchor from du moutton for to employ their time and to discover land as much as may before winter. we come to cape de sable- cap de sable or the sandie cape, saint mary bay, fair place to inhabit mine of iron and silver, or the sandie cape, and from thence we sail to the bay of saint marie where our man lay at anchor fifteen day while the land and passage, as well by sea as by river may be descry and know this bay be a very fair place to inhabit because that one be ready, carry thither without double. there be mine of iron and silver, but in no great abundance, according to the trial. make thereof in france have sojourn there some 12 or 13 day, a strange accident happen, such as i will tell you. there be a certain churchman of a good family in paris that have a desire to perform the voyage with mont and that, against the like of his friend who send express to honfleur to divert he thereof and to bring he back to paris. the ship lie at anchor in the say bay of saint marie. he put himself in a accident of a man lose in the wood the space of 16. day company, with some that go to sport themselves in the wood, it come to pass that have stay to drink at a brook. he forget there his sword and follow on. his way with his company, which, when he perceive he return back to seek it, but have find it forgetful from what part he come and not consider whether he shall go east or west or otherwise, for there be no path. he take his way, quite contrary, turn his back from his company and so long travel that he sound himself at the sea shore where no ship be to be see, for they be at the other side of a nook of land. far reach into the sea, he imagine that he be forsake and begin to bewail his fortune upon a rock. the night be come, every one be retire. he be find, want he be ask for. of those that have be in the wood, they report in what manner he depart from they and that since they have no news of he whereupon a protestant be charge to have, kill he because they quarrel sometime for matter of religion. final, they sound a trumpet through the forest, they shoot off the canon diverse time, but in vain, for the roar of the sea, strong than all that do, expel back the sound of the say canon and trumpet. two, three and four day pass. he appear not in the mean, while the time hasten to depart. so have tarry so long that he be then hold for dead. they weigh anchor to go further and to bay francoise, see the depth of a bay that have some 40 league length and 14 yea 18 of breadth, which be name la bay francoise or the french bay. in this bay be the passage to come into a port whereinto our man enter and make some abode, during the which they have the pleasure to hunt a ellan or stag that cross a great lake of the sea which make this port and do swim but easy. this port be environ, with mountain on the north side towards the south, be small hill which, with the say mountain, do power out a thousand brook which make that place pleasant than any other place in the world there be. very fair fall of water fit to make mill of all sort. at the east be a river between the say mountain and hill, in the which ship may sail fifteen league and more, and in all this distance be nothing of both side the river, but fair meadow. which river be name l' equille, because that the, the river of l' equille, first fish take. therein be a equille, but the say port, for the beauty thereof be call port royal port. royal poutrincourt have find this place to be to his like, demand it with the land thereunto adjoin of mont, to who the king have, by commission before insert, grant the distribution of the land of new france from the 40. degree to the 46.. which place be grant to the say de poutrincourt who, since have have letter of confirmation for the same of his majesty, intend to retire himself thither with his family and there to establish the christian and french name, asmuch as his power shall stretch, and god grant he the mean to accomplish it. the say contain eight league of circuit beside the river of l' equille. there be within it two isle, very fair and pleasant: the one at the mouth of the say river, which i deem to be of the greatness of the city of beawais, the other at the side of the mouth of a other river as broad as the river of oise or marne. enter within the say. the say isle be almost of the greatness of the other and they both be woody in this, and right over against the former i will we dwell three year after this voyage. we will speak thereof more at large hereafter. a copper i. in the 28. and 29 chap of the second book of the whole volume, untranslated from port royal, they sail to the copper mine whereof we have speak before else, where it be a high rock between two bay of the sea, wherein the copper be conjoin with the stone, very fair and very pure, such as be that which be call rozette copper. many goldsmith have see of it in france which do say that under the copper my there may be a. golden mine, which be very probable, for if those excrement that nature expel forth be so pure, namely small piece that be find upon the gravel at the foot of the rock when it be low water, there be no doubt that the mettle which be thing first to be provide in new plantation in the bowel of the earth be much more perfect, but this be a work that require time. the first mine and work be to have bread, wine and cattle, as we have, say else, where our felicity consist not in mine special of gold and silver, the which serve for nothing in the tillage of the ground, nor to handicraft use. contrariwise, the abundance of they be but a charge and burden that keep man in perpetual unquiet, and the more he have thereof, the less rest enjoy he and his life. lesser assure unto he nota before the voyage of peron, great riches may have be set up in a small place, in stead that, in this our age, by the abundance of gold and silver the same be come at no value nor esteem. one have need of huge chest and coffer to put in that which a small budget may have contain. one may have travel with a purse in one sleeve, and now a cloak-bag and a horse must express be have for that purpose. we may just curse the hour that greedy avarice do. carry the spaniard into the west for the woeful event that have ensue thereof. for when i consider that by his greediness he have kindle and maintain the war through all christendom, and his only study have be how to destroy his neighbour and not the turk, i can think that any other but the devil have be the author of their voyage. and let not the pretence of religion be allege unto i, for, as we have say elsewhere, they have kill all the offspring of the country with the most inhuman torment that the devil have be able to excogitate and by their cruelty have render the name of god odious and a name of offence to those poor people and have continual and daily blaspheme. esaiah 52. vers 5.. he, in the midst of the gentile, as the prophet reproach to the people of israel: witness he that have rather be damn then to go to the paradise of the spaniard. the roman, who covetousness have be unsatiable, have make cruel war to the nation of the earth, but the spanish cruelty be not to be find out in their history. they have content themselves to ransack the nation which they have overcome and not to deprive they of their life. a ancient heathenish author, patronius arbiter, make trial of his poetical humour. find no great crime in they, but that if they find out or discover some people that have gold, they take they for their enemy. the verse of this author have so good a grace that i must needs insert they here, though i intend not to allege much latin romanus victor i be, but the doctrine of the wise son of sirach teach we a contrary thing, for know that the riches which ecclesiast 31. ver 8., 9, 10. be dig up even from as deep as pluto den be that which some one have say irritament a. he declare that man to be happy that have not run after gold and have not put his hope in silver and treasure. add that he ought to be esteem to have do wonderful thing among all his people and to be the example of glory which have be tempt by gold and remain. perfect and so, by a contrary sense, the same to be unhappy that do otherwise. now to return to our mine. among these copper rock there be find sometime small rock cover with diamons fix to they. i will not assure they for fine, but diamond that be very please to the sight. there be also certain shine blue stone which be of no less value or worth than turkey stone. our guide, turkey stone for the navigation in those country, have cut within a rock one of those stone. at his return from new france he break it in two and give one part of it to mont, the other to de poutrincourt, which they make to be put in gold and be find worthy to be. present the one to the king by the say poutrincourt, the other to the queen by the say mont, and be very well accept. i remember that a goldsmith do offer fifteen crown to de poutrincourt for that he present to his majesty. there be many other secret, rare and fair thing within the ground of those country which be yet unknown unto we and will come to the knowledge and evidence by inhabit the province. chap 4, the description of the river saint john and of the. i will saint croix, the man lose in the wood, find out 16.. day after example of some strange abstinence, the discord of the savage defer to the judgement of mont, the fatherly authority among the say savage, what husband. they choose to their daughter. have view the, say i, the company, pass to the other side of the french bay and go saint john river towards the bottom of the same, then turn back, come to the river of saint john, so call, as i think, because they arrive thither, the sour and twenty of june dangerous. come in, which be s john baptist day, there be a fair port but the entry or mouth be dangerous to they that know not the best way, because that before the come in there be a long bank of rock which be not see nor discover the fall of a river, but only at low water, which do serve as for defence to this port, within which, when one have go about a league, there be find a violent fall of the say river which fall down from the rock, when that the sea do ebb with a marvelous noise for be sometime at amchor at sea. we have hear it from above, twelve league off, but at full sea one may pass it with great ship. this river be one of the fair that may be see, have store of land and swarm with fish this last year, 1608.. 1608.. the say with one of the say, mont his man, have be some 50 league up the say river and do witness that there be great quantity vine of vine along the shore, but the grape be not so big as they be in the country of the armouchiquois. there be also onion and many other sort of good herb. as for the tree, they be the fair that may be see, great grape among the armouchiquois. abundance of fish, the commodity of voyage by the river. when we be there we see great number of cedar tree. concern fish the say have relate. unto we that put the kettle over the fire, they have take fish sufficient for their dinner before that the water be hot. moreover, this river stretch itself far within the land of the savage. do marvelous shorten the long travel by mean thereof, for in six day they go to come to the bay or gulf of chaleur or heat. when they be at the end of it, in carry their canowes some few league. and by the same river, in eight day they go to tadoussac by a branch of the same which come from the northwest in such sort that in port royal one may have, within 15. or 18. day- news from the frenchman- dwell in the great river of canada. by these way, which can not be do in one month by sea, nor without danger, the i will of s croix, 20. league from saint john river. leave saint john river, they come, follow the coast, 20. league from that place to a great river which be proper sea, where they fortify themselves in a little island seat in the midst of this river, which the say champlein have be to discover and view and see it, strong by nature and of easy defence, and keep beside that the season begin to slide away and therefore it be behooveful to provide of lodging, without run any far. they resolve to make their abode there. i will. he that will possess a land ought to place himself in. the main or firm land not sift out. curious the reason of all part, upon the resolution of this, their dwell. but i will always be of opinion that whosoever go into a country to possess it must not stay in the isle there to be a prisoner. for before all thing, the coulter and tillage of the ground must be regard, and i will fain know how one shall till and manure it. if it behove at every hour in the morning, at noon and the evening, to cross a great passage of water to go for thing requisite from the firm land, and if one fear the enemy, how shall he that husband the land or otherwise busy in necessary affair, save himself if he be? pursue, for one find not always a boat in hand in time of need, nor two man to conduct it beside out. life require many commodity. a island be not fit for to begin the establishment and seat of a colony unless there be current and stream of sweet water for to drink and to supply other necessary in household which be not in small land. there need wood for fuel which also be not there. but above all there must be shelter from the hurtful wind and cold which be hardly find in a small continent environ with water of all side. nevertheless, the company sojourn there in the midst of a broad river where the north wind and northwest blow at will. and because that two league high there be brook that come crosswise to fall within this large branch of sea, the i will of the frenchman retreat be call saint croix, 25. league distant from port royal, while that they begin to cut down cedar and other tree of the say isle to make necessary building, let we return to seek out master nicolas, lose in the wood which long time since be hold for dead. as they begin to visit and search the island, of who we shall henceforth make mention by reason: he dwell four year in those part, conduct the voyage, make there, be send back to the bay of saint mary with a mine-finder that have be carry thither for to get some mine. of silver and iron, which they do, and as they have cross the french bay, they enter, return to the bay of saint marie where the lose man be find again. the long i will into the say bay of saint marie by a narrow strait or passage which be between the land of port royal and a island call the long i will, where, after some abode, they go afishing the say, perceive they and begin with a feeble voice to call as loud as he can and for to help his voice, he advise himself to do as ariadne do heretofore to theseus, for he put his handkerchief and his hat on a staff end which make he better to be know for as one of. they hear the voice and ask the rest of the company if it may be the say, they mock and laugh at it. but after they have ipy the move of the handkerchief and of the hat, than they begin to think that it may be he, and come near, they know, perfect it be himself and take he in their bark with great joy and contentment. the sixteen day after he have lose himself, diverse in this late age have stuff their book and history with many miracle wherein be not to be find so great cause of admiration as in this. for during these sixteen day he feed himself, but by i know not cherry, what small fruit like unto cherry, without kernel, yet not so. delicate which be scarce find in those wood, and indeed in these last voyage, a special grace and favour of god have be evident in many occurrence which we will mark as occasion shall be offer the poor. i call he so by reason of his affliction. be as one may easy think marvelous, weaken they, give he food by measure and bring he back again to the company at the island of saint croix, whereof every one receive a incredible joy and consolation, and especial mont, who it concern more than any other. do not allege unto i the history of the maid of confolans, in the country of poictou, which be two year without eat, some six year ago, nor of a other near berne, in. switzerland, which lose, not yet full ten year ago, the desire and appetite of eat during all plin, lib 7. cap 2. her life, time and other like example, for they be accident happen by the disorder of nature and concern. that which pliny recite that in the remote part of the indies, in the inferior part of the fountain and spring of the river ganges, there be a nation of astom, that be to say mouthless people that live but with the only odour and exhalation of certain root, flower and fruit which they assume through their nose. i will hardly believe it, but will think rather that in smell they may bite very well of the say root and fruit, as also those that james quartier. mention to have no mouth and to eat nothing by the report of the savage donnacona, who he bring into france to make recital thereof to the king, with other thing as void of common sense, and credit as that. but imagine it be true. such people have their nature dispose to this manner of live, and this case be not alike, for the say want no stomach nor appetite and have live sixteen day, partly nourish by some nutritive force which be in the air of that country and partly by those small fruit before speak, god have. give he strength to endure this long want, john wier, in the treaty, comment of food. preserve he from the step of death, which i find strange, and be so indeed. but in the history of our time there be find thing of great marvel, among other thing of one henry de hasseld, merchant traffic from the low country to berg in norwege, who have hear a belly-god preacher speak ill of the miraculous fast, as though it be not in god power to do that which he have do in time past, provoke by it, do assay to fast and abstain himself three day from eat, at the end whereof be pinch with hunger, take a morsel of bread, mean to swallow it down with a glass of beer, but all that stick so in his throat that he remain forty day and forty night without either eat or drink. that time be end. he vomit out by. the mouth that which he have eat and drink, which, all that while remain in his throat so long a abstinence, weaken he in such sort that it be needful to sustain and restore he with milk. the governor of the country have understand this wonder. call he before he and inquire of the truth of the matter, whereof be incredulous, will make new trial of it and have make he careful to be keep in a chamber. find the thing to be true. this man be praise for great piety, special towards the poor. sometime after be come for his private affair to bruxelles, in brabant, a creditor of he, to bereave he of his due, accuse he of heresy and so cause he to be burn. in the year 1545.. and since one of the canon of the city of liege make trial of his strength in fast, have continue the same even to the seventeen day, feel himself so weaken that, unless he have be sudden succour by a good restorative, he have quite perish. a yongue maid of buchold in the territory of munster in westphalia, afflict with grief of mind and unwilling to stir or go abroad from home, be beat by her mother for the same, which redouble her dolour in such sort that have lose her natural rest, be four month without either drink or eat. save that sometime she do chaw some roast apple and wash her mouth with a little ptisane. euagrius, lib 1.. of the ecclesiastical history, cap 3.. baronius upon the martyrol, rom 9 ianv. the ecclesiastical history, among a great number of faster, make mention of three holy hermit, all name simeon, which do live in strange austerity and long fast as of eight day and fifteen day, continuance yea long not have for all their dwell but a column or hermitage where they dwell and lead their life by reason whereof they be name stelite, that be to say columnary, as dwell in column. but all these before allege have partly resolve themselves to such fast and partly have by little and little accustom themselves to it, so that it be not very strange for they to fast so long, which be not in he of who we speak, and therefore his fast be the more to be admire by so much as that he have not in any wise dispose himself thereto and have not use these long austerity after he have be cherish and they sojourn yet sometime to order the business and to view the land round about the. i will saint croix motion be make to send back the ship into france before winter, and so they that go not thither to winter prepare themselves for the return. the mean, while the savage, from about all their confine, come to see the manner of the frenchman. the savage submit themselves to the censure of mont, in in their variance and lodge themselves willing near. they also, in certain variance, happen among themselves. they do make, monsieur mont, judge of their debate, which be a beginning of voluntary subjection, from whence a hope may be conceive that these people will soon conform themselves to our manner of live. among other thing happen before the depart of the say ship. it chance, one day that a savage call bituani, the father authority in marriage, find good relish in the kitchen of the say mont, settle himself therein, do there some service, and yet do make love to a maid by way of marriage, the which not be able to have with the good like and consent of her father. he ravish she and take she to wife. thereupon a great quarrel ensue, and in the cause the of savagesplead before mont the end, the maid be take away from he and return to her father. a very great debate be like to follow, be it not that bituani complain to the say mont for this injury. the other come to defend their cause, say to wit the father. assist with his friend that he will not give his daughter to a man unless he have some mean by his industry to nourish and maintain both she and the child that shall proceed of the marriage. as for he, he see not any thing that he can do, that he loiter about the kitchen of the say mont, not exercise himself, hunt final, that he shall not have the maid and aught to content himself with that which be pass. the say mont have hear both party tell they that he detain he not, and that the say bituani be a diligent fellow and shall go hunt to make proof of what he can do. but yet, for all that, they do not restore the maid unto. he until he have show effectual that which the say mont have promise of he final. he go store of salmon, bever, matachias be lace, bead, bracelet or such trinket. afish take great store of salmon, the maid be, redeliver he, and the next day follow he, come clothe with a fair new gown of bever. well, set on with matachias to the fort which be then a build for the frenchman. bring his wife with he as triumph for the victory have get she as it be by dint of sword, who he have ever since love dear. contrary to the custom of the other savage, give we to understand that the thing which be get with pain aught to be much cherish by this action. we. see the two most considerable point in matter of marriage to be observe among these people guide only by the law of nature, that be to say the fatherly authority and the husband industry, a thing which i have much admire. see that in our christian church, by i know not what abuse, man have live many age during which the fatherly authority have be despise and set at nought, until that the ecclesiastical convention have open their eye and know that the same be even against nature itself and that our king, by law and edict, have re-establish in his force this fatherly authority which, notwithstanding, in spiritual marriage and vow of religion, have not yet recover his ancient glory and have, in this respect, his prop. but upon the court of parliament order, the which oftentimes have constrain the detainer of child to restore they to their parent. chap 5: the description of the island of saint croix. the enterprise of mont, difficult and generous, yet persecute through envy. the return of de poutrincourt into france. the peril of the voyage. before we speak of the ship, return into france, it the description of the i will of saint croix. be meet to tell you how hard the i will of saint croix be to be find out to they that be never there, for there be so many isle and great bays to go by before one be at it that i wonder how ever one may pierce so far for to find. it, there be three or four mountain imminent above the other on the side. but on the north side, from whence the river run down, there be but a sharp point, one above two league distant. the wood of the main land be fair and admirable, high and well grow as in like manner be the grass there be, right over against the island, fresh water brook, very pleasant and agreeable. the fruitfulness of the soil where diverse of mont, his man, do their business and build there certain cabanes. as for the nature of the ground, it be most excellent and most abundant, fruitful for the, say mont have cause there some piece of ground to be till, and the same sow with rye. for i have see there no wheat he be not able to tarry for the maturity thereof, to reap it. and notwithstanding the grain fall, have, grow and increase. so wonderful that two year after we reap and do, gather of it as fair, big and weighty as any in the island, half a league in compass, france, which the soil have bring forth without any tillage, and yet at this present it do continue still to mulltiply every year. the say island contain some half a league of circuit and at the end of it, on the sea side, there be a mount or small hill which, be as it be a little isle sever from the other, where mont his canon be place. there be also a little chapel, build after the savage fashion, at the foot of which chapel there be such store, store of mussel, of mussel, as be wonderful, which may be gather at low water, but they be small. i believe that mont people do not forget to choose and take the big and leave there, but the small one to grow and increase. as for the exercise and occupation of our frenchman during the time of their abode there, we will mention it brief- have first conduct back our ship into france. the sea and maritime charge in such enterprise as that of mont be so great that he who have not a good stock and foundation shall easy sink under such a burden. and for to supply in some sort those expense, one be force to suffer and bear infinite discommodity and put himself in danger to be discredit among unknown people. and which be worse, in a land which be unmanured and all over grow with forest, wherein this action be the more generous by so much as the peril be more evident, dangerous. and notwithstanding all this fortune be not leave unattempted and to tread down so many thorn that stop the way. mont, his ship return into france, he remain in a desolate place with one bark and one boat only. and though he be promise to be send for home at the end of the year, who may assure himself of aeolus and neptune fidelity, two evil. furious, unconstant and unmerciful master. behold the estate whereunto the say mont reduce himself. have have no help of the king, as have have all those voyage that have be heretofore describe, except the late lord marquis de la roche, and yet it be he that have do more than all the rest, not have yet lose his hold, but in the end, i fear he shall be constrain to give over and forsake all to the great shame and reproach of the french name, which by this mean be make ridiculous, and a by word to other nation. for as though one will of set purpose oppose himself to the conversion, envy upon the privilege grant to mont upon bever of these poor, westerly people and to the set forward of the glory of god and the king. there be man start up full of avarice and envy. man which will not give a stroke or draw their sword for the king service, as monsieur de poutrincourt show one day to his majesty. man which will not endure the least labour in the world for the honour of god, which do hinder that any profit be draw from the very province itself to furnish to that which be necessary to the establishment of such a work. have rather that englishman and hollander reap the profit thereof. than frenchmen, and seek to make the name of god unknown in those part of the world. and such man which have no fear of god- for if they have any, they will be zealous of his name- be hear, be believe and carry thing away at their pleasure. now let we prepare and hoist up sail de poutrincourt, make the voyage into these part with some man of good sort, not to winter there, but, as it be, to seek out his seat and find out a land that may, like he which he have do, have no need to sojourn there any. the return of de poutrincourt into france long. so then, the ship be ready for the return, he ship himself and those of his. company in one of they, the mean, while the fame be from all side in these part of the wonder make in ostend, then besiege by their highness of flanders. already, three year pass the voyage be not without storm and great peril, for, among other, i will recite two or three which may be place among miracle. be it not that the sea-accident be frequent enough, not that i will, for all that, darken the special favour that god have always show in the first peril these voyage. the first be of a gust of wind which, in the midst of their navigation, come by night instant to strike in the sail with such a violent boistrousnesse that it overturn the ship in such manner that, of the one part, the keel be on the face of the water and the sail swim upon it without any mean or time to right it or to lose the tackle. on the sudden, the sea be all afire and the mariner themselves, all wet, do seem to be all compass with flame, so furious be the sea. the sailor call this fire saint goudrans fire, and by ill fortune, in this sudden surprise, there be not a knife to be find for to cut the cable or the sail. the poor ship, during this casualty, remain overturn, carry continual, one while upon mountain of water than another while sink down even to hell. brief, every one do prepare to drink more than his belly full to all his friend. when a new blast of wind come which rend the sail in a thousand piece ever after, unprofitable to any use, happy sail have by his ruin. save all this people, for if it have be a new one, they have be cast away and never news have be hear of they, but god do often. try his people and bring they even to death door, to the end. they may know his powerful might and fear he. so the ship begin to stir and rise again by little and little. and well be it for they that she be deep keel, for if it have be a fliboate with a flat bottom and broad belly, it have be quite overturn up side down, but the ballast which remain beneath do help to stir she upright. the second danger, the second be at casket a i will, or rock in the form of a cask between france and england on which there be no dwelling, be come within three league of the same. there be some jealousy between the master of the ship, a evil which oftentimes spy both man and fair enterprise. the one say that they may double well enough the say casket, a other that they can not and that it behoove to cast a little from the right course for to pass under the island. in this case, the worst be that one know not the hour of the day because it be dark by reason of mist and by consequent they know not if it do ebb or flow. for if it have be flood they have easy double it, but it chance that it be turn water and by that mean the ebb do hinder it. so that approach the say rock, they see no. hope to save themselves, and that necessary, they must go. strike against necessity. make we seek to god the devilishness of revengeful desire. it then every one begin to pray to god, to crave pardon one of another and for their last comfort to bewail one another. hereupon, captain rossignol, who ship be, take in new france, as we have say before, draw out a great knife to kill therewith captain timothy, governor of this present voyage, say to he: do thou not content thyself to have undo i, but will thou need yet cast i here away? but he be, hold and keep from. do of that he be about to do, and in very truth it be in he great folly. yea, rather madness to go. about to kill a man that be go to die and he that go to give the blow in the same peril in the end, as they go to strike upon the rock de poutrincort, who have already yield his soul and recommend his family to god, ask of he that be at the top if there be any hope. who tell he there be none. then he bid some to help he to change the sail, which two or three only do, and already be there no more water, but to turn the ship. when the mercy and favour of god come to help they and turn the ship from the peril wherein they see themselves. some have put off their doublet for to seek to save themselves by climb upon the rock, but the, the three, danger fear be all the harm they have for that time save that. some few hour after be arrive near to a rock call nid a l'aigle, the eagle nest. they think to go board it. think, in the darkness of the mist, it have be a ship from whence be again escape. they arrive at new. their return at new haven haven the place from whence they first set out the say de poutrincourt, have, leave his armour and provision of war in the i will of saint croix, in the keep of the say mont, as a gage and token of the good will. he have to return thither the four peril. but i may yet well set down here a marvelous danger from which the same vessel be preserve, a little after the depart from saint croix, and this by a bad accident which god turn to good, for a certain tipple fellow be, by night steal come down to the. bottom of the ship for to drink his belly full and to fill his bottle with wine. he find that there be but too much to drink and that the say ship be already half full of water, in such sort that the peril be imminent and they have infinite pain to staunch she by pomp, in the end be come about. they find a great leak by the keel, which they stop with all diligence. chap 5: the building of the. i will, saint croix the frenchman, discommodity in the say place, unknown sickness of their cause, of the people that be subject to it, of diet, bad water, air, wind, lake, corruption of wood, season, disposition of body of yongue and old. the author advice upon the government of health and cure of the say disease. the building at the i will of s croix during the foresay navigation mont, his people do work about the fort which he seat at the end of the island, opposite to the place where he have lodge his canon, which, be wise, consider to the end to command the river up and down. but there be a inconvenience. the say fort do lie towards the north and without any shelter, but of the tree that be on the, i will shore, which all about he command to be keep and not cut down. and out of the same fort be the swisser lodging, great and large, and other small lodging represent, as it be a suburb, some have house themselves on the firm land near the brook, but within the fort, be mont his lodging. make with very fair and artificial carpentry work, with the banner of france upon the same. at another part be the storehouse wherein consist the safety and life of every one. likewise, make with fair carpentry work and cover with reed right over against the say. storehouse be the lodging and house of these gentleman, d'oruille, champlein and other man of reckon, opposite to mont, his say lodging, there be a gallery, cover for to exercise themselves, either in play or for the workman in time of rain, and between the say fort and the platform where lay the canon, all be full of garden whereunto every one exercise himself, willing all autumn quarter be pass on these work, and it be well for they to have lodge themselves and to manure the ground of the island before winter, while that in these part, pamphlet be set out under the name of maistre guillaume, stuff with all sort of news by the which, among other thing, this prognosticator, do say that mont do pull. out thorn in canada and all well consider- it may well be term the pull out of thorn, to take in hand such enterprise full of toil and continual peril, with care. vexation and discommodity, but virtue and courage that over come all these thing make those thorn to be but gillyflower and rose to they that resolve themselves in these heroical action to make themselves praiseworthy and famous in the memory of man despise the vain pleasure of delicate and effeminate man, good for nothing but to coffer themselves in a chamber. three discommodity in winter at s croix. the most urgent thing be do and hoary snowy father be come, that be to say winter, than they be force to keep within door and to live. every one at his own home, during which time our man have three special discommodity in this hand: want of wood for that which be in the say isle be spend in building. lack of fresh water and the continual watch make, by night, fear, some surprise from the savage that have lodge themselves at the foot of the say island, or some wickedness of many christian other enemy for the malediction and rage of many christian, be such that one must take heed of they much more than of infidel, a thing which grieve i to speak. will to god i be a liar in this respect and that i have no cause to speak it. when they have need of water or wood, they be constrain. to cross over the river which be thrice as broad of every side as the river of seine, the river of rouen. it be a thing, painful and tedious in such sort that it be needful to keep the boat a whole day before one may get those necessary. in the mean, while the cold and snow come upon they and the ice so strong that the cider be freeze in the vessel and every one his measure be give, he out by weight. as for wine, it be distribute, but at certain day of the week many idle, sluggish companion drink snow-water, not willing to take the pain to cross the river. brief, the unknown, unknown sickness, sickness like to those describe unto we by james quartier. in his relation, assail we for remedy, there be none to be find in the mean, while the poor sick creature do, languish, pine away by little and little, for want of sweet meat as milk or spoon-meat for to sustain their stomach which can not receive the hard meat by reason of, let proceed, from a rot flesh which grow and over-abounded within their mouth, and when one think to root it out, it do grow again in one night space, more abundant than before. as for the tree call annedda, mention by the say quartier. the savage of these land know it not, so that it be most pitiful to behold every one, very few except in this misery and the miserable sick folk to die. as it be full of life, without any possibility to be succour, there die. the number of the dead and sick dangerous month of this sickness, 36 and 36 or 40 more that be strike with it, recover themselves by the help of the spring assoon as the comfortable season appear, but the deadly season for that sickness be in the end of januarie, the month of february and march, wherein most common the sick do die, every one at his turn, according to the time they have begin to be sick in such sort that he which begin to be ill in february and march may escape, but he that shall over-haste himself and betake he to his bed in december and januarie, he be in danger. to die in february, march or the begin of april, which time be pass. he be in good hope and, as it be, assure of his safety notwithstanding, some have feel some touch thereof have be sharp handle with it. mont be, return into france, do consult with our doctor of physic upon the sickness, which, in my opinion, they find very new and unknown. for i do not see that when we go away, our pothecary be charge with any order for the cure thereof. and notwithstanding hypocrates, it seem that hypocrates have have knowledge of it, or at least of some that be very like to it. for in the book affect. he speak of a certain malady where the belly and afterward the spleen do swell and harden itself and feel grievous and sharp gripe. the skin become black and pale, draw towards the colour of a green pomegranate, the ear and gum do render and yield a bad send the say gum disjoin themselves from the tooth, the leg full of blister, northerly people subject to the land disease of new france, the limb be weaken etc. but special the northerly people be more subject to it than other more southerly nation. witness the hollander frizeland man and other thereabout. among who the say hollander do write in their navigation that go to the east indies, many of they be take with the same disease, be upon the coast of guinie, a dangerous coast, bear a pestiferous air, a hundred league far in the sea. and the same, i mean the hollander, be, in the year 1606, go upon the coast of spain to keep the same coast and to annoy the spanish navy. be constrain to withdraw themselves by reason of this disease, have cast into the sea two and twenty of their dead. and if one will hear the witness of olaus write of the northerly olaus, lib 16.. cap 5^ nation of which part himself be. let he hearken to his report which be this: there be, say he, yet a other martial sickness, that be, a sickness that afflict they which follow the war, which torment and afflict they that be besiege such who limb thicken by a certain fleshy heaviness and by a corrupt blood which be between the flesh and the skin, dilate itself like wax, they sink with the least impression, make on they with the finger and disjoin the tooth as ready to fall out, change the white colour of the skin into blue and cause a benumb with a distaste to take physic. and that disease be call, in the vulgar tongue of the country, sorbut in greek: (@), (@). (@), (@), (@). adventure because of this putrefy softness which be under evil disposition of the body, corrupt the meat, the skin which seem to proceed of indige and salt meat and to be continue by the cold exhalation of the wall. but it shall not have so much force where the house be inward wainscot with board. if it continue long, it must be drive out by. take every day wormwood as one expel a medicine for the stone out the root of the stone by a decoction of stale beer drink with butter. the same author do, yet say in a other place a thing much to be note. in the beginning it be in the 9 book, ca 38, say he. they sustain the siege. with force but in the end the soldier be by continuance weaken. they take away the provision from the invader by artificial mean, subtlety- this be to be note- and ambushment special the sheep which they carry away and make they to graze in grassy place of their house for fear that through want of fresh meat they fall into the lothsome sickness of all sickness, call in the country language, sorbut or scoruie. sorbut, that be to say a wound stomach dry by cruel torment and long anguish, for the cold and indigesting meat greedy take seem to be the true cause of this sickness. i have delight myself to recite here the very word of this author, because he speak thereof as be skilful and set. forth sufficient enough, the land disease of new france, save that he make no mention of the stiffen of the ham, nor of a superfluous flesh which grow and abound within the mouth and that if one think to take it away, it increase still. but well, speak the open of a dead body, he of the bad stomach, for de poutrincourt, make a negro to be open that die of that sickness in our voyage, who be find to have the inward part very sound, except the stomach that have wrinkle as though they be ulcer cause of the say disease. and as for the cause, proceed from salt meat. it be very true there be many other cause concur which feed and entertain this sickness. among which i will place, in general, the bad food, comprehend with it the drink, then the vice of the air of the country and, after the evil disposition of the body, leave the physician in the begin of the book to sift it out. more curious, whereunto hypocrates say that the physician ought also careful to take heed in consider the season, the wind, the aspect of the sun, the water, the land itself, the nature and situation of it, the nature of man, their manner of live and exercise. what food cause the land disease? as for the food, this sickness be cause by cold meat without juice, gross and corrupt. one must then take heed of salt meat, smoky, musty, raw and of a evil. send likewise of dry fish as new-found land fish and stink ray, brief from all melancholy meat which be of hard digest, be easy, corrupt and breed a gross and melancholy blood. i will not, for all that, be so scrupulous as the physician which do put in the number of gross and melancholy meat, beevesflesh, bear, wild boar and hog flesh. they may as well add unto they bever flesh which, notwithstanding, we have find very good, as they do. among fish, the ton, dolphin and all those that carry lard, among the bird, the heron, duck and all other water bird, for in be a over curious of these thing, one may fall into the danger of starve and to die for hunger they place. yet, among the meat that be to be shun, biscuit bean and pulse, the often use of milk cheese, the gross and harsh wine and that which be too small white wine and the use of vinegar beer which be not well sodden nor well scum and that have not hop enough. also water that run through rot bad water, wood and those of lake and bog, still and corrupt water, such as be much in holland and frizeland, where be observe that they of amsterdam be more subject to paulfy and stifn of sinew than they of rotterdam, for the abovesaid cause of still and sleepy water, which beside do engender dropfy, dysentery, flux, quarten ague and burn fever, swell ulcer of the light, shortness of breath. rupture in child, swell in the vein, sore in the leg, final, they whole belong to the disease whereof we speak, be draw by the spleen where they leave all their corruption. sometime this sickness do also come by a vice, which be even in water of run fountain, as if they be among or near bog, or if they issue from a muddy ground or from a place that have not the sun aspect. so pliny recite that in the voyage which the prince plin li 25. (). caesar germanicus make into germany, have give order to his army to pass the river of rhine to the end. to get still forward in the country, he do set his camp on the sea shore, upon the coast. of frizeland, in a place where be but one only fountain of fresh water to be find, which, notwithstanding, be so pernicious that all they that drink of it lose their tooth in less than two year space and have their knee so weak and disjoint that they can not bear themselves, which be very the sickness whereof we speak, which the physician do call, that be to say mouth sore, and which be as much to say as the shake of thigh and leg, and it be not possible to find any remedy but by the a herb- mean of a herb call- or scuruie-grasse, which beside be very good for the sinew, against the sore and accident in the mouth, against the squinancy and against the. bite of serpent. it have long leaf, draw in colour to a dark green and produce a black root from which liquor be draw as well as from the leaf. strabo say that the like case happen to the army that strabo joinuille, the govitre of savoy, aelius gallus, bring into arabia by the commission of augustus the emperor and the like. also chance to king s jew, his army in egypt, as the lord joinuille report. other effect of bad water, be see near unto we, to wit in savoy, where the woman, more than man, because they be of a cold constitution, have common swell in their throat as big as bottle. what air be against health? next to water, the air be also one of. the father and of this sickness in boggy and waterish place and opposite to the south, which be most often rainy. but there be yet in new france, another bad quality of the air by reason of lake that be thick there and of the great rottenness in the wood who odour the body, have draw up during the rain of autumn and winter, easy be engender the corruption of the mouth and swell in the leg before speak and a cold enter, unsensible, into it, which benumb the limb, stifn the sinew, constrain to creep with cruche and in the end to keep the bed wind and for as much as the wind do participate with the air, yea, be a air run with a more vehement. force than ordinary and in this quality have great power over the health and sickness of man. we will speak some thing of it, not for all that stray ourselves from the sequel of our history. what wind be healthful and unhealthful? the easterly wind, call by the latin subsolanus, be hold for the healthful of all, and for that cause wise builder give advice to set their building towards the aspect of the east. the opposite to it be the wind call favorinus or zephyrus, which our seaman do name west, which in these part be mild and fructify. the southern wind, call austere by the latin, be in africa hot and dry, but in cross the mediterranean sea it gather a great moistness which make it. stormy and putrefy in provence and languedoc, the opposite to it be the northern wind, otherwise call boreas, bize, tramontane, which be cold and dry, chase the cloud and sweep the wind. have not one and the self same quality in all place: the airy region, it be take for the holsom next to the east wind. but these quality of the wind, find and note in these part, make not one general rule through over all the earth. for the north-wind beyond the equinoctial line, be not cold, as in these part, nor the southwinde hot, because that by a long cross they borrow the quality of the region through which they pass. beside that, the southwinde, at his first issue, be cool, according to the report. of those that have travel in africa in like manner. there be region in perou, as in lima and the plain, where the north-wind be unwholesome and noisome and through all that coast, which be above 500 league in length, they take the southwinde for a sound and fresh, cool wind and which more be most mild and pleasant. yea also that it do never rain by it, according to that which joseph acosta write of it clean. contrary to that, we see in this our part of europe, and in spain the eastwind, which we have say to be sound, lib 3, cap 3.. the same acosta say that it be noisome and unsound. the wind call circius, which be the northwest, be so stormy and boisterous. in the westerly shore of norwege that if there be any which undertake any voyage that way, when that wind blow he must make account to be lose and cast away, and this wind be so cold in that region that it suffer not any tree, small or great, to grow. lib 1., cap 10. there, so that for want of wood they must serve themselves with the bone of great fish to seethe or roast their meat. which discommodity be not in these part. in like sort. we have have experience in new france that the north-wind be not for health and the north-east which be the sick. folk and beast do feel. the wind and weather come cold, strong, sharp and stormy, aquilons yet worse. which our sick folk and they that have winter there the former year do great fear because that likely some of they droop away when that wind blow, for indeed they have some sensible feel of this wind, as we see those that be subject to rupture endure great pang when that the southwinde do blow, and as we see the very beast to prognosticate, by some sign, the change of weather, this noisome quality of wind proceed, in my judgement, from the nature of the country through which it pass, which, as we have say, be full of lake, and those very great, which be as it be stand and still water, whereto i add the exhalation of the rottenness of wood that this wind bring, and that in so much great quantity as the northwest part be great, large and spacious season. the season be also to be. mark in this disease, which i have not see nor hear of, that it begin to work neither in the spring time, summer, nor autumn, unless it be at the end of it, but in winter. and the cause thereof be that as the grow heat of the spring make the humour close up in the winter to disperse themselves to the extremity of the body and so clear it from melancholy and from the noisome humour that have be gather in winter, so the autumn, as the winter approach, draw they inward and do nourish this melancholy and black humour which do abound, special in this season, and the winter be come show forth his effect at the cost and grief of the poor patient. galen galen, com 35.. lib 1. nat humh yield a reason for the same say that the humour of the body have be parch by the burn of the summer, that which may rest of it after the. heat be expulse, become forthwith cold and dry, that be to say cold by the privation of the heat, and dry in as much as in the dry of these humour, all the moistness that be therein have be consume, and thereby it come that sickness be breed in this season, and the far one go the weak nature be and the untemperate coldness of the air be enter into a body already thereto dispose, do handle it as it be, at a beck and at will, without pity, i will add, willing to all the foresay, cause the bad, bad food and discommodity of the sea, food of the sea, which in a long voyage bring much corruption in man body, for one must of necessity after four or five day live of salt meat or to bring sheep alive and store of poultry. but this be but for master and commander in ship, and we have none in our voyage but for to reserve and multiply in the land. whither we do go, the mariner then and passenger do suffer discommodity as well in the bread as in meat and drink. the biskit become dampish and rot, the fish that be give they alike and the water stink. they which carry sweet meat, be it flesh or fruit, and that use good bread, good wine and good broth, do easy avoid those sickness, and i dare in some sort be answerable unto they for their health, unless they be very unhealthful by nature. and when i consider that this disease be as well take in holland, frizeland, in spain and in guinie as in canada, i be bring to believe that the chief cause thereof be in that which i have say, and not peculiar nor particular to new france: disposition of body. after all these cause and consideration, it be good in every place to have a well dispose body for to be in health and live long. for those which natural gather cold and gross humour and have the mass of their body pory item, they that be subject to the oppilation of the spleen and they that use not a stir life but sit and without frequent motion, be more apt and subject to these sickness. therefore, a physician may say that a student be not fit for that country, that be to say he shall not live there in health, nor those which overtoile in labour, nor melancholy people, man, which have drowsy dream spirit, nor those that be often visit with ague and such other sort of people which i may easy believe, because that these thing do heap much melancholy, cold and superfluous humour notwithstanding, i have try the contrary, both by myself and by other, against the opinion sagamo be a savage word which signify a lord, a ruler or a captain of some of we yea of sagamo. membertou himself, which play the soothsayer among the savage who arrive in that country, say that i shall never return into. france, nor monsieur boullet, sometime captain of de poutrincourt, his regiment, who for the most part of the time have have ague there, but he do farewell, and they themselves do advise our labourer to take but small labour in their work, which counsel they can the author, his exercise in new france, very well observe. for i may say, and that true, that i never make so much bodily work for the pleasure that i do take in dress and till my garden to enclose and hedge they against the gluttony of the hog, to make knot, to draw out ally, to build arbour, to sow wheat, rye, barley, oat, bean, pease, garden herb and to water they so much desire. have i to know the goodness? of the labour of the mind, the ground by my own experience, so that summer day be unto i too short, and very often do i work by moonlight. concern the labour of the mind, i take a reasonable part of it, for at night every one be retire among the prate, noise and hurly-burly. i be shut up in my study, read or write of something. yea, i will not be ashamed to speak. that be request by de poutrincourt, our commander, to bestow some hour of my industry in give christian instruction, the piety of the author of this history to our small company for not to live like beast and for to give to the savage a example of our manner of life i have. do it according to the necessity and be thereof request every sunday and sometime extraordinary, almost during all the time we have be there. and well be it for i that i have bring my bible and some book unaware, for otherwise it have be very difficult for i and have be cause to excuse i of that work. it have not be without fruit. many witness unto i that they have never hear so much good talk of god, not know before any principle of that which belong to christian doctrine and such be the state wherein live the most part of christendom. and if there be any edify of one part, there be backbite on the other by reason that use a french liberty, i willing. speak the truth, whereupon i remember the say of the prophet amos: they have hate, say he. he that reprove they amos 5. verse 10. in the gate and have have in abomination he that speak in integrity. but in the end we become all good friend, and among these thing, god, give i always a sound and a perfect health, always a good taste, always merry and nimble. save that have once lie in the wood near to a brook in snowy weather i be touch with a cramp or sciatika in my thigh. a fortnight space. not lose my appetite nor stomach for the same, for indeed i take delight in that which. i do desire to confine there my life, if it will please god. to bless the voyage of child. i shall be over tedious if i will set down here the disposition of all person, and to speak concern child that they be more subject to this sickness than other, for that they have very often ulcer in the mouth and gum because of the thin substance that abound in their body, and also that they gather many crude humour by their disorder of live and by the quantity of fruit they eat, be never fill with it, by which m? ean they gather great quantity of waterish blood and the spleen be stop can soak up those moistur of age folk. and as for old folk that have their heat weaken and can resist the sickness, be fill with crudity. and with a cold and moist temperature which be the quality proper to stir up and nourish it. i will not take the physician office in hand, fear the censure rod and notwithstanding with their leave, not touch with their order and receipt of agaric, aloe, rhubarb and other ingredient. i will write here that which i think more ready at hand for the poor people which have not the ability and mean to send to alexandria as well for the preservation of their health, as for the remedy of this sickness, advice for the sickness of new france. it be a certain axiom that a contrary must be heal by his contrary. this sickness proceed from a indigestion of rude, gross, cold and melancholy meat which offend the stomach. i think it good, submit myself to better judgement and advice, to accompany they with good sauce, be it of butter, oil or fat. all well, spice, to correct as well the quality of the meat as of the body. inward wax, cold, let this be say, for rude and gross meat as bean, pease and fish. for he that shall eat good capon, good partridge, good duck and good rabbit, he may be assure of his health, or else his body be of a very bad constitution. we have have some sick that have, as it be, raise up from death to life for have good wine. eat twice or thrice of a coolice, make of a cock. good wine, take according to the necessity of nature. be a sovereign preservative for all sickness, and particulary for this, master macquin and master george, worshipful, merchant of rochel, as associate to mont, do furnish we with 45. toone of wine, which do we very much good, and our sick folk themselves have their mouth spoil and not be able to eat, have never lose the taste of wine which they take with a pipe. the same have, preserve many of they from death. the young bud of herb in the spring time be also very sovereign. and beside that reason require to believe it. i have try it. herb in the spring time, be myself go many time to gather some for our sick people. before that those of our garden may be use which restore they to their taste again and comfort their weak stomach. and as for that which concern the exterior part of the body, we have find great good in wear wooden pantaphle or patins with our shoe. for to avoid the moistness the house need no open nor window. on the northwest side be a wind very dangerous, but rather on the east side or the south it be very good to have good bedding and it be good for i to have carry thing necessary to this purpose. and above all to keep himself stoove neat. i will like well the use of stoove, such as they have in germany by mean, whereof they feel no winter be at home, but as much as they please, yea, they stoove in garden. have of they in many place in their garden, which do so temper the coldness of winter that in this rough and sharp season there one may see orenge-tree, limon-tree, figtree, pomgranet-tree and all such sort of tree bring forth fruit as good as in provence, which be so much the more easy to do in this new land, for that it be all cover over with wood, except when one come in the armonchiquois country, a hundred league further of the country of the. armouchiquois, 100 league distant from port royal, then port royal, and in make of winter a summer, one shall discover the land which not have any more those great obstacle that hinder the sun to court she and from warm it with his heat. without doubt, it will become very temperate and yield a most mild air and well, agree with our humour, not have there, even at this time, neither cold nor heat that be excessive. the savage that know not germany nor the custom thereof, do teach we the same lesson: which be subject to those sickness, as we have see in the voyage of james quartier: use sweat, often, as it be every month, the sweating of the savage, and by this mean they preserve. themselves drive out by sweat all the cold and evil humour they may have gather. but one singular preservative against this perfidious sickness which come so steal and which have once lodge itself within we will not be put out: be to follow the counsel of he that be wise among the wise, who have consider all the affliction that man give to himself during his life, have find nothing better- ecclesi 3., verse 12. and 22. than to rejoice himself and do good and to take pleasure in his own work. they that have do so in our company have find themselves well by it. contrawise, some always grudge repine, never content. idle have be mean of mirth, find out by the same disease, true it be. that, for to enjoy mirth, it be good to have the sweetness of fresh meat, flesh, fish, milk, butter, oil, fruit and such like, which we have not at will. i mean the common sort, for always, some one or other of the company do furnish de poutrincourt his table with wild foul venison or fresh fish, and if we have have half a dozen kine. i believe that no body have die there. it rest a preservative necessary for the accomplishment necessity of have woman into the country of mirth, and to the end one may take pleasure on the work of his hand. be every one to have the honest company of his lawful wife, for without that the cheer be never perfect. one mind be. always upon that which one love and desire, there be still some sorrow, the body become full of ill humour, and so the sickness do breed. and for the last and sovereign remedy, i send back the tree of life patient to the tree of life, for so one may well qualify it- which james quartier do call anneda, yet unknown in sassafras, the coast of port royal, unless it be peradventure. the sassafras, whereof there be quantity in certain place, and it be a assure thing that the say tree be very excellent, but champlain, who be now in the great river of canada, pass his winter in the same part where the say quartier do winter. have charge to find it out, champlein be now this. present year, 1609.. in canada, and to make provision thereof, chap 7, the discovery of new land by mont, fabulous tale and report of the river and feign town of norombega. the refute of the author that have write thereof. fish bank in new find land, kinibeki, chovacoet, mallebarre, armouchiquois, the death of a french man kill, mortality of englishman in virginia. the rough season be pass. mont, weary with his bad dwell at saint croix, determine to seek out another port in a warrner country and more to the south, and to that end make a pinnace to be arm and furnish with victual to follow the coast and discover new country, to seek out some happy port in a more temperate air. and because mont his voyage for the discovery of new land, that in seek one can set forward so much as when in full sail one go in open sea and that find out, bay and gulf lie between two land, one must put in because that there one may assoon, find that which be seek for. as else, where he make in this voyage, but about six score league, as we will tell you now, from saint croix to 60. league forward, the coast lie east and west, at the end of which 60. league be the river call by the savage kinibeki, from which place to malebarre kinibeki, 60. league from saint croix. it lie north and south and there be yet from one to the other 60. league in right line. not follow the bay so far stretch mont, his voyage, wherein he have for pilot in his vessel de champdore. in all this coast, so far as kinibeki, there be many place where ship may be harbour among the land, but the people there be not so frequent as be beyond that and there be no remarkable thing at least that may be see in the outside of the land, but a river whereof many have write fable one after another, like to those that they who ground themselves upon plin. lib 3. cap 1. his commentary, a carthaginian captain have feign of town, build by he in great number, upon the coast of africa, which be water with the ocean, sea, for that he play a heroical part in sail so far as the isle of cap, where long time since no body have be the navigation, not be so secure then, upon that great sea as it be at this day, by the benefit of the compass. therefore, without allege that which the first writer, spaniard and portugese, have say, i will recite that which be in the last book entitle the universal history of the west indies, print at dovay, the last year 1607.. in the place where he speak of norombega, for in report this i shall have also. say that which the first have. write from who they have. have it fabulous tale of the river norombega. moreover, towards the north, say the author, after he have speak of virginia, be norombega, which be know well enough by reason of a fair town and a great river, though it be not find from whence it have his name, for the barbarian, do call it agguncia. at the mouth of this river, there be a island very fit for fish. the region that go along the sea do abound in fish and towards new france, there be great number of wild beast and be very commodious for hunt. the inhabitant do live in the same manner as they of new france, if this beautiful town have ever. be in nature, i will fain know who have pull it down, for there be but cabanes here and there, make with pearke and cover with bark of tree or with skin, and both the river and the place pemtegoet inhabit be call pemtegoet and not agguncia. the river, save the tide, be scarce as the river of oyse, and there can be no great river on that coast because there be not land sufficient to produce they, by reason of the great river of canada, which run like this coast and be not fourscore league distant from that place, in cross the land which from elsewhere, receive many river fall from those part which be towards norombega, at the entry whereof it be so far from have. but one island, that rather the number thereof be almost infinite, for as much as this river enlarge itself like the greek lambda l, the mouth whereof be all full of isle, whereof there be one of, they lie very far off, and the foremost in the sea, which be high and markable above the other. but some will say that i equivocate in the situation of norombega and that it be not place where i take it to oiection. answer this. i answer that the author, who- word i have a little before, allege be in this my sufficient warrant, who, in his geographical map, have place in the mouth of this river, in the 44. degree, and his, suppose, town in the 45., wherein we differ. but in one degree, which be a small matter. for the river, that i mean be in the 45. degree, and as for any town, there be none. now, of necessity, it must be this river, because that the same be pass, and that of kinibeki which be in the same height. there be no other river forward whereof account shall be. make tell one come to virginia. i say furthermore that see the barbarian of norombega do live as they of new france and have abundance of hunt, it must be that their province be seat in our new france for fifty league. far to the south-west there be no great game, because the wood be thin there and the inhabitant settle, and in great number than in norombega. true it be that a sea captain, name john alfonse of xaintonge, in the relation of his adventurous voyage, have another fabulous report of the river of norombega write that have pass saint john island, which i take for the same that i have call heretofore the i will of bacaillos. the coast turn to the west and west, south-west, note this well- as far as the river of norombergue, new discover, say he, by the portugais and spaniard, which be in 30. degree. add that this river have at the entire thereof many isle, bank and rock and that fifteen or twenty league within it be build a great town where the people be small and blackish, like they of the indies and be clothe with skin, whereof they have abundance of all sort item, that the bank of new find land end there and that that river be pass the coast, turn to the west and west, northwest above 250. league, towards a country where there be both town and castle. but i see very little or no truth at all in all the discourse of this man. and well may he call his voyage adventurous, not for he who be never in the hundred part of the place he describe- at least it be easy so to think- but for those that will follow the way which he will, mariner to follow. for if the say river of norombega be in thirty degree, it must needs be in florida, which be the contrary to all they that ever have write of it and to the very truth itself. concern that which he say of the bank of new-found, the great bank of newfoundland, banquereau jacquet land, it end by the report of mariner about the i will of sablon, or sande, about cap breton. true it be that there be some other bank that be. call and jacquet, but they be but five or six or ten league and be divide from the great bank of new find land and touch the man in the land of norombega. they be of fair and high stature and to say that this river be pass the coast, lie west and west, northwest, that have no likelihood for, from cap breton so far as the point of florida that lie over against the isle cuba, there be not any coast, stand west, northwest only there be in the part join upon the true river, call norombega some fifty league coast that stand east and west. final of all that which the say, john alfonse do report i receive, but that which he say that this river whereof we speak have at the come in many land bank and rock. kinibek, the river of norombega be pass mont go, still coast until he come to kinibeki, where a river be that may shorten the way to go to the great river of canada. there be a number of savage cabane there and the land begin there to be better. people from kinibeki go far. one find the bay of march, name by the captain, his name that the bay of march 1607.. chovakoet, the ground manure, command therein this march be kill, the year that we part from new france, 1607.. farther be a. other bay call chovakoet, where, in regard of the former country, be a great number of people, for there they till the ground and the region begin to be more temperate, and for proof of this there be in this land store of vine, yea, even there be land full of it, which be more vine, subject to the injury of the wind and cold, as we shall say malebarre hereafter. there be between chovakoet and malebarre many bay and isle, and the coast be sandy with shallow ground, draw near to the say malebarre, so that scarce one may land there with bark. the people that befrom saint john river to kinibeki, wherein be comprise the river of saint croix and norombega, be call etechemins, and from kinibeki as far as malebarre and far, they be call armouchiquois. the armouchiquois, traitor and thief. they be traitor and thief and one have need to take heed of they mont have make some stay at malebarre victual, begin to be scarce with he, and it be needful to think upon the return special. see all the coast, so troublesome that one can pass no further, shall stretch far into the sea. violent death of a frenchman of saint mallos, without peril for shoal, that stretch far into the sea in such wise that the far one go from the land lesser depth there. be. but before depart, a carpenter of saint mallos die casual, who go to fetch water with some kettle, a armouchiquois see fit opportunity to steal one of those kettle, when that the frenchman take no heed, take it and run away speedy with his booty, the malovin run after be kill by this wicked people. and although the same have not happen, it be in the swiftness of the armouchiquois, vain to pursue after this thief. for all these armouchiquois be as swift in run as greyhound, as we will yet further say in speak of the voyage that de poutrincourt make in the same country in the year 1606.. 1606.. it grieve sore mont to see such a thing and his man be earnest for revenge. which they may do for the other barbarian be not so far from the frenchman, but that a musket shot may have, scare they which they have already on rest to level every one at his man. but the say mont, upon some consideration which many other of his place and dignity may have miss to consider, make every one to put down their musket cock and leave they alone, not have hitherto find a fit place to make a settle dwelling. and so the say mont cause all thing to be in a readiness for the return to saint croix where he have leave a good number of his man yet weak by the winter. sickness of who health he be careful, demonts difficulty in his enterprise. many that know not what belong to the sea do think that the set of a habitation in a unknown land be easy. but by the discourse of this voyage and other that follow, they shall find that it be far easy to say than to do, and that mont have exploit many thing this first year, in view all the coast of this land, even to malebarre, which be 400.. league follow the same coast and search to the bottom of the bays, beside the labour he be force to in cause house to be make at saint croix, the care he have of those which he have bring thither and of their return into france, if any peril or shipwreck shall come to those that have. promise he to fetch he at the end of the year. but one may run and take pain to seek port and haven where fortune favour. yet she be always like to herself. it be good for one to lodge himself in a sweet, mild climate when one may choose. notwithstanding, death follow we every where. i have hear of a pilot of new haven. the mortality of the english in virginia like that of the french in new france. virginia be in 36., 37., 38. degree of latitude. praise of the temper of virginia. bad fare the chief cause of the sickness. thing needful that be with the englishman in virginia 24. year ago that be come thither there die 36. of they in three month. nevertheless, virginia be take to be in the 36., 37. and 38. degree of latitude, which be a good, temperate country which consider, i yet believe, as i have already say before, that such mortality come by the bad fare and it be altogether needful to have in such a country, at the very beginning, household and tame cattle of all sort, and to carry store of fruit tree and graft for to have there quick recreation necessary to the health of they that desire to people the land. that if the savage themselves be subject to the sickness whereof we have speak, i attribute that to the same cause of evil fare, for they have nothing that may correct the vice of the meat which they take. and be always naked among the moisture of the ground, which be the very mean to gather quantity of corrupt humour which cause those sickness unto they as well as to the stranger that go thither although they be, bear to that kind of life. chap 8: the second voyage make by monsieur du pont-graue. the arrival of monsieur du pont to saint croix, the habitation transfer in port. royal return of mont into france. the difficulty of hand milles, the furniture of the say du pont for the discovery of new land beyond malebarre. shippewracke forecast for the return into france, comparison of these voyage with they of florida, the blame of those that dispraise the tillage of the land. the spring time season be pass in. the voyage of the armouchiquois mont do temporize at saint croix for the time that he have agree upon, in the which, if he have no news from france, he may depart and come to seek some ship of they that come to new, find land for the dry of fish to the end to repass in france. within the same, he and his company, if it be possible this time, be already expire and they be ready to set sail, not expect more, any succour: the arrival of monsieur du pont 1605. nor refresh when monsieur du point, surname dwell at honfleur, do arrive with a company of some forty man, for to ease the say mont and his troop, which be to the great joy of all, as one may well imagine and canon shot, be free and plentiful at the come, according to custom, and the sound of trumpet, the say, monsieur du pont, not know yet the state of our french man, do think to find there a assure dwelling and his lodging ready, but consider the accident of the strange sickness whereof we have speak. he take advice to change place. mont be very desirous that the new habitation have be about 40. degree, that be to say 4. degree far than saint croix but have view the coast as far as malebarre and with much pain, not find what he desire. it be deliberate to go and make their dwell in port royal. until mean be have to make a ample transmigration from s croix to port royal discovery. so every one begin to pack up his thing, that which be build with infinite labour be pull down except the storehouse which be too great and painful to be transport and in execute of this many voyage be make. all be come to port royal. they find out new labour. the abide place be, choose right new building over against the island, that be at the come in of the river equille, in a place where all be cover over and full of wood as thick as possible may be. the month of september do already begin to come, and care be to be take for the unlade of monsieur du pont, his ship, to make room for they that shall return back into france. final, there be work enough for all when the ship be in a readiness to put to sail mont have see the beginning of the new habitation ship himself for his return with they that will follow. he, notwithstanding, many of good courage, forget the grief and labour pass, do tarry behind among who be monsieur champlain and monsieur, the one for geography and the other for the conduct and guide of the voyage that shall be necessary to be make by sea. then the say the return of mont into france. mont hoist up sail and leave the say du pont as his lieutenant and deputy in these part, who want no diligence, according to his nature, in make perfect that which be needful for to lodge both himself and his people, which be all that may be do for that year in that country, for to go far from home in the winter and after so long a toil, there be no reason. and as for the tillage of the ground, i believe they have no fit time to do it, for the say du pont be not a man to be long in rest, nor to leave his man idle, if there have be any mean for it. traffic with the savage. the winter be come. the savage of the country do assemble themselves from far to port royal for to truck with the frenchman for such thing they have. some bring beaver skin and otter, which be those whereof bever, otter and stag most account may be make in that place, and also ellans or stag, whereof good buff may be make. other bring flesh, new kill, wherewith they make many good tabagy or feast. live merry as long. as they have. tabaguia be a savage term, signify banquet wherewithal. they never want any bread but wine. do not continue with they till the season be end, for when we come thither, the year follow. they have be above three month without any wine and be very glad of our come for that. make they to take again the taste of it. hand mils, the great pain they have be to grind the corn to have bread, which be very painful with hand-mil, whereall the strength of the body be requisite. and therefore it be not without cause that in old time bad people be threaten to be send to the mill. as to the painefull thing that be, to which occupation poor slave be set to. before the use of water and windmill be find out, as the profane history make mention, and the same of the exod 11. ver. 4.. 5. come of the people of israel out of the land of egypt where, for the last scourge that god will send to pharaoh, he declare by the mouth of moses, that about midnight he will pass through egypt and every first bear shall die there, from the first bear of pharaoh that shall sit upon his throne to the first bear of the maid servant which grind at the mill. and this labour be so great that the savage, although they be very poor, can bear it and have rather to be without bread then to take so much pain as it. have be. try, offer they half of the grind, they shall do, but they choose rather to have no corn, and i may well believe that the same with other thing have be great mean to breed the sickness speak of in the number of the dead, some of monsieur du pont, his man, for there, die some half a dozen of they that winter. true it be that i find a defect in the building of our frenchman, which, be they fault in their building, have no ditch about they, whereby the water of the ground next to they do run under their lower-most room, which be a great hindrance to their health. i add, beside the bad water which they use that do not run from. a quick spring, but from the near brook, the furniture of monsieur du pont, to go to the discovery of new land, the winter be pass and the sea navigable. du pont will needs achieve the enterprise, begin the year before by mont and to go seek out a port more southerly where the air may be more temperate. according as he have in charge of the say mont, he furnish then the bark which remain with he to that effect but be set out of the port and full ready, hoist up, fail for malebarre, he be force by contrary wind twice to put back again, and at the three time the say bark strike against the rock at the, the wrack of their bark, entire of. the say port. in this disgrace of neptune, the man be save with the better part of provision and merchandise, but as for the bark, it be rend in piece and by this mishap the voyage be break. and that which be so desire intermit for the habitation of port royal, be not judge good. and notwithstanding cause of delay in establish the dwell place of the french man, it be on the north and northwest side, well shelter, with mountain distant some one league, some half a league from the port and the river l'equille. so we see how that enterprise take not effect according to the desire of man and be accompany with many peril, so that one must not wonder if the time be long. in establish of colony, special in land so remote, who nature and temperature of air be not know, and where one must fell and cut down forest and be constrain to take heed not from the people that we call savage, but from they that term themselves christian and yet have, but the name of it, curse and abominable people, worse than wolf, enemy to god and human nature. this attempt then be break du pont know not what to do but to attend the succour and supply that mont promise part from port royal at his return into france to send he the year follow. yet for all event, he build a other bark and a shaloup for to seek french ship in the place where they. use to dry fish, such as port english port, misamichis port, the bay of chaleur or heat, the bay of morue, or cod and other in great number, according as mont, have do the former year to the end, to ship himself in they and to return into france, in case that no ship shall come to succour he, wherein he do wise, for he be in danger to hear no news from we that be appoint to succeed he, as it shall appear by the discourse, follow the compare of these late voyage. but in the mean while we must consider that they which in these voyage have transport themselves in these part, have have a advantage over those that will plant in florida, which be in, have that refuge- beforesaid of french ship that frequent the new, find land for fish, not be force to build great ship, nor to abide extreme famine as they have do in florida, who voyage have be lamentable for that respect and these by reason of the sickness that have persecute they. but they of florida have have a blessing for that: they be in a mild and fertile country and more friendly to man health. then new france speak of else, where if they have suffer famine there be great fault in they. for not have till the ground which they find plain and champion which, before all other thing be to be do. of they that will lodge themselves so far, the blame of they who, at this day, despise the manure of the ground from ordinary succour. but the frenchman, and almost all nation at this day, i mean of those that be not bear and bring up to the manure of the ground, have this bad nature that they think to derogate much from their dignity in addict themselves to the tillage of the ground, which, notwithstanding, be almost the only vocation where innocence remain, and thereby come that every one shun this noble labour our first parent and ancient king exercise, as also of the great captain. of the world seek to make himself a gentleman at other cost, or else will only to learn the god punishment trade to deceive man or to claw himself in the sun. god, take away his blessing from we and beat we at this day, and have do a long time, with a iron rod, so that in all part the people languish miserable and we see the realm of france swarm with beggar and vagabond of all kind, beside a infinite number groan in their poor cottage, not dare or ashamed to shewfoorth their poverty and misery. chap 9: the first motive and acceptation of the voyage by de poutrincourt, together with the author, into new france, their departure from paris to go into rochel the three. voyage make by de poutrincourt about the time of the before mention shipwreck mont be in france. do think careful upon the mean: how to prepare a new for new france, which seem hard and difficult to he as well, for the great charge that that action require, as because that province have be so discredit at his return that the continue of these voyage any long do seem vain and unfruitful beside there be some reason to believe that no body will adventure himself thither. notwithstanding, know monsieur de poutrincourt his desire to who before he have, give part of the land according to the power which the king have give he which be to inhabit in those part and there to settle his family and his fortune. together with the name of god, he write unto he and send a man of purpose to give he notice of the voyage that be in hand, which the say de poutrincourt accept. de poutrincourt accept the voyage of new france of leave all other affair to attend. on this action, though he have suit in law of great weight to the prosecute and defence whereof his presence be very requisite, and that at his first voyage he have try the malice of some which, during his absence, prosecute against he with rigour and at his return give over and become dumb. he be no soon come to paris, but that he be force to depart, not have scarce time to provide for thing necessary- and i have have that good hap to be acquaint with he some year before, ask i if i will take part in that business, whereunto i demand a day respite to answer he have well consult with myself, not so much desirous to see the country, for i the cause. of the author voyage, know well that there be wood, lake and river, and that one must go over sea- which i have before do in the straits- as to be able to give a eye judgement of the land whereto my mind be before incline and to avoid a corrupt world, i engage my word unto he be induce thereto special for the unjustice do to i a little before by some presidial judge in favour of a parsonage of eminent quality, who i have always honour and reverence, which sentence, at my return, have be recall by order and sentence of the court of parliament, for which i be particular oblige to monsieur seruin the king, his advocate general, to who do belong proper this eloge. attribute, according to the letter, to the most wise and most magnificent of all, king, psal 5.. 4. thou have love justice and hate iniquity. so it be that god awaken we sometime to stir we up to generous action such as be these voyage which, as the world do vary. some will blame, other some will approve, but without answer any body. in this respect, i care not what discourse idle man or those that can or will not help i may make, enjoy contentment in myself and be ready to render all service to god and to the king in those remote land that bear the name of france, if either my fortune or condition call i thither for there to live in quiet and rest. by a acceptable please labour and to shun the hard and miserable life whereto i see reduce the most part of man in this part of the world. to return then to de poutrincourt, as he have dispatch some business, he inquire in some church, if some learned priest may be find out that will go with he to relieve and ease he who, monsieur mont have leave there at his voyage, who we think to be yet live, but because it be the holy week in which time they be employ and wait on confession and shriving, there be none to be find some excuse themselves upon the trouble and discommodity of the sea and the length of the voyage. other defer it till after easter, which be cause that none can be have out of paris by reason the season haste on, time and tide tarry for no man, so than we be force to depart. there rest to find out fit and necessary workman for the voyage of new france, whereunto be speedy, provide price, agree upon for their wage and money, give before hand in part thereof to bear their charge to rochel, where the rend be at the dwell house of master macquin and master george, worshipful merchant of the say town, the associate of mont, which do provide our furniture and provision. the part from paris our mean people be go three or four day after we take our way to orleans upon good friday, for there to solemnize and pass our easter, where every one accomplish the duty usual to all good christian in take the spiritual food, that be to say the holy communion. see, we do undertake. and be go on a voyage from thence. we come down the river loire to saumur with our carriage and from sawmur we go by tovars and maran to rochel by hackney horse, chap x, the name of our ship, call the jonas. the shallow water at rochel be the cause of the hard. go out rochel, a reform town. the common people be insolent croquans. the accident of shipwreck of the jonas, new preparation, weak soldier, be not to be place upon the frontier. the minister of rochel, do pray for the conversion of the savage, the smalzeale of we the eucharist, carry in voyage by the ancient christian the diligence of de poutrincourt at the very point of ship. be come to rochel. we find there. mont and de poutrincourt, that be come in post and our ship call the jonas, of the burden of 150.. ton, ready to pass out of the chain of the town to tarry for wind and tide. the tide, i say because that a great ship, lade, can come to sea from rochel, but in spring tide, upon the new and full moon, by reason that in the town ride there be no sufficient depth. in the mean while we make good cheer, yea, so good that we do long to be at sea to make diet, which we do, but too soon be once come thither, for during two whole month we see not a whit of land, as we will far tell anon, but the workman. through their good cheer, for they have every one two shilling a day. hire the praise of rochel, do play marvelous prank in saint nicholas quarter where they be lodge, which be find strange in a town. so reform as rochel be in, the which no notorious riot nor dissolution be make, and indeed one must behave himself orderly there, unless he will incur the danger either of the censure of the mayor or of the minister of the town. some of those disorder man be put in prison, which be keep in the town-house till the time of go and have be further punish. have it not be upon consideration of the voyage, where they know they shall not have all their ease but shall afterward pay. dear enough their mad bargain in put the, say master macquin and master georges, to so much trouble to keep they in order. i will not for all that put in the number of this disorder people, all the rest for there be some. croquans signify hook, why so call very civil and respective, but i will say that the common people be a dangerous beast and this make- i remember the croquans war among who i be once in my life. be in it be the strange thing in the world to see the confusion of those wooden shoe fellow from whence they take the name of croquans, that be to say hooker, because that their wooden shoe nail before and behind do hook or stick fast. at every step. this confuse people have neither rhyme nor reason. among they, every one be master there, some arm with a hedge-hooke at a staves end, other with some rusty sword, and so according, negligence in the keep of the jonas, our jonas have her full load, be in the end row out of the town into the road and we think to set out the 8. or 9 of april captain have take the charge for the conduct of the voyage. but as commonmon, there be negligence in man business. it happen that this captain, who, notwithstanding i have know very diligent and watchful at sea, have leave the ship ill man, not be in she himself, nor the pilot, but only 6. or 7. mariner. good and bad. a great southeast wind arise in the night which break the jonas cable, fasten with one only anchor, and drive she against a forewall which be out of the town back and prope the tower of the chain against which she strike so many time that she break and sink down. and it chance well that it be then ebb, for if this mishap have come in flow time, the ship be in danger to be overwhelm with a far great loss than we have. but she stand up and so there be mean to mend she which be do with speed. our workman be warn to come and help in this necessity. hire workman negligent either to draw at the pomp at the capestane. or to any other thing, but few there be that endeavour themselves to do any thing. the most part of they go away and most of they make a mock of it. some have go so far as to the oar, go back, complain that one have cast water upon they be of that side, that the water come out of the pomp which the wind do scatter upon they. i come thither with de poutrincourt and some other willing man where we be not unprofitable. almost all the inhabitant of rochel be behold this spectacle. upon the rampire, the sea be yet stormy and we think our ship will have dash oftentimes against the great tower of the town. in the end we come in with less. loss than we think of. the ship be all unlade, be force to tackle and furnish she anew. the loss thereby be great and the voyage almost break off for ever. for i believe that after so many trial, none will have venture to go plant colonies in those part that country be so ill. speak of that every one do pity. we consider the accident happen to the courage of mont and his associate. they that have be there before, notwithstanding, monsieur mont and his associate, do bear manful this loss, and i must needs be so bold as to tell in this occurrance that if ever that country be inhabit with christian and civil people, the first praise thereof must of right be due to the author of this voyage. this great trouble hinder we above a month, which be employ in the unlade and lade again of our ship. during that time we do walk sometime unto the place near about the town, and chief unto the convent of the cordelier, which be but half a league off from the frontier, ought to be furnish with good soldier the town where be one sunday. i do marvel how in those place of frontier there be no better garrison, have so strong enemy near they. and see, i take in hand to relate a history of thing according to the true manner of they. i say that it be a shameful thing for we that the minister of rochel pray to god every day in their congregation. the minister do pray for the conversion of the savage, for the conversion of the poor, savage people, and also for our safe conduct, and that our churchman do not the like. in very truth, we never require neither the one nor the other to do it, but therein be know the zeal of both side. in the end, a little before our depart, it come. to my mind to ask of the parson or vicar of rochel, if there may be find any of his fraternity that will come with we, which i hope may easy be do, because there be a reasonable good number of they and beside that be in a maritime town. i think they take delight to haunt the sea, but i can obtain nothing. and for all excuse, it be tell i that none will go to such voyage unless they be move with a extraordinary zeal and piety and that it will be the best way to seek to the father jesuite for the same, which we can not then do. our ship have almost her full lade, whereupon i remember to have hear oftentimes of de. poutrincourt that after his first voyage be at the court a ecclesiastical person esteem very zealous in the christian religion, demand of he what may be hope for in the conversion of the people of new france, and whether there be any great number of they. whereunto he answer that a hundred thousand soul may be get to jesus christ name. a number certain for a uncertain. this clergy man make small account of such a number, say thereupon by admiration, be that all, as if that number do not deserve the labour of a churchman. true though there be but the hundred part of that yea, yet less, one must not suffer it to be lose the good shepherd have among math 18.. vers 12. 132. a. hundred sheep, one astray, leave the 99 for to go and seek out the one that be lose. we be teach, and i believe it, so that, though there be but one man to be save, our lord jesus christ, have not disdain to come as well for he as he have do for all the world in like manner. one must not make so small account of the salvation of these poor people, though they swarm, not in number as within paris or constantinople. custom of the ancient christian: carry the eucharist in their voyage. see it avail i nothing in demand for a churchman to administer the sacrament unto we, be it during our navigation or upon the land. the ancient custom of the christian come. into my mind- which go in voyage, do carry with they the holy bread of the eucharist, and this do they because they find not in all place priest to administer this sacrament unto they. the world be then yet full either of heathen or heretic, so that it be not unproper call viatic, which they carry with they travel on the way. yet notwithstanding, i be of opinion that it have a spiritual meaning and consider that we may be bring to that necessity not have in new france, but one priest only, of who death we hear when we come thither. i demand if they will do unto we, as to the ancient christian, who be as wise as we, i be, answer that the same. be do in that time for consideration which be not now at this day. i, saint ambrose, in his funeral oration for his brother, reply that satirus, saint ambroses brother, go on a voyage upon the sea, serve himself with this spiritual physic, as we read in his funeral oration: make by his say, brother saint ambrose, which he do carry in orario, which i take to be a linen cloth or taffeta, and well, do it happen unto he by it, for have make shipwreck, he save himself upon a board leave of his vessel wrack. but i be as well refuse in this as of the rest, which give i cause of wonder, seem to i a very rigorous thing, to be in worse condition than the first christian, for the eucharist be no other thing at this day than it be then, and if they hold it precious, we do not demand it to make lesser account thereof. let we return to our jonas. now she be lade and bring out of the town into the road. there rest nothing more than fit weather and tide, which be the hard hardness to come forth from a port of the matter, for in place where be no great depth, as in rochel, one must tarry for the high tide of the full and new moon, and then, peradventure, the wind will not be fit, and so one must defer till a fortnight time, in the mean, while the season go away as it be, almost, with we for we see the hour that after so many labour and charge, we be endanger to tarry for lack of wind because the moon be in the wain and consequent the bad suspicion of captain. tide captain do not seem to affect his charge, make no ordinary stay in. the ship and it be report that other merchant not be of mont, his society do secret, solicit he to break off the voyage, and indeed it have be. think that he cause we to make wrong course, which keep we two month and a half at sea, as hereafter we shall see which thing the, the diligence and care of monss-de poutrincourts say. de poutrincourt perceive himself, take upon he the charge of captain of the ship and go to lie in she the space of five or six day, for to get out with the first wind and not to lose the opportunity in the end, with much a do, the eleven day of may 1606.. by the favour of a small easterly wind, he go. to sea and make our jonas to be bring to the palisse and the next * a place so call near rochel day, be the 12. of the same month. come again to which be the place where ship put themselves for shelter from wind, where the hope of new france be assemble. i say the hope because that of this voyage do depend the continuance or total breach of the enterprise. chap 11: their departure from rochel, sundry meeting of ship and pirate, stormy sea about the acore and whence it proceed, why the west wind be frequent in the west sea, from whence the wind do come porpese do prognosticate storm mean to take they, the describe of they of storm, their effect of calm. what be a gust of wind, how it be make the effect thereof, the boldness of mariner, how reverence be give to the king ship, the supputation of the voyage. hot sea, then cold, the reason of it, and of the bank of ice in new-found land, 13. of may 1606.. the saturday, whitsoneve, 13. of may, we weigh our anchor and sail in open sea, so that by little and little we lose the sight of the great tower and town of rochel, then of the isle of rez, and oleron bid france farewell. it be a thing fearful for they that be not use to such a dance, to see they carry upon so movable a and to be at every moment as it be within. two finger breadth to death. we have not long sail, but that many do their endeavour to yield up the tribute meeting of ship to neptune. in the mean while we go still forward for there be no more. go back the plank. be once. take up the 16. of may. we meet with 13. hollander, go for spain, which do inquire of our voyage and so hold their course. since that time we be a whole month, see nothing else out of our float town but sky and meet of a pirate or outlaw water. one ship except near about the acor well, fill with english and dutchmen. they bear up with we and come very near we and, according to the manner of the sea, we. ask they whence their ship be. they tell we they be newfoundland man, that be to say, go a fish for new-found-land-fish. and they ask we if we will accept of their company. we thank they thereupon. they drink to we and we to they. and they take another course, but have consider their vessel all set with green moss on the belly and side. we judge they to be pirate and that they have, of a long time beat the sea in hope to make some prize. it be then that we begin to neptune sheep see more than before neptune sheep to skip up. so do they call the frothy wave. when the sea begin to sturand to feel the hard blow of his trident. for common. why be the sea stormy about the acore in that place before name the sea be stormy. if one ask i the cause why, i will answer that i think it to proceed of a certain conflict between the east and westerly wind which do encounter in that part of the sea, and especial in summer when the west wind do rise up and with a great force pierce and pass through a great distance of sea until they find the wind of these part which do resist they. then it be dangerous for a ship to be at these windy encounter. this reason seem the more probable unto i in this that until we come near the acore we have the wind fit enough, and afterward we have almost always either south-west or norweast, little north and south, which be not good for we but to sail with the bowline. for easterly wind, we have none at all, but once or twice westerly wind ordinary in the western sea, which continue, nothing with we to speak of. sure it be that the westerly wind do reign much a long that sea, whether it be by a certain repercussion of the east wind, which be stiff and swift, under the equinoctial line whereof we have speak elsewhere, or because that this western land be large and great, also the wind. that issue from thence do abound the more which come, especial in summer when the sun have force to draw up the from whence the wind do come vapour of the earth, for the wind come from thence issue from the den and cave of the same, and therefore the poet do fain that aeolus hold they in prison, from whence he draw they and give they liberty when it please he. but the spirit of god do confirm it unto we yet better when he say, by the mouth of the prophet, that almighty god, among other his marvel, draw- psal 135.. the wind out of his treasure, which be the cave whereof i speak, for the word treasure signify in hebrew secret and hide place. he. bring forth the cloud from the earth, further part the lightning with the rain he make, and they impart on some in his anger, on other for pleasure, the wind he draw forth out of his deep treasure. and upon this consideration, christopher columbus, a genwaie first navigator of these last age unto the land of amerika, do judge that there be some great land in the west, have observe sail on the sea that continual wind come from that part. continue then, our course we have some other storm and hindrance procure by wind which we almost have always, contrary by reason, we set out too late, but they that set out in march have common good wind, because that then the east, noreast and northern wind. do reign which be fit and prosperous for these voyage. porpese do prognosticate storm. these tempest be very often foretell we by porpese which do haunt about our ship by thousand, sport themselves after a very pleasant manner. some of they do the way to take. they pay for their so near eapproach for some man. wait for they at the beke head, which be the forepart of the ship, with harp iron in their hand, which meet with they sometime, and draw they in aboard with the help of the other sailor which, with iron hook which they call gaffes, tie at the end of a long paul, pull they up. we have. take many of they in that sort, both in go and come, which have do we no harm. there be the description of the porpese, two sort of they, some which have a blunt and big nose, other which have it sharp. we take none but of these. last but yet i remember to have see in the water some of the short-nosed one. this fish have two finger the porpese. hot blood do comfort the sinew, breadth of fat at the least on the back when it be cut in two. we do wash our hand in his hot blood which they say comfort the sinew. he have a marvelous quantity of tooth along his jaw and i think that he hold fast that which he once catch. moreover, the inward part have altogether the taste of hog flesh and the bone not in form of fish bone, but like a four footed creature. the most delicate meat of it be the fin which he have upon the back and the tail, which be neither fish nor flesh but better then that such as also be in substance of tail, that of the bever, which seem to be scail, a beavers tail, be dainty meat. these porpese be the only fish we take before we come to the great bank of morue or codfish, but far off we see other great fish which do. show out of the water above half a acre length of their back and do thrust out in the air above a spear height of great pipe of water through the hole they have upon their head. storm and their effect. but to return to our purpose of storm during our voyage we have some which make we strike down sail and to stand our arm a cross, carry at the pleasure of the wave and toss up and down after a strange manner. if any coffer or chest be not well make fast, it be hear to roll from side to side, make a foul noise, sometime the kettle be overturn and in dine or sup our dish and platter fly from one end of the table. to the other, unless they be hold very fast. as for the drink, one must carry his mouth and the glass according to the motion of the ship. brief, it be a sport, but somewhat rude to they that can bear this jog easy. for all that, the most of we do laugh at it. for there be no danger in it, at least evident be in a good ship and strong to withstand the wave. we have also sometime calm, wearisome. calm, very tedious and wearisome, during which we wash ourselves in the sea, we dance upon the deck, we climb up the main top, we sing in muficke, then whirlwind what it be, how it be make the effect thereof when a little small cloud be. percerue to issue from under the horizon, we be force to give over those exercise for to take heed of a gust of wind which be wrap in the same cloud, which dissolve itself, grumble, snort, whistle, roar, storm and buzz be able to over turn our ship upside down, unless man have be ready to execute that which the master of the ship, which be captain, a man very vigilant, command. they there be no harm in show how these gust of wind, otherwise call storm, be form and from whence they proceed. pliny speak of they in his plin lib 2. cap 48. natural history and say that they be exhalation and light vapour, raise from the earth to the cold region of the air and not be able to pass further, but rather force to return back. they sometime meet sulphury and fiery exhalation which compass they about and bind so hard that there come thereby a great combat, motion and agitation between the sulphury heat and the airy moistness which be constrain by the strong enemy to run away, it open itself, make itself way, whistle, roar and storm, brief become a wind which be great or lesser, according that the sulphury exhalation which wrap it, break itself and give it way, sometime all at once, as we have show before, and sometime with long time, according to the quantity of the matter whereof it be make and according as either more or less it be move by his contrary quality, the marvelous assurance of the good mariner in their sea-labour. but i can leave unmention the wonderful courage and assurance that good sailor have in these windy conflict, storm and tempest. when, as a ship be, carry and mount upon mountain of water and from thence let down as it be into the profound depth of the world. they climb among the tackle and cord, not only to the main top and to the very height of the main mast, but also, without ladder, step to the top of another mast, fasten to the first, hold only with the force of their arm and foot, wind about the high tackle, yea, much more that if, in this great toss and roll it chance that the main sail, which they call paphil or papefust be untie at the high. end, he who be first command will put himself straddle upon the main yard, that be the tree which cross the main mast, and with a hammer at his girdle and half a dozen nail in his mouth, will tie again and make fast that which be untie to the. the boldness of a swisser at laon, peril of a thousand life. i have sometime hear great account make of a swisser boldness who, after the siege of laon and the city be, render to the king obedience, climb and stand, straddle upon the thwart branch of the cross of our lady church, steeple of the say town, and stand there, fork wise his foot upward. but that, in my judgement, be nothing in regard of this. the say swisser be upon a firm and solid body, and without motion. and this contrariwise, hang over a unconstant sea, toss with boisterous wind, as we have sometime see after we have leave these pirate speak of before we be, until the 18. of june. toss with diverse and almost contrary the 18. of june wind without any discovery but of one ship, far off from we, which we do not board, and yet, notwithstanding a ship, the very sight thereof do comfort we and the same another ship day we meet, a ship of honfleur, wherein captain roche do command go for new-found-lande, who have no better fortune upon the sea than we: the custom be at the vail of marchand ship to a ship royal. sea, that when some particular ship meet with the king, his ship as we be to come under the lee and to present herself, not side by side, but bias wise also to pull down her flag, as this captain roche do, except the flag, for she have none. no more have we be, not needful in so great a voyage, but in approach the land or when one must fight, our sailor do cast then their computation computatiof the voyage on the course that we have make, for in every ship, the master, the pilot and master mate do write down every day of their course and wind that they have follow for how many hour, and the estimation of league, the say la roche do account. that they be then in the forty five degree and within a hundred league of the bank. our pilot, call master oliver fleuriot of saint maloe. by his computation say that we be within 60. league of it and captain within 120. league. i believe he give the best judgement. we receive much contentment by the meeting of this ship and do great encourage. we see we do begin to meet with ship. seem unto we that we do enter in a place of acquaintance: sea, water, milk, warm, then cold. but by the way, a thing must be note which i have find admirable and which give we occasion to play the philosopher, for about the same 18. day of june we find the sea-water during three day space very warm, and by the same warmth our wine also be warm in the bottom of our ship. yet the air be not hot than before and the 21. of the say month, quite contrary, we be 2. great cold or 3. day, so much compass with mist and cold that we think ourselves to be in the month of january, and the water of the sea be extreme cold which continue with we until we come upon the say bank by reason of the say mist which outward do procure this cold. the reason of this antiperistase and the cause of the ice of newfoundlande unto we. when i seek out the cause of this antiperistase, i attribute it to the ice of the north which come float down upon the coast and sea adjoin to newfoundland and labrador, which we have say elsewhere, be bring thither with the sea by her natural motion, which be great there, then elsewhere, because of the great space it have to run, as in a gulf in the depth of america, where the nature and situation of the universal earth do bear it easy. now, these ice, which sometime be see in bank, of ten league length and as high as mountain and hill and thrice as deep in the water, hold as it be a empire in this sea, drive out far from they that which be contrary to their coldness and, consequent, do bind and close on this side that small quantity of mild temperature that the summer may bring to that part where they come to seat and place themselves. yet, for all that, i will not deny but this region, in one and the self-same parallel, be somewhat cold than those of our part of europe, for the reason that we will aleage hereafter when we shall speak of the foulness of in the 16. chapter, second experience season. such be my opinion. be ready to hear another man reason and be mindful hereof. i do of purpose take heed of the same at my return from new france and find the same warmness of water, or very near though it be, in the month of september, within five or six day sail, on this side of the say bank, whereof we will now entreat chap 12 of the great bank of morue or cod, of the sound our come to the say bank, the description thereof, the fish of new-found-land-fish and of bird, the greediness of bird, call by frenchman hap-foye, that be to say liver-catcher, diverse peril, the favour of god, the cause of frequent and long mist in the western. sea landmark, the sight of it marvelous, odour. the board of two shaloupe, the land at the port moutton, the come into port royal of two frenchman remain there alone among the savage. before we come to the bank speak of before, which be the great bank where the fish of green cod-fish be make. so be they call. when they be not dry, for one must go aland for the dry of. they, the sea-faring-man, beside the computation they make of their course, have warning when they come near to it. by warning, near the great bank, bird call by frenchman god fouquet, happefoy, bird which be know even as one do. they of these, our part, return back into france when one be within 100 or 120.. league near it, the most frequent of these bird, towards the say bank, be god fouquet and other call happe-foye, for a reason that we will declare anon when these bird than be see which be not like to they that we have see in the midst of the great sea. we begin to think ourselves not to be far from the say bank, which make we to sound with our lead. upon a thursday, the 22. of june, but then we find no bottom what the sound be and how it be cast. the same day in the evening we cast again with better success, for we find bottom at 36. fadam, the say, sound be a piece of lead of seven or eight pound weight, make pyramidal wise, fasten at one or diverse line and at the big end, which be flat one, put some grease to it, mingle with butter. then all the sail be strike down and the sound cast. and when that the bottom be feel and the lead draw no more line, they leave off, let down of it. so our sound be draw up. bring with it some small stone with a white one and a piece of shell. have, moreover, a pit in the grease whereby they judge the arrival to the fish bank, that the bottom be a rock. i can express the joy that we have see we there, where we have so much desire to be there. be not any one of we more sick, every one do leap for joy and do seem unto we to be in our own country, though we be come, but to the half of our voyage, at least for the time that pass before we come to port royal whther we be bind of the word bank and description of the fish bank. here i will, before i proceed any further, decipher unto you what mean this word bank, which peradventure put some in pain to know what it be. they sometime call bank a sandy bottom which be very shallow or which be a dry at low water. such place be mortal for ship that meet with they. but the bank whereof we speak be mountain ground in the depth of the water which be raise up to 30., 36. and 40. fadam, near to the upper face of the sea. this bank be hold to be of 200. league in length and 18., 20. and 24. league broad, which be pass there be no more bottom. find out then in these part, until one come to the land, the ship be there arrive, the sail be roll up and there fish be make, of the green fish, as i have say, whereof we shall speak in the book follow. for the satisfy of my reader, i have draw it in my geography call map of newfoundland with prick, which be all may be do to represent it. there be, far off other bank, as i have mark in the say map, upon the which good fish may be make and many go thither that know the place. when that we part from rochel, there be as it be, a forest of ship lie at de bois, whereof that place have take his name, which go all in a company to that country, prevent we in their go. but only of two day have see and note the bank, we hoist up sail and, bare all night, keep still our course to the west, but the dawn of day be come, which be saint the fish of cod. john baptist eve. in god name, we pull down sail, pass that day a fish of codfish, with a thousand mirth and contentment by reason of fresh meat whereof we have asmuch as we will have long before wish for they de poutrincourt, and a young man of retel name feure, who, by reason of the sea-sickness, be not come out from their bed nor cabane from the begin of the navigation, come upon the hatch that day and have the pleasure not only of fish of cod but also of those bird that be call by french mariner happe-foye, that be to say liver-catcher, because happe-foye why so call of their greediness to devour the liver of the cod-fish that be cast into the sea after their belly be open. whereof they be so covetous that though they see a great paul over their head ready to strike they down, yet they adventure themselves to come near to the ship to catch some of they, at what price soever. and they which be not occupy in fish do pass their time in that sport, and so do they, by their diligence that we take some thirty of they. but in this action, one of our shipwright fall down in the sea, and it be good for he that the ship go, but slow, which give he mean to save himself by take hold of the rudder from which he be pull in a board. but for his pain, be well beat by captain sea-dogge skin in this fish. we sometime do take sea-dogge who skin our joiner, do keep careful to smooth their work withal item fish call by frenchmen merlus, which be better than cod, and sometime another kind of fish call bar, which diversity do augment our delight. they which be not busy in take neither fish nor bird, do pass their time in gather the heart, gut and other inward part most delicate of the codfish, which they do mince with lard and spice and excellent sausage make with the inward of cod with those thing do make as good bolonia sausige as any can be make in paris and we do eat of they with a very good stomach. on the evening we make ready to continue our course, have first make. our canon to roar as well because of saint john, his holy day, as for de poutrincourts sake, which bear the name of that saint. the next day, some of our man tell we they have see a bank of ice, and thereupon be recite unto we how that the year before man save upon a bank of ice, a ship of olone be cast away by approach too near to it, and that two man have save themselves upon the ice, have this good fortune that another ship pass by the man, take they in aboard, they the weather in those sea. contrary then in we it be to be note that from the 18. of june until we do arrive at port royal, we have find the weather quite otherwise to that we have before. for, as we have already say, we have cold, mist or fog before our come to the bank, where we come in fair sunshine, but the next day we fall to the fog again, which, a far off we, the cause of mist on the west sea, may perceive to come and wrap we about. hold we continual prisoner three whole day for two day of fair weather that they permit. we, which be always accompany with cold by reason of the summer absence, yea, even diverse time, we have see ourselves a whole seven-night continual in thick fog, twice without any show of sun, but very little, as i will recite hereafter, and i will bring forth a reason for such effect which seem unto i probable, as we see the fire to draw the moistness of a wet cloth opposite unto it. likewise the sun draw moistness and vapour both from the sea and from the land, but for the dissolve of they there be here one virtue and beyond those part, another. according to the accident and circumstance that be find in these our country, it raise up vapour only from the ground and from our. river, which earthly vapour, gross and weighty and participate less of the moist, do, cause we a hot air and the earth discharge of those vapour, become thereby more hot and parch. from thence it come that the say vapour have the earth of the one part and the sun on the other, which heat they. they be easy, dissolve, not remain long in the air, unless it be in winter when the earth be waxen cold and the sun beyond the equinoctial line, far off from we. from the same reason proceed the cause why mist and fog be not so frequent nor so long in the french sea as in newfoundland, because that the sun pass from his rise above the ground. this sea, at the come thereof receive almost but earthly vapour and by a long space retain this virtue to dissolve very soon the exhalation it draw to itself. but when it come to the midst of the ocean and to the say new find land, have elevate and assume in so long a course a great abundance of vapour from this moist, wide ocean. it do not so easy dissolve they as well, because those vapour be cold of themselves and of their nature, as because the element which be near under they do sympathize with they and preserve they and the sun beam be not holpen in the dissolve of they as they be upon the earth which be even see in the land of that. country which, although it have but small heat by reason of the abundance of wood, notwithstanding it help to disperse the mist and fog which be ordinary there in the morning during summer, but not as at sea, for about eight aclocke in the morning they begin to vanish away and serve as a dew to the ground. a small bank. i hope the reader will not dislike these small digression. see, they serve to our purpose. the 28. day of june we find ourselves upon a little small bank, other than the great bank whereof we have speak at forty fadam and the day follow, one of our sailor fall by night into the sea which have be lose if he have not meet with a cable. a mariner fall by night in the sea. land mark hang in the water. from that time forward we begin to descry land mark it be newfoundland by herb moss flower and piece of wood that we always meet abound the more by so much we draw near to it. the 4. day of july, our sailor which be appoint the discovery of s peter land plain, discovery of the land for the last quarter watch descry in the morning very early, every one be yet abed the isle of saint peter. and the friday, the seven of the say month, we discover on the larboard a coast of land high raise up, appear unto we as long as one sight can stretch out, which give we great. cause of joy than yet we have have, wherein god do great, show his merciful favour unto we. make this discovery in fair, calm weather, be yet far from it. the bold of the company go up to the main top, to the end, to see it better. so much be all of. we desirous to see this land true and most delightful habitation of man de poutrincourt go up thither, and myself also, which we have not yet do, even our dog do, thrust their nose out of the ship. better to draw and smell the sweet air of the land, not be able to contain themselves from witness, by their gesture, the joy they have of it. we draw within a league, near unto it and the sail be let down, we fall a fish of cod, the fish of the bank beginning to fail. they which have, before we make voyage in those part, do judge. we, cap breton, the bay of campseau. eight day to be at cap-breton, the night draw on, we stand off to the seaward. the next day follow be the eight of the say, month of julj. as we draw near to the bay of campseau, come about the evening mist which do continue eight whole day, during the which we keep, we at sea hull, still not be able to go forward, be resist by west and south-west wind during these eight day which be from one saturday. to another god who have always guide these voyage in the which not one man have be lose by sea, show we his special favour in send unto we, among the thick fog, god favour in danger, a clear of the sun which continue but half a hour, and then have we sight of the firm land and know that we be ready to be cast away upon the rock if we have not speedy stand off to seaward. a man do sometime seek the land, as one do his belove which sometime repulse her sweet heart. very rude final, upon saturday, the 15. of julj, about two aclocke in the after noon, the sky begin to salute we as it be, with cannon shot, shed tear as. be sorry to have keep we so long in pain so that fair weather be come again. calm weather, we see, come straight to we. we be four league off from the land. two shaloupe with open sail in a sea, yet wrathe, this thing give we much content. but whilst marvelous odour come from the land, we follow on our course there come from the land odour uncomparable for sweetness, bring with a warm wind so abundant that all the orient part can not procure great abundance. we do stretch out our hand at it. be to take they, so palpable be they, which i have admire a thousand time since then. the two shaloup do approach the board of two shalope, the one man with savage who have a stag paint at their sail, the other with frenchman of saint maloe, which make their fish at the port of camseau. but the savage, be more diligent, for they arrive first, have never see any before. i do admire at the first the savage goodly man sight their fair shape and form of visage. one of they do excuse himself for that. he have not bring his fair beaver gown because the weather have be foul. he have but one red piece of freeze upon his back and matachiaz, matachiaz be carcanet necklace bracelet and wrought girdle about his neck, at his wrist, above the elbow and at his girdle. we make they to eat and drink during that time. they tell we all that have pass a year before at port royal whither we be bind in the mean while they of saint maloe come and tell we as much as the savage have. add that the wednesday, when that we do shun the rock they have see we and will have corn to we with the say savage, but that they leave off during the mist at sea, it be fair wether on land a discommodity bring, a commodity by reason we put to the sea, and moreover, that it have be always fair weather on the land which make we much to marvel. but the cause thereof have be show before. of this discommodity may be draw hereafter a great good, that these mist will serve as a rampire to the country and one shall know with speed what be pass at sea. they tell we also that they have be advertise some day before by other savage that a ship be see at cap breton. these french man of s maloe be man that do deal for the associate of mont and do complain that the baske or man of saint john lussurioso, against the king, his inhibition, have truck with the savage and carry away above six thousand beaver the care of the savage for their wife skin. they give we sundry sort of their fish as bar marlus. and great fletan. as for the savage, before to depart they ask bread of we to carry to their wife, which be grant and give they, for they deserve it well be come so willing to show we in what part we be. for since that time we sail still in assurance and, without doubt, the depart of some of our company go aland at the part, some number of we go aland at the port of campseau as well to fetch we some wood and fresh water, whereof we have need. as for to follow the coast from that place to port royal in a shaloup, for we do fear lest de pont shall be at our. come thither already. go from thence the savage make offer. to go to he through the wood with promise to be there within six day to advertise he of our come to the end. the savage do travel much way in small time to cause his stay for as much as word be leave with he to depart unless he be succour within the 16. day of that month, which he fail not to do, notwithstanding our man desirous to see the land near, do hinder the same which promise we to bring unto we the next day, the say wood and water, if we will approach near the land, which we do not, but follow on our course. mist, calm. the tuesday 17. of july, we be, according to our accustom manner, surprise with mist and contrary. wind, but the thursday we have calm weather, so that whether it be miss or fair weather, we go nothing forward during this calm. about the evening a shipwright, the peril of many mariner, wash himself in the sea. have before drink too much, aquavitae find himself overtake the cold of the sea water strive against the heat of this spirit of wine. some mariner see their fellow in danger cast themselves. drunkenness cause diverse peril into the water, to succour. he but his wit be trouble. he mock they and they not able to rule. he which cause yet other mariner to go to help, and they so hinder one another that they be all in danger in the end. there be one of they which, among this confusion, hear the voice of de poutrincourt, who do say to he: john hay, look towards i and with a rope that be give he, he be pull up and the rest withal be save. but the author of the trouble fall into a sickness that almost kill he port. after this calm, we have two day of fog, the sunday 23.. of the say month, we have knowledge of the port du, and the same day, in the afternoon, the port mouton. sun shine fair. we cast anchor at the mouth of port du mouton and we be in danger to fall upon a shall be come to two fatham and a half depth. we go aland, seventeen of we in number, to fetch the wood and water whereof we have need. there we find the cabin and lodging, yet whole and unbroken, that mont make two year before, who have sojourn there by the space of one month, as we have say in his place. what grow in the land? at port monton we see there be a sandy land store of oak bear, acorn, cypresse-tree, firre-tree, bay-tree, musk-rose, gooseberry, purslen, raspies, fernes, lysimachia, a kind of sammonee, angelica and other simple. in the space of two hour that we tarry there we bring back in our ship wild pease which we find good. we have not the leisure to hunt after rabbit that be there in great number, not far. from the port, but we return aboard as soon as we have lade ourselves with water and wood and so hoist up sail de sable, long island, the bay s mary, the arrive to port royal tuesday, the 25. day. we be about the cap de sable in fair weather and make a good journey, for about the evening we come to sight of long i will and the bay of saint marie, but because of the night we put back to the seaward and the next day we cast anchor at the mouth of port royal, where we can not enter by reason it be ebb water. but we give two cannon shoot from our ship to salute the say port and to advertise the frenchman that. we be there, difficulty in come. in thursday, the 27. of july, we come in with the flood, which be not without much difficulty for that. we have the wind contrary and gust of wind from the mountain which make we almost to strike upon the rock. and in these trouble our ship bear, still contrary, the poop before and sometime turn round, not be able to do the beauty of the port any other thing else. final, be in the port, it be unto we a thing marvelous to see the fair distance and largeness of it and the mountain and hill that environ it. and i wonder how so fair a place do remain desert be all fill with wood, see that so many pine away. in the world which may make good of this land, if only they have a chief governor to conduct. they thither by little and little we draw near to the island which be right over against the fort where we have dwell since a island, i say, the most agreeable thing to be see in her kind, that be possible to be. desire, wish in ourselves to have bring thither some of those fair building that be unprofitable in these our part, that serve for nothing but to retire wildefowle in and other bird. we know not yet if du pont be go or no, and therefore we do expect that he shall send some man to meet we, but it be in vain for he be go. from thence, 12. day before, and while we do, hull in the midst of the port, membertou, the great sagamo of the souriquois. so be the sagamo, signify captain. people call with who we be come to the frenchfort. to they that be, leave there be only two. cry, as a madman say in his language, what you stand here a dine, for it be about noon and do not see a great ship that come here and we know not what man they be. sudden, these two man run upon the bulwark and, with diligence, make ready the canon which they furnish with pellet and touch powder. membertou, without delay, come in a conow make of bark of tree, with a daughter of he to view we. and have find but friendship and know we to be frenchman. make no alarm notwithstanding. one of the two frenchman leave there call, come to the shore of the port, his match on the cock, to know what we be, though he know it well enough, for we have the white banner display at the top of the mast and on the sudden, four volley of canon be shoot off which make innumerable echo, and from our part, the fort be salute with three canon shot and many musket shot, at which time our trumpeter be not slack of his duty. then we land, view the house and we pass that day in, give god thanks in praise of the two frenchman leave alone in the fort of. portroyall, see the savage cabin and walk through the meadow. but i can but praise the gentle courage of these two man. one of they i have already name, the other be call miquelet, which deserve well to be mention here for have so free expose their life in the conservation of the welfare of new france. for du pont have but one bark and a shaloupe to seek out towards newfoundland, for french ship can not charge himself with so much furniture, corn, meat and merchandise as be there which he have be force to cast into the sea and which have be great to our prejudice. and we do fear it very much if these two man have not adventure themselves to tarry there for the preserve of those thing which they do with a willing and joyful mind. chap 13: the happy meeting of monsieur du pont, his return unto port royal rejoice. description of the confine of the say port conjecture: touch the head and spring of the great river of canada, sow of corn. the return of monsieur du pont into france. the voyage of de poutrincourt unto the country of the armouchiquois. fair rye spring up without tillage. the exercise and manner of live in port royal, the meadow of the river l'equille. the till of the ground. the friday next day after our arrival de poutrincourt, affect to this. enterprise. as for himself, put part of his people to work in the tillage and manure of the ground, while the other be employ in make clean of the chamber, and every one to make ready that which belong to his trade. in the mean time, those people of we that have leave we at campseau to come along the coast, meet, as it be miraculous, the meeting with du pont. with monsieur du pont, among land that be in great number in those part, to declare how great be the joy of each side, be a thing not to be express the say monsieur du pont, at this happy and fortunate meeting, return back to see we in port royal and to ship himself in the jonas. to return into france. as this chance be beneficial unto he, so be it unto we, by the mean of his ship, that he leave with we, for without that we have be in such extremity that we have not be able to go nor come any where our ship be once return into france. he arrive there on mondy the last of july and tarry yet in port royal until the 28. of august. all this month we make merry de poutrincourt do set up and open a hogshead of wine, one of they that be. give he for his own drink, give leave to all comer to drink as long as it shall hold, so that some of they drink until their cap turn round at. the very beginning. we be desirous to see the country up the river, where we find meadow almost continual, above twelve league of ground, among which brook do run without number, which come from the hill and mountain adjoin the wood, very thick on the water shore and so thick that sometime one can go through they. yet for all that, i will not make they, such as joseph acosta, recite those of peru to be joseph acosta, lib 4.. ca 30. when he say one of our brother, a man of credit, tell we that be go astray and lose in the mountain, not know what part nor which way, he shall go, find himself among bush so thick that he be constrain to travel upon they. without put his foot on the ground a whole fortnight space. i refer the believe of that to any one that will. but this belief can reach so far as to have place with i land, like to that which god promise to his people, deut 8., vers 7. 8. now, in the land whereof we speak, the wood be thin, far off from the shore and waterish place, and the felicity thereof be so much the more to be hope for, in that it be like the land which god do promise to his people. by the mouth of moses, say the lord, thy god, do bring thou into a good land of river of water, with fountain and depth, which do spring in field, etc. a land where thou shall eat thy bread without scarcity, wherein nothing shall fail. thou a land who stone be of iron and from who mountain thou shall dig brass and further in another place. confirm the promise for the goodness and state of the land that he will give they. the country, say he, wherein deuter 11. vers 10.. you be go for to possess it, be not as the land of egypt, from whence you be come forth, where thou do sow thy seed and water it with the labour of they foot, as a garden of herb, but the country through which you be go to pass for to possess it, be a land of mountain and field and be water hereupon the 3. chap. with water that rain from heaven. now, according to the description that heretofore we have make of port royal and the confine thereof, in describe the first voyage of mont, and as yet we do mention it here. brook do there abound at will, and for this respect, a abundance of brook. this land be no less happy than the country of the gaul. now call france, to who king agrippa make a oration to the jew, recite by josephus in his war of the jew attribute a particular felicity because iron stone, mountain of brass they have store of domestical fountain. and also that a part of those country be call aquitaine, for the same consideration as for the stone which our god promise that shall be. of iron and the mountain of brass that signify nothing else but the mine of copper, of iron and of steel, whereof we have already heretofore speak and will speak yet hereafter. and as for the field whereof we have not yet speak, there be some on the west side, lake and brook, upon the mountain of the say, port royal, and above the mountain there be some fair one where i have see lake and brook, even as in the valley yea, even in the passage to come forth from the same fort for to go to sea, there be a brook which fall from the high rock down and in fall disperse itself into a small rain, which be very delightful in summer because that at the foot of the rock there be cave wherein one be cover while that this rain fall so pleasant, and in the cave wherein the rain of this brook fall, be make. as it be a rainbow when the sun shine, which have give i great cause the form of a rain bow under a cave. they travel three league in the wood of admiration, once we go from our fort as far as the sea, through the wood, the space of three league. but in our return we be pleasant deceive, for at the end of our journey, think to be in a plain champion country. we find ourselves on the top of a high mountain and be force to come down with pain enough by reason of snow, but mountain be not perpetual in a country within 15. league of our dwell, the country through which the river equille pass, be all plain, and even. i have see in those part many country where the land be all even and the fair of the world. but the perfection country, well water thereof. be that it be well water, and for witness whereof, not only in port royal but also in all new france, the great river of canada be proof thereof, which, at the end of 400. league be as broad as the great river of the world, replenish with isle and rock innumerable. take conjecture upon the spring of the great river of canada, her beginning from one of the lake which do meet at the stream of her course, and so i think so. that it have two course, the one from the east towards france, the other from the west towards the south sea, which be admirable, but not without the like example find in our europe, for the river which come down to trent and to verone, proceed from a lake which produce another river who course be bend opposite to the river of lins, which fall into the river danube. so the nile issue, from a lake that bring forth other river which discharge themselves into the great ocean, which be the first mine. let we return to our tillage, for to that must we apply ourselves. it be the first mine that must be seek for which be more worth than the treasure of atabalipa and he that have corn, wine cattle, woollen and linen, leather, iron and afterward codde-fish. he need no other treasure for the necessary of life. now, all this be or may be in the land by we describe, upon the which monsieur de poutrincourt sow of corn have cause a second tillage to be make. in fifteen day after his arrival. thither, he sow it with our french corn, as well wheat and rye, as with hemp, flax, turnip seed, reddish cabidge and other seed, and the eight day follow. he see that his labour have not be in vain, but rather a fair hope by the production that the ground have already make, of the seed which she have receive, which be show to monsieur du pont, be unto he a fair subject to make his relation in france as a thing altogether new there. 20 of august, the 20. day of august be already come when these fair show be make and the time do admonish they that be to go in the voyage to make ready, whereunto they begin to give order so that, the 25 day of the same month, after many peal of ordinance, they weigh anchor to come to the mouth of the port which be common the first day journey cause. of the voyage make into the country of the armou thiquois mont, be desirous to reach as far into the south as he can and seek out a place very fit to inhabit beyond malebarre, have request de poutrincourt to pass far than yet he have do, and to seek a convenient port in good temperature of air. make no great account of port royal than of s croix in that which concern health, whereunto the say de poutrincourt be willing to condescend, will not tarry for the spring time. know he shall have other employment to exercise himself withal, but see his so wing end and his field green resolve himself to make this voyage and discovery before winter. so then he dispose all thing to that. end and with his bark anchor near to the jonas to the end, to get out in a whale in port royal company. while they lie there for a prosperous wind, the space of three day there be a whale of mean bigness which the savage do call maria, who come every day into the port with the morning flood, play there within at her pleasure and go away back again with the ebb and then take some leisure. i make in french verse a farewell to the say du pont and his company, which i have place among the muse of new france part from port royal. the 28. day of the say month, each of we take his course, one one way and the other another. diverse to god keep. as for du pont, he purpose, by the way, to set upon a merchant of rone name boyer who, contrary to the king inhibition, be in those part to truck with the sanage notwithstanding, he have be deliver out of prison in rochel by the consent of de poutrincourt, under promise he shall not go thither, but the say boyer be already go. and as for de poutrincourt, he take his course for the i will of s croix, the frenchman, first abode, have monsieur de champdore for master and guide of his bark, but be hinder by the wind, and because his bark do leak, he be force twice to put back again. in the end he quite pass the bay francoise and view the say i will fair rye find at s croix, where he find ripe corn of that which two year before be sow by mont, which be fair, big, weighty and well fill. he send unto we some of that corn to port royal, where i be request to stay to look to the house and to keep the rest of the company there in concord, whereunto i do agree, though it be refer to my will for the assurance that we have among ourselves that the year follow, we shall make our habitation in a warm country beyond malebarre, and their meaning be to plant, beyond malebarre to the southward, a ditch profitable make that we shall all go in company with they that shall be send to we out of france. in the mean, while i employ myself in dress the ground to make enclosure and partition of garden for to sow corn and kitchen herb, we cause also. a ditch to be make all about the fort, which be very needful to receive the water and moistness that before do run underneath among the root of tree. what store of workman and labourer in new france that have be fall down, which peradventure do make the place unhealthful? i will not stand in describe here what each of our other workman and labourer do particular. make it suffice that we have store of joiner, carpenter, mason, stone-caruer, locke-smithe, tailor, their exercise and manner of life, boord-sawyers, mariner, etc. who do exercise their trade, which in do their duty, be very kind use for they be at their own liberty for three hour mussel, tapster, crab day, the overplus of the time they bestow it in go. to gather mussel which be at low water in great quantity before the fort, or tapster, or crab which be in port royal under the rock in great abundance, or cockle which be in every part in the oase about the shore of the say port. all that kind of fish be take without net or boat. some there be that sometime take good provision of wildfowl. wildfowl, but not be skilful, they spoil the game. and as for we, our table be furnish by one of mont man who provide for we in such sort that we want no foul. bring unto we sometime half a dozen of bird, call by french man outard, a kind of wild goose, sometime as many mallarde or wild goose white. and gray, very often two or three dozen. what quantity of bread? and wine, of lark and other kind of bird? as for bread, no body feel want thereof, and every one have three quart of pure and good wine a day, which have continue with we as long as we have be there, save that when they who come to fetch we in stead of bring commodity unto we, help we to spend our own, as we shall have occasion hereafter to deelare, we be force to reduce that portion to a pint. and notwithstanding there be very often some thing more of extrordinary, this voyage, for this respect, have be the best voyage of all, whereof we be to give much praise to the say mont. and his associate, monsieur macquin and monsieur george, preservative against the sickness of new france of rochel in provide so abundant for we, for true, i find that this septembrall liquor, i mean wine, be among other thing a sovereign preservative against the sickness of that country and the spicery, to correct the, a clear and pure air vice that may be in the air of that region, which, nevertheless, i have always find very clear and pure, notwithstanding the reason that i may have allege for the same allowance, speak heretofore of the same sickness. for our allowance, we have pease, bean rice, prune, raisin, dry cod and salt flesh beside oil and butter, but whensoever the savage dwell near, we have take any quantity of sturgeon. salmon or small fish item, any bever * * a kind of stag or red deer- the liberal nature of the savage ellan carabous or fallow deer or other beast mention in my farewell to new france. they bring unto we half of it, and that which remain, they expose it sometime to sale public, and they that will have any thereof do truck bread for it. this be partly our manner of life in those part. but although every one of our workman have his particular trade or occupation, yet for all that it be necessary to employ himself to all use, as many do. some mason and stone-caruer apply themselves to bake, which make we as good bread as be make in paris also one of. our sawyer diverse time make charcoal, make in new france we coal in great quantity, wherein be to be- note a thing that now i remember- it be that be necessary to cut turf to cover the pile of wood heap to make the say coal there be find in what earth be in the meadow, the meadow three foot deep of earth, not earth but grass or herb mingle with mud which have heap themselves yearly one upon another, from the begin of the world not have be move. nevertheless, the green thereof serve for pasture to the ellan which we ellan in the meadow have many time see in our meadow, of those part in herd of three or four, great and small, suffer themselves sometime. to be approach than they run to the wood. but i may say, moreover, that i have see in cross two league of our say meadow the same to be all tread with track of ellans, for i know not there any other cleave footed beast there be. kill one of those beast, not far off from our fort, at a place where mont have cause the grass to be mow two year before it be grow again. the fair of the world. some may marvel how those meadow be make see that all the ground in those place be cover with wood for satisfaction, whereof let the curious reader know that in high spring, tide, special in march and september, the flood cover those shore which hinder the tree there to take root, but every where where the water overflow, not if there be any ground, there be wood. chap 14: their depart fromthe i will of s croix, the bay of march, chouakoet, vine and grape. the liberality of the savage, the land and people of the armouchiquois. the cure of a armouchiquois wound, the simplicity and ignorance of the people, vice of the armouchiquois, suspicion. people not care for clothes, cornesow andvine plant. in the country of the armouchiquois: quantity of grape, abundance of people, dangerous sea. let we return to de poutrincourt, who we have leave in the i will saint croix have, make there a review and cherish the savage that be there he pemptegoet. go in the space of four day to pemtegoet, which be that place so famous under the name of norombega. there need not so long a time in come thither, but he tarry on the way to mend his bark, for to that end he have bring with he a smith and a carpenter and quantity of board. he cross the isle which be at the kinibeki mouth of the river and come to kinibeki, where his bark be in danger by reason of. the great stream that the nature of the place procure there. this be the cause why he make there no stay but pass further to the bay of the bay of march, march which be the name of a captain of the savage who, at the arrival of the say de poutrincourt, begin to cry out aloud: he, he. whereunto the like answer be make. unto he, he reply. ask in his language. what be you? they answer he friend. and thereupon de poutrincourt approach, treat amity with he and present he with knife, hatchet and matachiaz, that be to say scarf, karkenet and bracelet make of bead or quill make of white and blue glass, whereof he be very glad, as also for the confederacy, confederacy that the say de poutrincourt make with. he know very well that the same will be a great aid and support unto he. he distribute to some man that be about he, among a great number of people, the present that the say de poutrincourt give. he to who he bring. store of orignac or ellans flesh for the baske, do call a stag or ellan orignac to refresh the company with victual that do. they set sail towards chouakoet, where the river of captain olmechin, the river of olmechin, port chouakoet be and where the year follow be make the war of the souriquois and etechemius, under the conduct of the sagamo membertou, which i have describe in verse, which verse i have insert: among the muse of new-france, at the entry of the bay of the say place of chouakoet, a island of vine, there be a great island. about half a league compass, wherein our man do first discover any vine, for although there be some in the land near to port royal notwithstanding, there be yet no knowledge have of they, which they find in great quantity. have the trunk three and four foot high and as big as one fist. in the low part, the grape fair and great, and some as big as plum, other lesser but as black that they leave a stain where their liquor be. spill those grape, i say, lie over bush and bramble that grow in the same island where the tree be not so thick as in other where but be six or seven rod distant, a sunder which cause the grape to be ripe, the soon. have beside a ground very fit for the same, grave and sandy. they tarry there but two hour but they note that there be no vine on the northside, even as in the i will saint croix, be no cedar-tree, but on the westside, the river of olmechin. from this island they go to the river of olmechin, a port of chavakoet, where march and the say olmechin bring to de poutrincourt, a prisoner of the and therefore their enemy, which they give unto he free two hour after there arrive two savage, the galantness of the savage port la have: the one a name: chkoudun, captain of the river, saint john, call by the savage oigoudi. the other a souriquois name: messamoet, captain or sagamo, of the. river of the port have where this prisoner be take. they have great store of merchandise truck with frenchman which they be come to utter, that be to say great, mean and small kettle, hatchet, knife, gown, short cloak, red waist coat, biscuit and other thing, whereupon there arrive twelve or fifteen boat. the savage do paint their face full of savage, of olmechins. subjection be in very good order. all their face paint according to their wont custom, when they will seem fair, have their bow the oration of messamoet and arrow in hand and the quiver which they lay down a board at that hour, begin his oration before the savage. show they how that in time past they often have friendship together and that they may easy overcome their enemy if they will have intelligence and serve themselves, with the amity of the frenchman who they see there present, to know their country to the end, to bring commodity unto they hereafter and to succour they with their force, which force he know, and he be the better able to make a demonstration thereof unto they, by so much that he which speak have before time be in france and dwell therewith de grandmont, governor of bayonne, final his speech continue almost a hour with messamoets, affection to the french man, the largesse and liberality of messamoet, much vehemency and affection with a gesture of body and arm. as be requisite in a good orator, and in the end he do cast all his merchandise, which be worth above 300. crown, bring into that country, into olmechin, his boat, as make he a present of that in assurance of the love he will witness unto he. that do the night haste on and every one retire himself. but messamoet, be not please for that olmechin make not the like oration unto he, nor requite his present for the savage. have the savage be liberal. that noble quality that they give liberal cast at the foot of he who. they will honour the present that they give he. but it be with hope to receive some reciprocal kindness which be a kind of contract which we call. without name. i give thou to the end, thou shall give i, and that be do through all the world. therefore, messamoet, from that day have in mind to make war to olmechin, notwithstanding a corn, country bean, pumpion and grape, the next day in the morning he and his people do return with a boat lade with that which they have, to wit corn, tobacco, bean and pumpion, which they distribute here and there. those two captain, olmechin and march, have since be kill in the war in who stead be choose, by the savage one name bessabe, bessabe englishman, which since our return have be kill by englishman, and in stead of he they have make a captain to come from within the land, name: asticou. a grave man, valiant, asticou and redoubt, which in the twinkle of a eye will gather up 1000 savage together, which thing olmechin and march might also do for our bark. be there, present the sea, be see all cover over with their boat lade with nimble and lusty man. hold themselves up straight in they, which we can do without danger. those boat be nothing else but tree hollow after the fashion that we will show you in the book. follow from thence, monsieur de poutrincourt, follow on his course, find a certain port, very delightful, which a very good port, have not be see by mont, and during the voyage they see store of smoke and people on the shore which invite we to come aland. and see that no account be make of it. they follow the bark along the agility of the armouchiquois. happy people if they have the knowledge of god. the sand, yea. most often they do outgo she so swift be. they have their bow in hand and their quiver upon their back, always sing and dance, not take care with what they shall live by the way. happy people, yea, a thousand time more happy than they which, in these part, make themselves to be worship if they have the knowledge of god and of their salvation. fife de poutrincourt have land in this port. behold, among a multitude of savage, a good number of fife which do play with certain long pipe, make as it be with cane of reed, paint over, but not with such a harmony as our shepherd may do, and to show the excellency of their art, they whisle with their nose, in gambol, according to their fashion, a savage wound, and as this people do, run headlong to come to the bark. there be a savage which hurt himself grievous in the heel, against the edge of a rock whereby he be enforce to remain in the place de poutrincourt. his chirurgeon, at that instant, will apply to this hurt that which be of his art. but they will not permit it until they have first make. their mouth and mop about their mouth and mop about he that be hurt the wound man. they then lay he down on the ground. one of they hold his head on his lap and make many bauling and sing, whereunto the wound man answer, but with a ho, with a complain voice which have do they yield he to the cure of the, say chirurgeon, and go their way, and the patient also, after he have be dress. but two hour after he come again, the most jocund in the world have put about his head the bind cloth wherewith his heel be wrap. for to seem the more gallant the day follow, our people enter far into the. the present of a savage woman. hemp, very fair bean, quantity of grape, port, where be go to see the cabin of the savage. a old woman of a hundred or six score year of age, come to cast at the foot of poutrincour a loaf of bread. make with the wheat, call mahis or maize, and in these our part, turkey or saracin wheat, than very fair hemp of a long growth item. bean and grape, new gather, because they have see french man eat of they at chavakoet, which the other savage see that know it not, they bring more of. they than one will emulate one another. and for recompense of this, their kindness, the simplicity and ignorance of people, there, be set on their forehead a filler or band of paper wet with spittle, of which they be very proud. it be show they in press the grape. into a glass that of that we do make the wine which we do drink, we will have make they to eat of the grape, but have take it into their mouth, they spit it out. so ignorant be this, people of the best thing that god have give to man, next to bread. yet notwithstanding, they have no want of wit and may be bring to do some good thing if they be civilize and have the use of handy craft. but they be subtle, thievish and traitorous. and though they be naked yet, one can take heed of their finger. for if one turn never so little his eye aside, and that they spy the opportunity to steal any knife, hatchet or any thing else, they will not miss nor fail of it, and will put the theft between their buttock or will hide it within the sand with their foot, so cunning that one shall not perceive it. indeed i the bad nature of the armouchiquois. do not wonder if a people, poor and naked, be thievish, but when the heart be malicious, it be unexcusable. this people be such that they must be handle with terror. for note how the armouchiquois must be deal withal if, through love and gentleness, one give they too free access, they will practice some surprise, as it have be know in diverse occasion heretofore, and will yet hereafter besee, and without defer any long, the second day after our come thither, as they see our people busy awishing linen, they come, some fifty, one follow another, with bow, arrow and quiver, intend to play some bad part, as it be conjecture upon their manner of proceed. but they be. prevent some of our man. go to meet they with their musket and match at the cock which make some of they run away and the other be compass in, have put down their weapon. come to a peninsule or small head of a island where our man be and make a friendly show, demand to truck the tobacco they have for our merchandise. the next day the captain of the say place and port come into de poutrincourts bark to see he we suspicion for the come of olmechin. do marvel to see he accompany with olmechin. see the way be marvelous, long to come, thither by land and much short by sea that give cause of bad suspicion, albeit he have promise his love to the. frenchman notwithstanding. they be gentle, receive and de poutrincourt give to the say olmechin a complete garment wherewith be clothe. he view himself in a glass and do laugh to see himself in that order. but a the trouble of garment, little while after feel that the same hinder he, although it be in october when he be, return unto his cabin, he distribute it to sundry of his man, to the end that one alone shall not be overpester with it. this aught to be a sufficient lesson to so many finnical, both man and woman, of these part, who cause their garment and breastplate to be make as hard and stiff as wood, wherein their body be so miserable torment that they be in their clothes. unable to all good action, and if the weather be too hot, they suffer in their great bumme with a thousand fold unsupportable heat that be more untolerable than the torment which felon and criminal man be sometime make to feel. now, during the time that the say de poutrincourt be there, be in doubt whether mont will come to make a habitation on that coast as corn sow and vine plant. he wish it. he make there a piece of ground to be till for to sow corn and to plant vine, which they do with the help of our apothecary master jew hebert, a man who, beside his experience in his art, take great delight in the till of the ground and the say de poutrincourt. may be here, compare to good father noah who, after he have make the tillage most necessary for the sow of corn, he begin to plant the vine. who effect, he feel afterward, as they be a deliberate to pass far. olmechin come to the bark to see de poutrincourt, where have tarry certain hour, either in talk or eat. he say that the next day 100 boat shall come, contain 100 boat of savage, every one six man. but the come of such a number of man be but troublesome. de poutrincourt will not tarry for they but go away. the same malebarre peril of shoal day to malebarre, not without much difficulty, by reason of the great stream and shoal that be there, so that the bark have touch at three foot of water. only we think to be cast away and we begin to unlade she and put the victual into the shaloup which be behind. for to save we on land but be no full sea, the bark come afloat. within a hour all this sea be a land overflow, as that of mount saint michel, a sandy ground in which all that rest be a plain, flat country as far as the mountain which be see 15. league off from that place, and i be of opinion that as far as virginia it be. all note, great quantity of grape alike. moreover, there be here great quantity of grape as before, and a country very full of people. mont be come to malebarre in a other season of the year, gather only green grape which he make to be preserve and bring some to the king. but it be our good hap to come thither in october for to see the hereupon chap 7.. maturity thereof i have here before show the difficulty that be find in enter into malebarre. this be the cause why monsieur de poutrincourt come not in with his bark but go thither with a shaloup only, which thirty or forty savage do help to draw in, and when it be full tide, but the tide do not. two fadame tide only mount here, but two fadame high, which be seldom see. he go out and retire himself into his say bark to pass further in the morning, as soon as he shall ordain it. chap 15, danger, unknown language. the make of a forge and of a oven, cross set up plenty. a conspiracy, disobedience, murder. the flight of three hundred against ten, the agility of the armouchiquois bad company. dangerous, the accident of a musket that do burst the insolency of the savage, their timorosity, impiety and flight. the fortunate port, a bad sea, revenge. the counsel and resolution for the return, new peril, god favour the arrival of de poutrincourt at port royal and how he be receive the night beginning to give. place to the dawn of the day, the sail be hoist up, but it be but a very perilous navigation, for with this small vessel, danger. they be force to coast the land. where they find no depth, go back to sea. it be yet worse, in such wise that they do strike twice or thrice, be raise up again only by the wave and the rudder be break, which be a dreadful thing. in this extremity they be constrain to cast anchor in the sea at two fadam deep and three league off from the land. which be do daniel hay, a man which take pleasure in show forth his virtue in the peril of the sea, be send towards the coast to view it and see. if there be any port. and as he be near land, he see a savage which do dance, sing you yo, yo. he call he to come near and by or s john river. savage of sundry nation, understand not one another sign, ask he if there be any place to retire ship in and where any fresh water. be the savage have make sign there be he, take he into his shaloup and bring he to the bark wherein be chkoudun, captain of the river of oigoudi, otherwise saint john river, who be bring before this savage. he understand he no more than do our own people. true it be that by sign he comprehend better than they what he will say. this savage show the place. where no depth be and where be any, and do so well, indent and wind, here and there, always the lead in hand that in the end they come to the port. show by he where small depth be, wherein the bark be, arrive, diligence be use to make a forge, a forge and a oven. make for to mend she with her rudder and a oven to bake bread because there be no more biscuit. leave fifteen day be, employ in this work during the which, monsieur de poutrincourt, according to the laudable, a cress set up custom of christian. make a cross to be frame and set up upon a green bank, as mont have do two year before at kinibeki and malebarre, now among these. painful exercise they give not over. make good cheer with that which both the sea and the land may furnish in that part, for in this port be plenty of foul in take, of which many of our man apply themselves. special the sea lark be there in so great flight that de poutrincourt kill 28.. of they, with one abundance of lark and fish caliver shoot. as for fish, there be such abundance of porpese and another kind of fish call by frenchmen soufleurs, that be to say blower, that the sea seem to be all cover over with they. but they have not the thing necessary for this kind of fish. they content themselves, then, with shellfish, as of oyster, skalop, periwinkle shellfish, whereof there be. enough to be satisfy the savage of the other side. do bring fish and grape within grape rush-basket basket. make of rush for to exchange with some of our ware. the say de poutrincourt, see the grape there. marvelous, fair command he that wait on his chamber to lay up in the bark a burden of the vine from whence the say grape be. take our apothecary m jew hebert, desirous to inhabit in those country, have, pull out a good quantity of they to the end to plant they in port royal, where none of they be, although the soil be there very fit for vine, which nevertheless, by a dull forgetfulness be not do, to the great discontent of the say de poutrincourt and of we. all, after certain day, the say de poutrincourt, see there, great assembly of savage come ashore and to give they some terror, make to march before he one the trial of french weapon, before the savage of his man flourish with two naked sword, whereat they much wonder. but yet much more when they see that our musket do pierce thick piece of wood where their arrow can not so much as scratch, and therefore they never assail our man as long as they keep watch. and it have be good to sound the trumpet at every good instruction hour end, as captain james quartier do. for as monsieur de poutrincourt do often say, one must never lay bait for thief mean that one must never give cause. to a enemy to think that he may surprise you, but one must always show that he be mistrust and that you be not asleep, chief. when one have to do with savage which will never set upon, he that resolute, expect they which be not perform in this place by they that buy the bargain of their negligence very dear, as we will now tell, you see, in the next book. fifteen day be expire the say de poutrincourt. see his bark mend and nothing remain sign of conspiracy to be do but a batch of bread. he go some 3. league distant, within the land, to see if he may discover any singularity, but in his return he and his man perceive the savage run away. through the wood in diverse troop of 20.. 30. and more. some bow themselves as man that will not be see. other hide themselves in the grass not to be perceive. other carry away their stuff and canowes full of corn for to betake they to their heel beside the woman transport their child and such stuff as they can with they. those action give cause to de poutrincourt to think that this people do plot some bad enterprise. therefore be arrive. he command his people, which be a make of bread, to retire themselves into their bark. but as young people do, young man, disobedient, often forget their duty. these have some cake or such like thing to make. have rather follow their likerish appetite than to do that which be command. they tarry till night without retire themselves. about midnight, de poutrincourts care. de poutrincourt, think upon that which have pass the day before. do ask whether they be in the bark. and hear they be not, he send the shaloupe unto they to command and bring they aboard. whereto disobedience? they disobay, except his chamberlain who fear his master. they be five, arm with musket and sword, which be warn to stand still upon their guard and yet be negligent, make not any watch. so much be they addict to their own. will the report be that they have before shoot off two musket upon the savage, because that some one of they have steal? a hatchet final. those savage, either provoke by that or by their bad nature, come at the break of day without any noise, which be very easy to. they have neither horse wagon nor woodden-shooe, even to the place where they be asleep and see a fit opportunity to play a bad part. murder do by the savage. they set upon they with shot of arrow and club and kill two of they, the rest be hurt, begin to cry out, run towards the sea shore. then he which keep watch within the bark cry out all affright: o lord, our man be kill, our man, be kill. at this voice and cry every one. rise up and hasty, not take leisure to fit on their clothes nor to set fire to their match ten of succour. they go into the shaloup, who name i do not remember, but of champlein, robert, monsieur du pont, his son, daniel hay, the chirurgeon, the apothecary and the trumpeter, all which follow the say de poutrincourt, who have his son with. he come aland unarm, but the savage run away as fast as ever they can, though they be above three hundred beside they that be hide in the grass, according to their custom, which appear not wherein be to be. note how god fix, i know not what, terror in the face of the faithful against infidel and miscreant, according to his sacred word when he say to his choose people, deutero 11. vers 25.. none shall be able to stand before you. the lord, your god, shall put a terror and fear of you over all the earth upon which you shall march. so we see that 135000. judge, 7., 8. able fight man run away and kill one another before gedeon, which have but 300.. man now to think to follow after these savage it have be but labour lose for they armouchiquois. be swift, be too swift in run, but if one have horse there they may pay they home very sound, for they have. a number of small path lead from one place to another, which be not in port royal and their wood be not so thick and have beside store of open land. while that de poutrincourt be come ashore, there be shoot from the bark some small cast piece upon some savage that be upon a little hill and some of they be see fall down, but they be so nimble in save their dead man that one know not what judgement the bury of the dead to make of it. the say de poutrincourt, see he can get nothing by pursue of. they cause pit to be make to bury they that be dead, which i have say to be two, but there be one that die at. the water side. think to save himself and a four man which be so sore wound with arrow shot that he die, be bring to port royal. the five man have a arrow stick in his breast yet do escape death for that time. but it have be better. he have die there for one have late tell we that he be hang in the habitation that mont maintain at kebeck. in the great river of conspiracy, canada have be the author of a conspiracy make against his captain champlein, which be now there. and as for this mischief, it have be procure by the folly and disobedience of one who i will not name because he die there, who play the cock and ringleader, lewd company cast. young man away among the young man that do too light believe he, which otherwise be of a reasonable good nature. and because one will not make he drink, he swear according to his custom that he will not return into the bark which also come to pass. for the self-same be rash oath take sometime effect to the cost of the swearer. accident by a musket, burst, find dead his face on the ground, have a little dog upon his back. both of they shoot together and pierce through with one and the self-same arrow in this bad occurrence. du pont son above name, have three of his finger cut off with a splint of a musket which be over charge do burst which trouble the company. very much that be afflict enough by other occasion. nevertheless, the last duty towards the dead be not neglect, which be bury at the foot of the cross that have be there, plant as be before, say the insolency of the savage, but the insolency of this barbarous people be great after the murder by they commit for that, as our man do, sing over our dead man, the funeral service and prayer accustom in the church, these rascal, i say, do dance and howl a far off rejoice for their traitorous treachery. and therefore, though they be a great number, they the timorousness of the savage adventure, not themselves to come and assail our people who have, at their leisure, do what we have say before, because the sea wax very low: retire themselves unto the bark wherein remain for the guard thereof, but be low water and have no the impiety of the savage mean to come aland, this wicked generation. come again to the place where they have commit the murder, pull up the cross, dig out and unbury one of the dead corpse, take away his shirt and put it on. they show their spoil that they have carry away and, beside all this, turn their back towards the bark, do cast sand with their two hand. betwixt their buttock in derision, howl like wolf which do marvelous, vex our people which spare no cast piece, shot at they, but the distance be very great. and they have already that subtlety as to cast themselves on the ground when they see the fire put at it in such sort that one know not whether they have be hurt or no. so that our man be force nill or will to drink that bitter potion, attend for the tide which be come and sufficient to carry they aland. as soon as they see our man enter into the shaloup, they run away. the savage slight, the courage of the sagamo schkoudun as swift as grayhound, trust themselves on their agility. there be with our man a. sagamo, name schkoudun, speak of before, who much dislike their prank and will alone go and fight against all this multitude. but they will not permit he. so they set up the cross again with reverence and the body which they have dig up be bury again and they name this port port port. the next day they hoist up sail to pass further and discover new land, but the contrary wind constrain they to put back and to come again into the say port the other next day after they attempt again to go far, but in vain, and they be yet force to put back until the wind shall be fit. during these attempt, the savage think, i believe, that that which have pass between we be but a jest and a play will needs, come again familiar unto we and offer to truck, dissemble that they be not they that have do those villainy, but other which they say be go away. but they be not aware of the fable how the stork be take among the crane which be find do some damage, be punish as the other notwithstanding, she plead that she be so far from do any harm that contrariwise, she do purge the ground from serpent which she do eat. de poutrincourt then suffer the shell of mother of pearl, they to approach and make as though he will accept of their ware, which be tobacco, carcanet and bracelet, make with the shell of a fish, call vignaux, and by james quartier, in the discovery of his second voyage of great esteem among they, item of their corn, bean, bow, arrow, quiver and other small trash. and as the society be, renew the, say poutrincourt, command stratagem to nine or ten that be with he to make the match of their musket round like to a round snare, and that when he shall give a sign, every one shall cast his string upon the savage head that shall be near he and shall catch he, even as the. hangman do with he that he have in hand, and, for the effect of this, that half of his people shall go aland, while the savage be busy. a truck in the shaloup which be do, but the execution be not altogether according to his desire, for he intend to serve himself with they that shall be take as of slave to grind at the handmill and to cut wood, wherein they fail by over much haste. nevertheless, six revenge, or seven of they be cut in piece, which can not so well run in the water as on the land and be watch at the passage by those of our man that be aland that do the next day. they endeavour to go far, although the wind be not good. but they go but a little forward and see only a island, six or seven league off, to which there be no mean to come, and it be call l'ile, the doubtful i will which be consider, and that, of one side, the want of victual be to be fear, and of the other, that the winter may hinder their course. and beside they have two sick man of who there be no hope of recovery. counsel be, take it be resolve, resolution for the return to return into port royal de poutrincourt. beside all this be yet in care for they who he have, leave there. so they come again for the three time into port. fortune where no savage be see. upon the first wind, the say de poutrincourt weigh anchor for the return and be mindful of the their return. peril danger pass. he sail in open sea which shorten his course, but not without a great mischief of the rudder which be again break in such sort that be at the mercy of the wave. they arrive in the end, as well as they can, among the land of norombega, where they mend it, and after their departure from the say land, they come menane to menane, a island about six league in length, between s croix and port royal, where they tarry for the wind which be come somewhat favourable part from peril. thence new mischance happen for the shaloup. be tie at the bark, be strike with a sea so rough that with her nose she break all the hinder part of the say bark wherein de poutrincourt and other be, and moreover, not be able to get to the passage of the a very swift current, say port royal. the tide which run swift in that place carry they towards the bottom of bay francoise, from whence they come not forth easy and they be in as great danger as ever they be before, for as much as seek to return from whence they come, they see themselves peril. carry with the wind and tide towards the coast which be high rock and down fall where, unless they have double a certain point that threaten they. of wreck. they have be cast away, but god will, in high enterprise, try the constancy of they that fight for his name and see if they will waver. he bring they to the door of death and yet hold they by the hand to the end. they deut 32.. ver 39 fall not into the pit, as it be. write it be i, it be i, and there be none other god with i, i kill and make a live, i wound and i heal, and there be no body that may deliver any out of my hand. so we have say heretofore and see by effect, that, although in those navigation a thousand danger have present themselves notwithstanding, not one man have be lose by the sea, although that of they which do only go for fish and to trade for skin, many there be that perish there. witness four fisher man of s maloe that be swallow up in the water be go afish. good consideration when, as we be upon our return into france, god be willing that we shall acknowledge to hold this benefit of he and to manifest by that mean his glory to the end. that sensible man may see that it be he which be the author of these holy enterprise, which be not make of covetonsnes nor by unjust effusion of blood, but of a zeal to establish his name and his greatness among nation that have no knowledge of he. now, after so many heavenly favour, it be the part of they that have receive they to say as the kingly psalmist: well, belove of god. psal 73., vers 23. 24.. yet nevertheless, by thy right hand thou hold i ever fast, and with thy counsel do i guide to glory at the last. what thing be there that i can wish but thou? in heaven, above and in the earth, there be nothing like thou that i can love. after many peril, which i will not compare to, they of ulysses nor of aeneas fear to defile our holy voyage, the arrival of de poutrincourt, with profane impurity. de poutrincourt arrive in port royal the 14. day of november, where we receive he, joyful and with a solemnity altogether new in that part, for about the time that we expect his return with great desire, and that so much the more that, if any harm have happen, he we have be in danger to have confusion among ourselves, i advise myself to show some jollity, go to meet he, as we do, and, for as much as it be in french verse, make in haste. i have place they with the muse of francia, by the title of neptune theatre, whereunto i refer the reader. moreover, to give great honour to the return and to our action, we do place over the gate of our fort the arm of france, environ with laurel crown. whereof there be great store along the wood side, with the king poesy and under the arm of mont, with this inscription, and those of de poutrincourt with this other inscription. both of they also environ with garland of bay. chap 16. the condition of the corn which they sow. the institution of the order, of the behaviour of the savage among the frenchman. the state of winter, why rein and fog be rare in this season, why rain be frequent between the tropick snow profitable to the ground. the state of january, conformity of weather in the ancient and new france, why the spring be slow. the till of garden, their crop, a water mill, a manna of herring. preparation for the return. de poutrincourts invention, the savage admiration news from france. the public rejoice be, finish de poutrincourt have a care to see his corn, the great part whereof he have sow two league off from our fort up the river equille, and the other part about our the state of corn, say fort and find that which be first sow very forward, but not the last that have be sow the six and ten day of november, which, notwithstanding, do grow under the snow during winter, as i have note it in my sow. it will be a tedious thing to particularize all that be do among we during winter as to tell how the coal, the use of the compass in land voyage, say de poutrincourt, cause many. time coal to be make, the forge-coale be spend, that he cause way to be make through the wood, that we go through the forest by the guide of the compass and other thing of such nature. but i will relate that, for to keep we merry and clean, concern victual, there be a order, the institution of the order, of establish at the table of the say de poutrincourt, which be name l' order, the order of good time or the order of mirth, at first invent by monsieur champlein, wherein they who be of the same table be every one at his turn and day, which be in fifteen day once steward and cater. now his care be that we shall have good and worshipful fare. which be so well. observe that although the belly-god of these part do often reproach unto we that we have not rue we or bear street be as pie-corner or such a cook place in london, we of paris with we we have ordinary, have there as good cheer as we can have at we and at far lesser charge for there. be none. but two day before his turn come, be careful to go hunt or fish and bring some dainty thing beside that which be of our ordinary allowance. so well that at breakfast we never want some modicum or other of fish or flesh, and at the repast of dinner and supper, yet less. for it be the great banquet where the governor of the feast, or steward, who the savage do call atoctegi, have make the cook to make all thing ready. do march with his napkin on his shoulder and his staff of office in his hand, with the collar of the order about his neck, which be worth above four crown, and all they of the order follow, of he bear every one a dish. the like also be at the bring in of the fruit, but not with so great a train. and at night, after grace be say, he resign the. colar of the order with a cup of wine to his successor in that charge, and they drink one to another. i have heretofore say that we have abundance of foul, as mallards, outard, goose, gray and whit, partridge and other bird item of ellans or stag, flesh of caribous or dear bever, otter, bear, rabbit, wilde-cat or leopard, nibaches and such like, which the savage do take, wherewith we make as good dish of meat as in the cook shop that be in we bear street and great store, for, of all meat, none be so tender as ellans flesh whereof we make good pasty, nor so delicate as the beverstaile. yea, we have have sometime, half a dozen sturgeon, store of sturgeon at one clap, which the savage do bring to we part, whereof we do take pay for it. and the rest be permit they to sell public and to truck it for bread before in chap 13.. whereof our people have abundant. and as for the ordinary meat bring out of france, that be distribute equal as much to the least as to the big and the like with wine, as we have say, in such action we have always 20. or 30. savage man, woman, girl and boy, the usage of the savage who, behold, we do our office. bread be give they gratis, as we do here to the poor. but as for the sagamo, membertou and other sagamo, when any come to we, they sit at table, eat and drink as we do, and we take pleasure in see they as, contrariwise, their absence be irksome unto we. as it come to pass three or four time that all go away to the place where they know that game and venison be, and bring one of our man with. they, who live some six week as they do without salt, without bread and without wine, lie on the ground. the savage have care of the frenchman upon skin, and that in snowy weather. moreover, they have great care of he, as also of other that have often go with they, than of themselves. say that if they. shall chance to die, it will be lay to their charge to have kill they, and hereby it may be know that we be not, as it be, pen up in a island as de villegagnon be in brafill. for this people love frenchmen and will all at a need arm themselves for to maintain they, but to use no digression. such government as we have speak of do serve we for preservative against the country, mortality, disease, and yet four of we die in february and march, of they who be of a fretful condition or sluggish, bad wind, and i remember i observe that all have their lodging on the west side and look towards the wide, open port, which be almost four league long shape. ovale-wise beside they have all of they ill bedding for the former sickness, and the go away of du pont in that manner, as we have say, cause the quilt bed to be cast away for they be rot, and they that go with the say du pont, carry away the sheet and blanket, challenge they as they so that some of our people have sore mouth and swell leg, like to the phthisique. phthisy number 11. vers 33.. and psalm 106., vers ^5, which be the sickness that god send to his people in the desert. in punishment for that, they will fill themselves with flesh. not content themselves with that, whereof the desert furnish they, by the divine providence, the state of winter weather. why rain? and mist be scarce in winter. we have fair weather almost during all the winter, for neither rain nor fog be so frequent there as here, whether it be at sea or on the land. the reason be because the sun beam by the long distance have not the force to raise up vapour from the ground here, chief, in a country all woody, but in summer it do, both from the sea and the land when, as their force be augment and those vapour be dissolve, sudden or slow, according as one approach to the equinoctial line. for we see that, why it rain between the tropic, between the two tropic. it rain in more abundance both at sea and on the land, special in peru and mexico- than in africa, because the sun, by so long space of sea, have draw up much moistness from the main ocean. he dissolve they in a moment by the great force of his heat where, contrariwise towards the new find land, they maintain themselves along time in the air before they be turn into rain or be disperse, which be do in summer, as we have say, and not in winter. and at sea more than on the land, for on the land the morning mist serve for a dew and fall about eight a clock and at sea they dure two, three and eight day, as oftentimes we have try. see then we be. speak of winter. we say that rain be in those part rare in that season. the sun likewise shine there very fair after the fall of snow, which we have have seven or eight time, but it be easy melt in open place and the long abide have. be snow be profitable in february, how so ever it be the snow, be very profitable for the fruit of the earth, to preserve they against the frost and to serve they as a fur-gowne. which be do by the admirable providence of god for the preservation of man and as the psalm say, psal 147.. vers 16.. he give snow like wool, hoar frost like ash he do, spread like morsel, cast his ice and as the sky be seldom cover with cloud towards new find land in winter time, so be there. morning, frost when they be, frost which do increase in the end of january, february and in the begin of march, for until the very time of januarie we keep, we still in our doublet, and i remember the state of january, that on a sunday, the 14. day of that month, in the afternoon we sport ourselves, sing in music upon the river equille, and in the same month we go to see the corn two league off from our fort and do dine merry in the sunn-shine. i will not, for all that, say that all other conformity of weather in east and west france year be like unto this, for as that winter be as mild in these part, these last winter of the year 1607.. 1608.. have be the hard that ever be see it have also be a like in those country, in such sort that many savage die through the rigour of the weather. as in these our part, many poor people and traveller have be kill through the same hardness of winter weather. but i will say that the year before we be in new france the winter have not be so hard as they which dwell there before we have testify unto, i let this suffice for that which. concern the winter season, but i be not yet full satisfy in search the cause why, in one and the self-same parallel, the season be in those wherefore be the season late. part of new france more slow by a month than in these part, and the leaf appear not upon the tree but towards the end of the month of may, unless we say that the thickness of the wood and greatness of forest do hinder the sun from warm of the ground. item that the country where we be be join to the sea and thereby more subject to cold, as participate of peru, a country likewise cold in regard of africa and beside that this land have never be till be. the more dampish the tree and plant not be able easy to draw sap from their mother, the earth, in recompense whereof the winter there be also more slow as we have. heererofore speak, dress of garden. the cold be pass about the end of march. the best dispose among we strive who shall best till the ground and make garden, to sow in they and gather fruit thereof, which be to very good purpose. for we find great discommodity in the winter for want of garden herb. when every one have do his sow, it be good crop from the ground, a marvelous pleasure in see they daily grow and spring up, and yet great contentment to use thereof. so abundant as we do so that this begin of good hope make we almost to forget our native country, and especial when the fish begin to haunt freshwater and come abundant, abundance of fish into our brook, in such innumerable quantity that we know not what to do with it. which thing when i consider. i can wonder enough how it be possible that they which have be in florida have suffer so great famine- consider the temperature of the air which be there almost without winter- and that their famine begin in the month. of april, may and june, wherein they can want for no fish, the care of de poutrincourt in provide for they that shall come after he, the building of a water-mill. while some labour on the ground, de poutrincourt make some building to be prepare for to lodge they which he hope shall succeed we, and consider how troublesome the hand mill be, he cause a water-mill to be make, which cause the savage to admire much at it, for indeed it be a invention which come not into the spirit of man from the first age. after that our workman have much rest. for the most part of they do almost nothing. but i may say that this mill, by the diligence of our miller, do furnish we with three time more herring, abundance of herring pilcher, than be needful unto we for our sustenance. de poutrincourt make two hogshead full of they to be salt, and one hogshead of sardines or pilcher to bring into france for a show which be leave in our return at s maloe to some merchant. among all these thing, the say de poutrincourt, do not neglect to think on his return, which be the part of a wiseman, for one must never put so much trust in man promise, but one must consider that very often many disaster do happen to they in a small moment. preparation for the return of time, and therefore even in the month of april, he make two bark to be prepare, a great one and a small one to come to seek out french-ship towards campseau or newfoundland. if it shall happen that no supply shall come unto we but the carpentry-worke be finish, one only inconvenience may hinder we. that be great oversight de poutrincourt, his invention. we have no pitch to calk our vessel. this. which be the chief thing, be forget at our departure from rochel. in this important necessity, the say de poutrincourt advise himself to gather in the wood quantity of the gum issue from firre-tree, which he do with much labour, go thither himself, most often with a boy or two, so that in the end he get some hundred pound weight of it. now, after these labour, it be not yet all, for it be needful to melt and purify the same, which be a necessary point and unknown to our shipmaster champdore and to his mariner. for as much as that, the pitch we have come from norwege, suedland, brick make in new france and danzick. nevertheless, the say de poutrincourt find the mean to draw out. the quintessence of these gum and fir-tree bark and cause quantity of brick to be make with the, which he make a open furnance wherein he put a limbeck make with many kettle, join one in the other which he fill with those gum and bark. then be well, cover fire, be put round about it by who? violence, the gum enclose within the, say lembeckemelted, and drop down into a basin. but it be needful to be very watchful at it, by reason that if the fire have take hold of the gum, all have be lose. that be admirable, especial in a man that never see any make whereof the savage be astonish. do say in word, borrow from the basques, why the savage call all. french man normand normandia, that be to say that the normand know many thing. now they call all frenchman normand, except the basques, because the most part of fisherman that go afish there be of that nation. this remedy come very fit unto we. for those which come to seek we be fall into the same want that we be now, as he which be in expectation, have neither contentment nor rest until he have that which he desire. likewise, our man in this season have often their eye upon the great compass of port royal to see if they may discover any ship, a come wherein they be oftentimes deceive. imagine sometime they have hear a canonshot, other while to perceive a sail and very often take the savage boat that come to see. we for french shaloup, for at that time great number of savage assemble themselves at the passage of the say port to go to the war against the armouchiquois. as we news out of france will declare in the book, follow final. that which be so much expect and wish for come at length. and we have news out of france on the ascension day in the forenoon, chap 17, the arrival of the french mont. his society be break, and why? the covetousness of they that do rob the dead bonfire for the nativity of the duke of orleans, the depart of the. savage to go to war. sagamo membertou voyage upon the coast bay, francoise base traffic, the town of ouigoudi. how the savage do make great voyage their bad intention a steel. i the voice of sea, wolf or seal, the state of the, i will s croix the love of the savage towards their child, the return into port. royal, the sun do but begin to cheer the earth and to behold his mistress with a amorous aspect. when the sagamo membertou, after our prayer solemn make to god and the breakfast distribute to the people according to the custom, come to give we advertisement that he have see a sail upon the lake which come towards our. the old savage have good sight. fort at this joyful. news every one go out to see, but yet none be find that have so good a sight as he, though he be above 100 year old. nevertheless, we spy very soon what it be de poutrincourt cause, in all diligence the small bark to be make ready for to go to view further, champdore and daniel hay go in she, and by the sign that have be tell they be certain that they be friend. they make present to salutation by canon-shot. be charge four canon and 12. fawkonnet to salute they that come so far to see. we, they, on their part, do not fail in beginning the joy and to discharge their piece to who they render the like with usury. it be only a. small bark under the charge of a young man of saint maloe name, chevalier, who be arrive at the fort, deliver his letter to de poutrincourt, which be read public. they do write unto he that for to help to the content of the letter, write to de poutrincourt, save the charge of the voyage the ship be. yet the jonas shall stay at campseau port, there to fish for cod, by reason that the merchant associate with mont know not that there be any fish far than that place. notwithstanding, if it be necessary, he shall cause the ship to come to port royal, moreover, that the the society of mont break. and why society be break? because that, contrary to the king, his edict, the hollander conduct by a traitorous frenchman call have the year before, take up the bever and other fur of the great river of canada, a thing which do turn to the great damage of the society, which, for that cause, can no long furnish the charge of the unhabit in these part as it have do in time past, and therefore do send no body for to remain there. after we, as we receive joy to see our assure succour, we feel also great grief to see so fair and so holy a enterprise break that so many labour and peril past shall serve to no effect and that the hope of plant, the name of de poutrincourt, his resolution, god and the catholic faith shall vanish away. notwithstanding, after that, de poutrincourt have a long while muse hereupon. he say that although he shall have no body to come with he but only his family, he will not forsake the enterprise. it be great grief unto we to abandon, without hope of return, a land that have produce unto we so fair corn. the english nation go to virginia with a zealous intent to plant true. religion. and so to () christ bless flock, no doubt he will be their leader. and so many, fair, adorn garden. all that can be do until that time be to find out a place fit to make a settle dwelling and a land of good fertility, and that be do it be great want of courage to give over the enterprise for another year. be pass the necessity of maintain a habitation there shall be take away for the land. be sufficient to yield thing necessary for life. this be the cause of that grief which pierce the heart of they which be desirous to see the christian religion establish in that country. but, on the contrary, mont and his associate reap no benefit but loss and have no help from the king. it be a thing which they can not do, but with much difficulty, to maintain a habitation in those part. mont be envy now, this envy for the trade of bever with the savage find not only place in the hollander heart but also in french merchant, in such sort that the privilege which have be give to the say mont for ten year be revoke. the unsatiable avarice of man be a strange thing, which have no regard to that which be honest, so that they may rifle and catch, by what mean soever, rob from the dead. and thereupon i will say, moreover, that there have be some of they that come to that country to fetch we home that wicked have presume so much as to strip the dead and steal away the bever which those poor people do put, for their last benefit, upon they, who they bury, as we will declare more at large in the book, follow a thing that make the french name to be odious and worthy disdain among they, which have no such sordid quality at all, but rather have a heart true, noble, the savage be of a noble mind and generous, have nothing in private to themselves, but rather all thing common and which ordinary do present gift, and that very liberal, according to their ability. to they who they love and honour. and beside this mischief, it come to pass that the savage, when that we be at campseau, kill he that have, show they the sepulchre of their dead. i need not to allege here what herodote recite of the vile baseness of king darius, who think to have catch the old one in the nest, as say the proverb. that be to say, great treasure in the tomb of the fair deceit of semiramis, semiramis, queen of the babylonian, go away altogether. confound as wise as he come thither, have find in it a writing, altogether contrary to the first he have read, which rebuke he very sharp for his avarice and wickedness. let we return to our sorrowful news and to the grief thereof. de poutrincourt have propound to some of our company whether they will tarry there for a year. eight good fellow offer themselves who be promise that every one of they shall have a hogshead of wine and corn sufficient for one year. but they demand so great wage that they can not agree. so resolution be take for the return towards the evening, bonfire make for the nativity of the duke of orleans. we make bonfire for the nativity of my lord, the duke of orleans, and begin afresh to make our canon and falconet to thunder out, accompany with store of musket shot. have before sing for that purpose the say chevalier bringer of the. news have bear the office of captain in the ship that remain at campseau refresh, send to de poutrincourt, and in this condition there be give to he for to bring unto we six wether: 24. hen, a pound of pepper, 20. pound of rice as many of raisens and of prune, a thousand of almond, a pound of nutmeg, a quarter of cinnamon, two pound of mace, half a pound of clove, two pound of citron rind, two dozen of citron as many orange, a westphalia gamon of bacon and six other gamon, a hogshead of gascon wine and as much of sack, a hogshead of powder beef, four pottle and a half of oil of olive, a jar of olive, a barrel of vinegar and two. sugarloaf. but all that be lose through gutter-lane and we a likorish trick play to de poutrincourt. see none of all these thing to make account of. nevertheless, i have think good to name here these ware to the end that they which will travel on the sea may provide themselves therewith. as for the hen and wether it sea provision be, tell we that they die in the voyage which we easy believe, but we desire at least to have have the bone of they. they tell we, yet for a full answer, that they think we have be all dead. see upon what ground the consume of our provision be found. for all that, we give good entertainment to the say chevalier and his company, which be no small number, nor drinker, like the marquis of pisani, a most sober man in drink, to the late decease de pisani, which make they like very well of our company, for there be but cider, well water in the ship wherein they come for their ordinary portion. but as for the say chevalier, even the very first day he speak of a return de poutrincourt, keep he some eight day in delay at the end, whereof this man willing to go away, the say chevalier, bad speech, tell to de poutrincourt. de poutrincourt put man in his bark and detain he for some report that he have. say that be come. to campseau, he will hoist up sail and leave we there. fifteen day after the say de poutrincourt, send a bark to campseau with part of our workman for to begin to pull down the house in the begin of june. the savage go to the war. the savage, about 400.. in number, go away from the dwell that the sagamo membertou have new make in form of a town, compass about with high pale for to go to war against the armouchiquois, which be at chouakoct, some 80. league distant from port royal, from whence they return victorious by the stratagem which i will declare in the description that i have make of this war in french verse: the savage be near, two month in the assemble. themselves thither. the great sagamo membertou have make they to be warn during and before the winter, have send unto they man of purpose, namely his two son, actaudin and actaudinech, to appoint they there the randez-uous, or place of meeting what man membertou be. this sagamo be a man already very old and have see captain james qartier in that country, at which time he be already marry and have child and notwithstanding do not seem to be above 50. year old. he have be a very great warrior in his young age and bloody during his life, which be the cause why he be say to have many enemy, and he be very glad to keep himself near the french man to live in security during. this gather of people, it behoove to make present unto he and gift of corn and bean yea, of some barrel of wine to feast his friend. for he declare to de poutrincourt membertou, his declaration in these word: i be the sagamo of this country and be esteem to be thy friend and of all the normand, for so call they the french man, as i have say and that you make good reckon of i, it will be a reproach unto i if i do not show the effect of this love. and notwithstanding whether it be through envy or otherwise, another sagamo name shkoudun, who be a good friend to bad report against membertou, the french and unfeigned report unto we that membertou do plot. some thing against we and have make a oration to that purpose which be understand by de poutrincourt. he send sudden for he to astonish he and to see if he will obey upon the first membertous obeisance. send he come alone with our man, not make any refusal which be the cause that he be permit to return back in peace. have. first, be kind use and have some bottle of wine which he love, because, say he, that when he have drink of it he sleep well and have no more fear nor care. this membertou. tell we at our membertou his liberality. a copper i first come thither that he will make the king a present of his copper i, because he see we make account of mine, and that it be meet that the sagamo be courteous and liberal one towards the other. for he be sagamo, esteem himself equal to the king and to all his lieutenant, and do say often to de poutrincourt, the savage praise themselves, that he be his great friend, brother, companion and equal. show his equality by join the two finger of the hand, that be call or demonstrative finger. now, although this present which he will give to his majesty be a thing that he care not for, notwithstanding that proceed from a generous and good mind of he, which deserve as great praise as if the thing have be of great value, as do the persian king, who receive with as good a will a handful of water from a poor country man as the great present that have be make unto he. for if membertou have have more, he will have offer it. liberal de poutrincourt be not willing to depart thence until he have see the issue of his expectation, that be to say the ripeness of his corn. he deliberate. after that, the savage be go to war to make voyage along voyage. upon the coast of the french bay, the coast, and because chavalier be desirous to gather some bever, he send he in a small bark to the river of s john, call by the savage, and to the i will, saint croix, and he, the say de poutrincourt, go in a shaloup to the say copper mine, i be of the say chevalier his voyage. we cross the french bay to go salmon to the say river where, as soon as we arrive, half a dozen salmon new take be bring to we. we sojourn there four day, during which we go into the assembly of savage, a feast cabin of sagamo chkoudun, where we see some 80. or 100 savage, all naked except their privy member, which be a make tabagy, that be to say abanquet with the meal that the say chevalier have truck with filthy trade. they for their old skin full of louse, for they give he nothing but that which they will cast away. so make he there a traffic which i little praise. but it may be that the odour of lucre be savoury and sweet of what thing, so ever it be, and the emperor vespasian do not disdain to receive in his own hand the tribute which come unto he from the piss vessel of rome. be among those savage the sagamo chkoudun will needs. give we the pleasure in see the order and gesture that they hold. go to the war and make they all to pass before we, which i reserve to speak of in the town book, follow the town of ouigoudi, so i call the dwell of the say chkoudun be a great enclosure upon a hill, compass about with high and small tree, tie one against another, and within it many cabin, great and small, one of which be as great as a market hall wherein many household retire themselves and as for the same, where they make their tabagie. it be somewhat less a good part of the say savage be of be the begin of the great river of canada. how the savage do make great voyage, which be the begin of the great river of canada, and they tell we that they come from their dwell, thither in six day, which make i much to marvel see the distance that there be by sea. but they shorten very much their way and make great voyage by the mean of lake and river, at the end of which be come in carry their canowes three or four league. they get to other river that have a contrary course. all these savage be come thither to go to the war with membertou against the armouchiquois. but because i have speak of this river, of ouigoudi mont voyage, i will not at this time speak more of it. when we return to our bark, which be at the come in of the port, half a league off from thence, shelter by a causey that the sea have make there our man and special captain champdore, that conduct we be in doubt lest some mischance shall happen unto we and have see the savage in arm think it have be to do we some mischief, which have be very easy for we be but two and therefore they be very glad of our return. after which the next day come the wizard, the subtlety of a autmoi^ or savage soothsayer, or soothsayer of that quarter, cry as a madman towards our bark, not know what he mean. he be send for in a cock boat and come. to parley with. we tell we that the armouchiquois be within the wood which come to assail they, and that they have kill some of their folk that be hunt, and therefore that we shall come aland to assist. they have hear this discourse which, according to our judgement, tend to no good. we tell he that our journey be limit and our victual also, and that it be behooveful for we to begone see himself deny. he say that before two year be come about, they will either kill all the normand or that the normand shall kill they. we mock he and tell he that we will bring our bark before their fort to ransack they all, but we do it not, for we go away. that day and have the wind contrary. we shelter ourselves under a small island where we be two day, during which some go a shoot at mallards for provision, other attend one the cookery, and captain and myself go along the rock with hammer, a mine of steel and chisel, seek if there be any mine in do, whereof we find quantity of steel among the rock which be since melt by de poutrincourt who make wedge of it and it be find very fine steel whereof he cause a knife to be make that do cut as a razor which at our return he show to the king. from thence we go in three day to the i will s croix be often contrary with the wind. and because we have a bad conjecture of the savage which we do see in great number at the river of s john and that the troop menane that be depart from port royal be yet at menane, a i will between the say port royal and s croix, which good watch, seal voice, we will not trust. we keep good watch in the night time, at which time we do often hear seal voice, which be very like to the voice of owl, a thing contrary to the opinion of they that have say and write that fish have no voice. the arrival in the i will of saint croix, the state of the same be. arrive at the i will saint croix, we find there the building, leave there all whole, save that the storehouse be uncover of one side. we find there yet sack in the bottom of a pipe whereof we drink, and it be not much the worse. as for garden, we find there coale-wort, sorrell lettuce, which we use for the kitchen turtle. we make there also good pasty of turtle dove, which be very plentiful in the wood, but the grass be there so high that one can not find they when they be kill and fall in the ground. the court be there full of whole cask which some ill dispose mariner do burn for their pleasure. which thing, when i see, i do abhor and i do judge better than before, that the savage be be the savage of better nature than many christian, less civilize, more human and honest man than many that bear the name of christian have, during three year, spare that place wherein they have not take so much as a piece of wood nor salt, which be there in great quantity, as hard as a rock. a number of iles go from thence. we cast anchor among a great number of confuse isle where we hear some savage and we do call to make they come to we. they answer we with the like call whereunto one of we reply: ouen kirau, that be to say what be you. they will not discover themselves. but the next day oagimont, the sagamo of this river, come to we and we know it be he who we hear he do prepare to follow membertou and his troop to the war, where he be grievous wound, as i have say in my verse upon this matter. this oagimont have a daughter about eleven year old, who be very comely, which monsieur de poutrincourt desire to have and have the love of the savage towards their child, oftentimes demand she of he to give she to the queen. promise he that he shall never want corn nor any thing else, but he will never condescend thereto be enter into our bark. he accompany we until we come to the broad sea. where he put himself in his shaloup to return back. and for we, we bend our course for port royal, where we arrive before day. but we be arrival into port royal before our fort, just at the very point that fair aurora begin to show her ready cheek upon the top of our woody hill. every body be yet asleep, and there be but one that rise up by the continual bark of dog. but we make the rest soon to awake by peal of musket shot and trumpets-sound. de poutrincourt be, but the day before arrive from his voyage to the mine, whither we have say that he be to go, and the day before that be the bark arrive that have carry part of our workman to campseau so that all be assemble there rest nothing more than to prepare thing necessary for our ship, and in this business our water-mill do we very good service, for otherwise there have be no mean to prepare meal enough for the voyage. but in the end we have more than we have need of. which be to the savage, to the end, to have we in remembrance. chap 18: the port, our departure from port royal, fog of eight, day continuance, a rainbow appear in the water. the port savalet tillage a honour able exercise the savage grief at de poutrincourts. go away, return into france. voyage to mount saint michael, fruit of new france. present to the king a voyage into new france after the say de poutrincourt, his return upon the point that we shall take our leave of port, the description of the port, royal de poutrincourt send his man, one after another, to find out the ship at campseau, which be a port, be between seven or eight land where ship may be shelter from wind, and there be a bay of above 15. league depth and 6. or 7. league broad, the say place be distant from port royal, above 150. league. we have a great bark, two small one. and a shaloup in one of the small bark, some man be ship that be send before and the 30. of july the other two go away. i be in the great one conduct by champdore but de poutrincourt, desirous to see a end of our sow corn tarry till it be ripe and the part from port royal. eight day miss remain there, eleven day yet after we, in the mean time, our first journey have be the passage of port royal. the next day, mist come and spread themselves upon the sea, which continue with we eight whole day during which all we can do be to get to cap de sable, which we see not in these cimmerian darkness, have one day cast anchor in. the sea, by reason of the night our anchor drive in such sort that in the morning the tide have carry we among land and i marvel that we be not cast away. peril abundance, cod strike against some rock, but for victual we want, for no fish, for in half a hour fish we may take, cod enough for to feed we a fortnight, and of the fair and fat that ever i see be, of the colour of carp which i have never know nor note, but in this part of the, say cap de sable, which, after we have pass the tide, which be swift in this place, bring we in short time as far as to the port, have think that we be no. port la have, further than the port du mouton. there we tarry two day and in the very same port we see the cod bite at the hook. we find there store of red gooseberry and a marcassite of copper i. we also make there some truck with the savage for skin. from thence forward we have wind at will and during that time it happen. once that be upon the hatch, i cry out to our pilot de champdore that we be ready to strike. think i have see the bottom of the sea, but i be deceive by the rainbow. which do the rainbow appea in the water, appear with all his colour in the water procure by the shadow that our boarespright sail do make? over the same be. opposite to the sun, which asemble his beam within the hollowness of the same sail as it do within the cloud, those beam be force to make a reverberation in the water and to show forth this wonder. in the end, we arrive within four league of campseau, at a port where a good old man of saint john lussurioso call captain savalet, receive we with all the kindness in the world and for as much as this port, which be little but very fair, have no name, i have qualify it in my geographical port: savalet, 42. voyage. make in new find land map with the name of savalet. this good, honest man tell we that the same voyage be the 42. voyage. that he have make into those part and nevertheless, the new-found-land-man do make but one in a year. he be marvelous, please, with his fish and tell we, moreover, that he take every day fifty crown worth of fish- good fish- and that his voyage will be worth 1000 pound. he pay wage to 16 man and his vessel be of 80. ton, which can carry 100000. dry fish. he be sometime savage, unportunate vex with the savage that do cabin there who, too bold and impudent, go into his ship and carry away from he what they list and for. to avoid their troublesome behaviour, he threaten they that we will come thither and that we will put they all to the edge. 150. league off they. fear the frenchman inhabit beyond that of the sword. if they do he wrong this, do fear they, and they do he not so much harm as otherwise they will have do. notwithstanding, whensoever the fisherman come with their shaloup full of fish, they do choose what seem good unto they, and they do not care for cod, but rather take merlus or whiting barse or fletan, a kind of very great turbot which may be worth here in paris above four crown apiece and peradventure six or more, for it be a marvelous good meat, special when they be great and of the thickness of six finger, as be those that be take there, and it will have be very hard to bridle their insolency because that. for to do it one shall be force to have always weapon in hand and savalet his kindness. so the work shall be leave undo. the good nature and honesty of this man be extend not only to we but also to all our people that pass by his port. for it be the passage to go and come from port royal, but there be some of they that come to fetch we home who do worse than the savage use he, as the soldier, do the poor peasan or country farmer here, a thing which be very grievous for i to hear. we be 4. day there by reason of the contrary wind. then come we to campseau, where we tarry for the other bark which come two day after we. and as for de poutrincourt, as soon as he see that the corn may be reap, he pull up some rye root and all for to show, hear the beauty, goodness and unmeasurable height of the same. he also make glean of the other exceed fair corn sort of seed as wheat, barley, oat, hemp and other, for the same purpose, which be not do by they that have heretofore be in brasill and in florida, wherein i have cause to rejoice because i be of the company and of the first tiller of that land, and herein i please myself the more when i do set before my eye. our ancient father noah, a great king, great priest and great prophet, the tillage of the ground be a honourable exercise. who occupation be to husband the ground, both in sow of corn and plant the vine. and the ancient roman captain seranus, who be find sow of his field when that he be send for to conduct the roman army. and cincinatus, who, all dusty do, plough four acre of land bare head and open stomach when the senate harold bring letter of the dictatorship unto he, in sort that this messenger be force to pray, he to cover himself before he declare his embassage unto he. delight myself in this exercise. god, fair wheat have, bless my poor labour and i have have in my garden. as fair wheat as any can be in france, whereof the say de poutrincourt give unto i a glean. when he come to the say port, the savage return from the war, he be ready to depart from port royal when membertou and his company arrive victorious over the armouchiquois. and because i have make a description of this war in french verse, i will not here trouble my paper with. it be desirous rather to be brief than to seek out new matter. at the instant of the say membertou, he tarry yet one day. but it be piteous to see at his depart the savage tear at the go away of the french man. those poor people, weep, who have be always keep in hope that. some of we shall always tarry with they in the end, promise be make unto they that the year follow, household and family shall be send thither whole to inhabit their land and teach they trade for to make they live as we do, which promise do somewhat meal, leave behind comfort they there be, leave remain ten hogshead of meal, which be give to they with the corn that we have sow and the possession of the manor, if they will use it, which they have not do for. they can be constant in one place and live as they do. de poutrincourt, his go away. the eleven of august, the say de poutrincourt depart with eight in his company from the say port royal, in a shaloup, to come to campseau. a thing marvelous, dangerous, to cross so many bay and sea in so small a vessel, lade with nine person, with victual necessary for the voyage and reasonable great quantity of other stuff be, arrive at the port of captain savalet, he receive they all as kind as it be possible for he, and from thence they come to we, to the say port of campseau where we tarry. yet eight day, the depart from new france. the three day of september, we weigh anchor, and with much ado come we from among the rock that be about the say campseau, which our mariner do, with two shaloup that do carry their anchor very far into the sea for to uphold our ship to the end she shall not strike against the rock. final be at sea, one of the say shaloup be let go and the other be take into the jonas which, beside our lade, do carry 100000. of fish as well dry as green. we have reasonable good wind until we come near to the land of europe, but we be not overcloy with good cheer because that, as i have say they who come to fetch, we presume we be dead. do cram themselves with our refresh commodity. our workman drink no more wine after we have leave port royal and we have but small portion thereof, because that which do over abound with we be drink merry in the company of they. that bring we news from the sight of the sorlingue, france, the 26. of september we have sight of the sorlingue, which be at the land end of cornwall in england, and the 28. think to come to saint maloe. we be force then of france, for want of good wind, to fall into roscoff in base bretaigne, where we remain two day and a half refresh ourselves. we have a savage who wonder very much. see the building steeple and windmill in france, yea also. of the woman who he have never see clothe after our manner from roscoff, give thanks to god, we come with a good wind unto saint maloe, wherein i can but praise the watchful foresight of our master nicolas martin. in have so skilful conduct we, in such a navigation and among so many bank and dangerous rock, wherewith the coast from the cap of vshant to saint maloe be full, if this man be praise worthy in this, his action, captain, deserve no less praise. have bring we through so many contrary wind into unknown land where the first foundation of new france have be lay the voyage unto s michael have tarry three or four day at saint maloe. de poutrincourts son and myself go to. mount saint michael, where we see the relic, all save the buckler of this holy archangel. it be tell we that the lord bishop of auranches have, four or five year ago, forbid to show it any more. as for the building, it merit the eight wonder of the world to be call the 8. wonder of the world, so fair and great be it upon the point of one only rock in the midst of the wave at full sea. true, it be that one may say that the sea come not thither when the say building be make, but i will reply that, howsoever it be, it be admirable. the complaint that may be make in this respect be that so many fair building be unprofitable. in these our day, as in the most part of the abbey of france, and will to god that by some archimedes mean they may be transport into new france, there to be better employ to god service and the king. at the return we come to see the fish of oyster at cancale, after we have sojourn eight day at saint maloe. we, de poutrincourt his industry, come in a bark to honfleur, where de poutrincourt, his experience, stand. we in good stead, who see our pilot at their wit end when they see themselves between the isle of jerzy and sare, not be accustom to take that course where we be drive by a great wind, east, southeast, accompany with fog and rain, he take his. sea-chard in hand and play the part of a pilot, in such sort that we pass the raz blanchart, a dangerous passage for small bark, and we come easy follow the coast of normandy to honfleur, for which eternal praise be. give to god. amen. harvest of new france. show to the king be at paris, the say de poutrincourt. present the king with the fruit of the land from whence he come, and especial the corn, wheat, rye, barley and oat as be the most precious thing that may be bring from what country soever. it have be very fit to vow these first fruit to god and to place they in some church among the monument of triumph, with more just plin, lib 18.. cap 2.. cause than the ancient roman who present to their country, god and goddess, terminus, seia and segesta, the first fruit of their tillage by the hand of the priest of the field institute by romulus, which be the first order in new rome who have for blazon a hat of the ear of corn outarde or wild goose. present to the king, the say de poutrincourt, have breed ten outard, take from the shell which he think to bring all into france, but five of they be lose and the other five he give to the king who delight much in they, and they be at fonteine belleau, upon the fair show of the fruit of the say country privilege of beaver. confirm to mont three ship send. 1608.. the king do confirm to mont the privilege for the trade of bever with the savage to the end to give. he mean to establish his colony in new france and by this occasion he send thither, in march last, family there to begin christian and french commonwealth which god vouchsafe to bless and increase the say ship be return. we have have report by news from new france since our come from thence, champdore and other, of the state of the country which we have leave and of the wonderful beauty of the corn that the say de poutrincourt have sow before his departure together, of the grain that be fall in the garden which have so increase that it be a incredible thing membertou do. gather six or seven barrel of the corn that we have sow and have yet one leave which he reserve for the frenchman who he look it be very dangerous to teach the savage the use of gun for. who arrive, he salute with three musket shot and bonfire. when it be lay to his charge that he have eat our pigeon which we leave there, he fall aweep and embrace he that tell it. he say that it be the macharoa, that be to say the great bird which be eagle, eagle which do eat many of they while we w^^^ there. moreover, all great and small do inquire how we do name every one by his own name, which be a witness of great love from port royal. the say champdore go as far as chovakovet, the beginning of the armouchiquois land, where he pacify that nation with the etechemins, which be not do without solemnity. for, as he have begin to speak of it, the captain who be now, instead of olmechin, name astikou, a grave man and of a goodly presence, how savage soever he be, demand that some one of the say etechemins shall be send to he. and that he will treat with he oagimont, sagamo of the river s croix, be appoint the savage wisdom for that purpose, and he will not trust they. but under the assurance of the frenchman, he go thither. some present be make to astikou who, upon the speech of peace, begin to exhort his people and to show they the cause that ought to induce they to hearken unto it, whereunto they condescend, make a exclamation at every article that he propound to they some five year ago. mont have likewise pacify those nation and have declare unto they that he will be enemy to the first of they that shall begin the war and will pursue he, but after his return into france. they can not contain. themselves in peace and the armouchiquois do kill a souriquois, savage call panoniac, who go to they for to truck merchandise which he take at the storehouse of the say mont. the war above mention happen by reason of this say murder under the conduct of sagamo membertou. the say war be make in the very same place where i now make mention that champlein be now in the river of canada. cattle, fruit tree, vine, hemp do treat the peace. this year. champlein be in another place, to wit in the great river of canada, near the place where captain james quartier do winter, where he have fortify himself, have bring thither household with cattle and diverse sort o^^ite-trees. there be store of vine and excellent hemp. in the same place, where he be, which the earth bring forth of itself. he be not a man to be idle. and we expect short news of the whole discovery of this great and uncomparable river and of the country which it wash on both side, by the diligence of the say de poutrincourt, his resolution champlein. as for de poutrincourt, his desire, be immutable in this resolution, to inhabit and adorn his province, to bring thither his family and all sort of trade necessary for the life of man which, with god help, he will, 1609.. continue to effect all this present year, 1609.. and as long as he have vigour and strength, will prosecute the same to live there under the king obeisance. the second book of the history of francia contain the fashion and manner of life of the people there and the fertility of the land and sea mention in the former book the preface: almighty god in the creation of this world have so much delight himself in diversity that, whether it be in heaven or in the earth, either under the same or in the profound depth of water, the effect of his might and glory do shine in every place. but the wonder that far exceed all other, be that in one and the self same kind of creature, i mean in man, be find more variety than in other thing create. for if one enter into the consideration of his face, two shall not be. find who in every respect do resemble one another. if he be consider in the voice, the same variety shall be find if in the speech, all nation have their proper and peculiar language whereby one be distinguish from the other, but in manner and fashion of life there be a marvelous difference which, without trouble ourselves in cross the sea to have the experience thereof, we see visible in our very neighbourhood now, forasmuch as it be a small matter to know that people differ from we in custom and manner, unless we know the particularity thereof. a small thing be it, likewise to know, but that which be near to we. but the fair science be to know the manner of life of all nation of the world, for which reason ulysses have be esteem, because he have see much and know much, it have seem necessary unto i to exercise myself in this second book upon this subject, in that which touch the nation speak of by we see that i have tie myself unto it and that it be one of the best part of a history which without it will be defective. have but slight and casual handle here. above those thing that i have reserve to speak of here- which also i do to the end, if it please god to take pity of those poor people and to work by his holy spirit that they be bring into his fold- their child may know hereafter what their father be- and bless they that have employ themselves in their conversion and reformation of their uncivility. let we therefore begin with man from his birth and have in gross mark out what the course of his life be. we will conduct he to the grave, there to leave he to rest and also to repose ourselves. chap i of the nativity of man, the author of the book of wisdom. call solomon, witness unto we a most true thing that all man have a like entrance into the world and the like go out. but each several people have bring some ceremony after these be accomplish, for some have weep see the birth of man upon this worldly theatre, other have rejoice at it as well, because nature have give to every creature a desire to preserve his own kind. as for that man have be make mortal by sin. he desire to be in some sort restore again to that lose right of immortality and to leave some visible image issue from he by the generation of child. i will not here discourse upon every nation, for it will be a infinite thing, but i will say that the hebrew, at the nativity of their child, do make some particular ceremony unto. they speak of by the prophet ezechiel, who have ezech 16. vers 23. 4. in charge to make a demonstration to the city of jerusalem of her own abomination, do reproach. unto she say that she be issue and bear out of the cananaeans country, that her father be a amorite and her mother a hittite. and as for thy birth, say he, in the day that thou be, bear thy navel. be not cut neither waist thou wash in water to soften thou, nor salt with salt, nor any wise julian imp sidon. car 7. claudian in ruffian, lib 2. swaddle in clout, the cimbre do put their new bear child into the snow to harden they, and the frenchman do plunge they into the river rhine to know if they, august epist maxim philos, be legitinate, for if they do sink unto the bottom they be esteem bastard, and if they do swim on the water they be legitimate, mean as it be that frenchman ought natural to swim upon the water. as for our savage of new france, when that i be there, think nothing less than on this history, i take not heed of many thing which i may have observe, but yet i remember that as a woman be deliver of her child, they come into our. fort to demand very instant for some grease or oil to make the child to swallow it down before they give he the dug or any food. they can render no reason for this, but that it be a custom of long continuance, whereupon i conjecture that the devil, who have always borrow ceremony from the church, as well in the ancient as in the new law, will that his people so do. i call they that believe not in god and be out of the communion of saint shall be anoint like to god people which unction he have make to be inward because the spiritual unction of the christian be so. chap 2 of the imposition of name. as for imposition of name, they give they. by tradition, that be to say they have great quantity of name which they choose and impose on their child: the dignity of eldership, or first bear. but the elder son common bear his father name. add at the end some diminutive, as the elder of membertou shall be call membertouchis, as it be the lesser or the young membertou. as for the young son, he bear not the father name, but they give he such name as they list, and he that be bear after he shall bear his name, add a syllable to it, as the young of membertou be call actaudin, he that come after be call actaudinech. so memembourre have a son name semcoud and his young be call semcoudech. it be not for. all that, a general rule, to add this termination, each for panoniac young son of, who mention be make in membertous war against the armouchiquois, which i have describe in the muse of new france, be call panoviague, so that this termination be do according as the former name require it. but they have a custom, the change of name, that when this elder brother or father be dead, they change name for to avoid the sorrow that the remembrance of the decease might bring unto they. this be the cause why, after the decease of memembourre and semcoud that die this last winter, semcoudech have leave his brother name and have not take that of his father but rather have make himself to be call paris because he dwell in paris. and after panoniac death, panoniague forsake his name and be by one of our man call roland, which i find evil and undiscreet. do so to profane christian name and to impose they upon infidel, as i remember of another that be call martin. alexander. the great though he be a heathen will not that any shall bear his name, unless he shall render himself worthy thereof. by virtue, and as one day a soldier bear the name of alexander, be accuse before. he to be voluptuous and lecherous. he command he, either to forsake that name or to change his life. the brasiliens, as john de leri say, who i have rather follow in that which he have see than a spaniard- impose name to their child of the first thing that come before they, as if a bow and string come to their imagination. they will call their child ourapacen, which signify a bow and a string and so consequent in regard of our savage. they have, at this day, name without signification, which peradventure in the first impose of. they do signify some thing, but as the tongue do change, the knowledge thereof be lose of all the name of they that i have know, i have learn. none save that chkoudun signify a trout and the name of the river of the say chkoudun, which signify to see. it be very certain that name have not be impose to what thing soever without reason, for adam give the name to every live creature according to the property and nature thereof, and consequent name have be give to man signify something as adam signify man, or that which be make of earth. eva signify the mother of all live, abel, weep, cain, possession jesus a saviour, devil a slanderer, satan a adversary, etc. among the roman, some be call lucius because they be bear at the break of day, other caesar for that the mother belly be cut at the birth of he that first do. bear this name in like manner: lentulus, piso, fabius, cicero, etc. all nickname give by reason of some accident, like our savage name, but with some more judgement. chap 3 of the feed of their child, isaiah 49. vers 15.. almighty god, show a true mother duty, say by the prophet isaiah. can a woman forget her child and not have compassion on the son of her womb? this pity which god require in mother be to give the breast to their child and not to change the food which they have give unto they before their birth. but at this day the most part make their breast to serve for allurement to whoredom and be willing to set themselves at ease, free from the child, noise do. send they into the country where peradventure they be change or give to bad nurse who corruption and bad nature they suck with their milk and from thence come the changeling weak and degenerate from the right stock who name they bear the savage woman. bear a great love than that towards their young one, for none but themselves do nourish they, and that be general throughout all the west indies. likewise, their breast be no bait of love, as in these our part, but rather love in those land be make by the flame that nature kindle in every one, without annex any art to it, either by paint, amorous poison or otherwise. and for this manner of nurse their child be the ancient german woman praise. by tacitus, because that every one do nurse their child with her own breast and will not have suffer that another beside themselves shall give suck to their child. now our savage woman do give unto they with the dug meat which they use. have first, well, chaw they, and so, by little and little, bring they up. as for the swaddle of they, they that dwell in hot country and near the tropic have no care of it but leave they free, unbind, but draw towards the north. the mother have a even smooth board like the cover of a drawer or cupborod upon which they lie the child, wrap in a beaver fur, unless it be too hot, and tie thereupon with some swaddle band. who they carry on their back, their leg, hang down, then be return into their cabin. they set they in this manner up straight against a stone or some thing else. and as in these, our part one, give small feather and gild thing to little child, so they hang quantity of bead and small square toy, diverse colour, in the upper part of the say board or plank for the deck of they chap 4 of their love towards their child. that which we have say even now be a part of true love, which do shame the christian woman. but after the child be wean and at all time they love, they all observe this law that nature have graft in the heart of all creature. except in lewd, slippery woman to have care of they and when it be question to demand of they some of their child- i speak of the souriquois in who land we dwell for- to bring they into france. they will not give they, but if any one of they do yield unto it, present must be give unto he beside large promise. we have already speak of this at the end of the 17. chapter. so then i find that they have wrong to be call barbarous. see that the ancient roman be far more brabarous than they who oftentimes sell their. the cause why the savage love their child more than we do in these part: child for to have mean to live now that which. cause they to love their child more than we do in these part, be that they be the maintenance of their father in their old age, whether it be to help they to live or to defend they from their enemy. and nature conserve whole in they her right in this respect, by reason whereof that which they wish most be to have. number of child gens: 2. vers 28.. to be thereby so much the mighty, as in the first age of the world, when virginity be a thing reproovable because of god commandment to man and woman to increase, multiply and replenish the earth. but after it be fill this love, wax marvelous, cold and child begin to be a burden to father and mother, who many have have in disdain and have very often procure their mean to ease the family of france. death now be the way open for france to have a remedy for the same, for, if it please god, to guide and prosper the voyage of new france, whosoever in these part shall find himself oppress, may pass thither and there end his day in rest, and that without feel any. poverty, or if any one find himself overburden with child, he may send half of they thither, and with a small portion they shall be rich and possess the land which be the most assure condition of this life. for we see at this day labour and pain in all vocation, yea in they of the best sort, which be often cross through envy and want other will make a hundred capping and crouch for to live, and yet they do but pine away. but the ground never deceive we if we earnest cherish. she witness the fable of he who, by his last will and testament, do declare to his child that he have hide a treasure in his vineyard. and as they have, well and deep, dig and turn it, they find nothing. but the year be come about. they gather so great a quantity of grape that they know not where to bestow they. so, through all the holy scripture, the promise that god make to the patriarch abraham, isaac and jacob, and afterward to the people of israel, by the mouth of moses, be that they shall possess the. to possess the land be a rich heritage, land as a certain heritage that can perish and where a man have wherewith to sustain his family, to make himself. strong and to live in innocency, according to the speech of the ancient cato, who do say that, common plin, lib 18.. cap 5. husbandman or farmer, son, be valiant and strong and do think on no harm. chap 5. of their religion, man be create after the image of god. it be good reason that he acknowledge, serve, worship, praise and bless his creator, and that therein he employ his whole desire, his mind, his strength and his courage. but the nature of man have be corrupt by sin. this fair light that god have first give unto he have be so darken that he be become thereby to lose the knowledge of his beginning. and for as much as god show not himself unto we by a certain visible form as a father or a king, may do man find himself overcome with poverty and infirmity, not settle himself to the contemplation of the wonder of this almighty workman and to seek he as he ought to be, seek for with a base and brutish spirit, miserable have he forge to himself god according to his own fancy and there be nothing visible in the world, but have be deify in some place or other. yea, even in that rank and degree, imaginary thing have also be put as virtue. hope, honour, fortune and a thousand such like thing. item: infernal god and sickness and all sort of plague every one worship. the thing that he stand in fear of. but notwithstanding, though, tuliie have say, speak of the nature of the god that there be no nation so savage or brutish, nor so barbarous, but be season with some opinion of they. yet there have be find in these late age nation that have no feel thereof at all, which be so much the strange that among they there, idolater in virginia be and yet be idolater as in mexico and virginia. if we will, we may add hereunto florida. and notwithstanding all be well, consider, see the condition both of the one and of the other be to be lament. i give more praise to he that worship nothing than to he who worship creature without either life. or sense, for at least as bad as he be, he blaspheme not and give not the glory due to god to a other live, indeed a life. not much differ from brutishness, but the same be yet more brutish that adore a dead thing and put his confidence in it and beside he which be not stain with any bad opinion, be much more capable of true adoration than the other. be like to a bare table which be ready to receive what colour soever one will give to it. for when any people have once receive a bad impression of doctrine, one must root it out from they before another may be place in they, which be very difficult as well for the obstinacy of man. which do say our father have live in this sort. as for the hindrance that they give they which do teach they such a doctrine, and other who life depend thereupon, who do fear that their mean of gain be take from they, even as that demetrius the siluer-smith act 19, vers 24.. the savage easy to be convert to the christian religion, james cartier mention in the act of the apostle this be the reason why our savage of new france will be find more easy to receive the christian doctrine if, once the province be thorough inhabit. for that we may begin with they of canada. james quartier, in his second relation, recite that which i have say a little before in these word, which be not here lay down in the former book. this say people say he have not any belief of god, the savage religion in canada that may be esteem for. they believe in one who they call cudouagni, and say that he often speak to they and tell they what weather shall fall out. they say that when he be angry with they he cast dust in their eye. they believe also that when they die they go the state of soul after death up into the star and afterward they go into fair greenefield full of fair tree flower and rare fruit. after they have make we to understand these thing. we show they their error and that their cudouagni be a evil spirit that deceive they and that there be but one god, which be in heaven, who do give unto we all and be creator of all thing, and that in he we must only believe and that they must be baptize or go into hell and many other thing of our faith be. show they which people easy to be convert. agoiuda signify wicked. they easy believe and call their cudouagni agoiuda, so that many time they request our captain to cause they to be baptize and the say lord, that be to say donnacona, taiguragni, domagaia, with all the people of their town, come thither for. that purpose but because we know not their intent and desire and that there be no body to instruct they in the faith. we excuse ourselves to they for that time and bad taiguragni and domagaia to make they understand that we will return another voyage and will bring priest with we and chreme. tell they for a excuse that one can be baptize without the say chreme, which they do believe, and they be very glad of the promise which the captain make they to return and thank they for it. champlein have of late make the same voyage which the captain, james quartier, have make. do discourse with savage that be yet live and report the speech that be between he and certain of their sagamo. concern their belief in spiritual and heavenly thing which i have think good be, incident to the savage belief and faith this matter to insert here, his word, be these, the most part of. they be people without law, according as i can see and inform myself by the say great sagamo, who tell i that they very believe there be one god who have create all thing. and then i ask, he see that they believe in one only god. by what mean do he place they in this world and from whence they be of the creation of man come? he answer i, that after god have make all thing, he take a number of arrow and do stick they into the ground, from whence man and woman spring up, which have multiply in the world until now, and that mankind grow by. that mean i, answer he, that what he say be false, but that indeed there be one only god, who have create all thing both in heaven and earth, see all these thing so perfect and be no body that do govern in this world. he take slime out of the earth and create thereof our first father, adam, and while he do sleep, god take one of his rib and form eva thereof, who he give to he for company. and that this be the truth that both they and we be make. they believe one god, one son, one mother and the sun. by this mean, and not of arrow, as they do believe, he say nothing more to i, but that he allow better of my speech than of his own. i ask he also if he believe not that there be any other but one only god. he say unto i that their belief be there be one only god, one son, one mother and the sun, which be four, notwithstanding that god be over and above all, but that the son be good and the sun by reason of the good which they receive of they. as for the mother, she be nought and do eat they, and that the father be not very good. i show he his error, according to our faith, whereunto he give some credit. i demand of he: if they never see, nor hear their ancestor say that god be come into the world, he tell i he have not see he, but that ancient there be five man who travel towards the set of the sun, meet with god, of five man, who the savage believe to have see god man transform into stone, who demand of they: whither go you? they answer we go to seek for our live, god, answer they, you shall find it here. but they pass further. not make any account of that. which god have. say unto they who take a stone, and therewith touch two of they, who be turn into stone, and he say again to the three other: whither go you? and they answer as at the first time. and god say unto they: a gain, pass no further. you shall find it here, and see that they find no, and into staff food. they pass further, and god take two staff and touch therewith the two foremost, who be transform into staff. but the five man stay and will pass no further. and god ask he again: whither go thou, who make answer: i go to seek for my live. and god tell he tarry and thou shall find it. and he stay without pass any. further and god give he meat and he do eat of it. and after he have make good cheer, he return among the other savage and tell they all that you have hear. he also tell i that at another time there be a man who have store of tobacco which be a herb of a other man, who the savage believe to have speak with god tabacco, the smoke whereof they take, and that god come to this man and ask he where his pipe be. the man take his tobacco pipe and give it to god who drink very much tobacco. after he have take well of it, god break the say tobacco-pipe into many piece. and the man ask he: why have thou break my tobacco-pipe, and thou see well that i have none other. and god, take one which he have and give it. he say unto he: lo, here be one which i give to thou. carry it to thy great sagamo, let he keep it, and if he keep it, well, he shall not want any thing, nor any of his companion. the say man, take the tobacco-pipe which he give to his great sagamo who, while he have it, the savage want for nothing in the world, but that, since the say sagamo have lose this tobacco-pipe which be the cause of the great famine which sometime they have among they, i demand of he whether he do believe. all that, he tell i yes, and that it be true. now, i believe that that be the cause why they say that god be not very good. but i reply and say unto he that god be all good and that, without doubt, it be the devil that have show himself to those man, and that if they do believe in god, as we do, they shall want nothing that shall be needful for they, that the sun which they see, the moon and the star be create by the same great god who have make both heaven and earth, and that they have no power but that which god. i do not think that this theology may be expound to these people, though one can perfect. speak their language have. give they that we believe in that great god who, by his goodness do, send unto we his dear, belove son, who be conceive by the holy ghost, take human flesh within the virgin womb of the virgin mary, have be 33.. year on earth, work infinite miracle. raise up the dead, heal the sick, drive out devil, give sight to the blind, show unto man the will of god his father, for to serve honour and worship he have, spill his blood and suffer death and passion for we and for our sin, and redeem mankind be bury and rise again, go down into hell and ascend up into heaven, where he sit at the right hand of god, his father. that this be the belief of all christian which do believe in the father, in the son and in the holy ghost, which be not for all that three god, but be one, self-same and one, only god and one trinity, wherein there be nothing before nor after, nothing great nor lesser that the virgin mary, mother to the son of god, and all man and woman that have live in this world, do god commandment and suffer martyrdom for his name, and who, by the permission of god, have wrought miracle and be saint in heaven in his paradise. pray all for we unto this great divine majesty to pardon we our fault and sin, which we do against his law and commandment. and so, by the saint prayer in heaven and by our own that we make to his divine majesty, he give we what we have need of, and the devil have no power over we and can do we no hurt. that if they have this belief, they shall be eve as we be, that the devil shall not be able to do they any more harm and they shall not want what shall be needful for they. then the say sagamo, say unto i that he grant all that i say. i demand of he what ceremony they use in pray to their god. he tell i that they use no other ceremony but that every one do pray in his heart as he will. this be the cause why i believe there be no law among they. neither do they know what it be to worship or pray to god and live the most part as brute beast. and i believe that in short time they may be bring to be good christian if one will inhabit their land, which most of they do desire. they have among they some savage who- what savage- speak to the devil. they call pilotova, who speak visible to the devil, and he tell they what they must do, as well for war as for other thing, and if he shall command they to go and put any enterprise in execution or to kill a french man or any other of their nation, they will immediate obey to the savage. do believe firm in dream his command. they believe also that all their dream be true, and indeed there be many of they which do say that they have see and dream thing that do happen or shall come to pass, but to speak thereof, in truth they be vision of the devil who do deceive and seduce they. so far champleins report. as for our souriquois and other their neighbour, i can say nothing else but that they be destitute of all knowledge of god, have no adoration, neither do they make any divine service, live in a pitiful ignorance which ought to touch the heart both of christian prince and prelate who- very a lesson for christian prince and prelate- often do, employ upon frivolous thing that which will be more than sufficient to establish there many colony which will bear their name. about who these poor people will flock and assemble themselves, i do not say they shall go thither in person, for their presence be here more necessary and beside every one be not fit for the sea, but there be so many person. well, dispose that. will employ themselves on that if they have the mean they, than that may do. it be altogether unexcusable to all sort and degree of people our present age be fall, as one may say, into a astorgie, want both love and christian charity and retain almost nothing of that fire which kindle our father either in the time of our first king or in the time of the croisades for the holy land yea. contrariwise, if any venture, his life and that little mean he have upon this generous christian work, the most part do mock he for it, like to the salamandre which do not live in the midst of flame, as some do imagine, but be of so cold a nature that she kill they. by her coldness. every one will run after treasure and will carry they away without pain, take and afterward to live frolic, but they come too late for it, and they shall have enough if luk 12. vers 31. they do believe as be meet to do in he that have say: seek first the kingdom of god, and all these thing shall be give unto you over and above. let we return to our savage for who conversion. it rest unto we to pray to god that it will please he to open the mean to make a plentiful harvest to the further manifestation of the gospel, for we and general, all those people, even as far as florida inclusive, be very easy to be bring to. the christian religion, according as i may conjecture of they, which i have not see by the discourse of history, but i find that there shall be more facility in they of the near land, as from cap-breton to malebarre, because they have not any show of religion, for i call not religion unless there be some latria and divine service, nor tillage of ground, at least as far as chovakoet, which be the chief thing that may draw man to believe, as one will by reason-that out from the earth come all that which be necessary for the life. after the general use we have of the other element, our life have chief need of meat, drink and clothing. these people, as one may say, have nothing. of all that, for it be not to be call cover, to be always wander and lodge under four stake and to have a skin upon their back. neither do i call eat and live to eat all at once and starve. the right mean to bring the savage to one devotion, gen 28. 20. the next day, not provide for the next day. whosoever then shall give bread and clothing to this people, the same shall be as it be their god. they will believe all that he shall say to they, even as the patriarch jacob do promise to serve god if he will give he bread to eat and garment to cover. he god, have no name for all that we can say, can comprehend. he, but we call he god because he give, and man in give may, by resemblance, be call god cause, say s gregory nazianzen, greg nazian, in the oration of the care for the poor. that thou be a god towards the needy in imitate god. mercifulness for man, have nothing so divine in he as benefit. the heathen have know this, and among other, pliny when he say that it be a great sign plin lib 2., 7. of divinity in a mortal man to help and aid a other mortal man. these people then enjoy the fruit of the use of trade and tillage of the ground, will believe all that shall be, tell they at the first voice that shall sound in their ear, and of this have i certain proof, because i have know they whole dispose thereunto by the communication they have with we. and there be some of they that be christian in mind and do perform the act of it in such wise as they can, though they be not baptize, among who i will name, chkoudun, captain, alias sagamo, of the river of saint john, mention in the begin of this work, who, whensoever he eat, lift up his eye to heaven and make the sign of the cross because he have see. we do so, yea, at our prayer, he do kneel down, as we do, and because he have see a great cross plant near to our fort, he have make the like at his house and in all his cabin and carry one at his breast, say that he be no more a savage and acknowledge plain that they be beast, so he say in his language, but that he be like unto. we desire to be instruct. that which i say. of this man i may affirm the same almost of all the other, and though he shall be alone yet he be capable be instruct to bring in all the rest. the armouchiquois be a great people which have likewise no adoration and be settle because they manure the ground. one may easy make a congregation of they and exhort they to that which be for their salvation: lib 1. chap 7.. they be vicious and bloody man, as we have say heretofore, but this insolency proceed. for that they feel themselves strong by reason of their multitude and because they live more at ease than the other, reap the fruit of the earth. their country be not yet well know, but in that small part that we have discover, i find a conformity between the armouchiquois and the natural virginian. the religion of the virginian they have conformity with, they of virginia, except in the superstition and error in that which concern our subject. for as much as the virginian do begin to have some opinion of a superior thing in nature which govern here this world, they believe in many god, as a english historian that dwell there report which they call montoac, but of sundry sort and degree, one alone be chief and great who have ever be who purpose to make the world, make first other god for to be mean and instrument wherewith he may serve himself. in the creation and in the government, then afterward the sun, the moon and the star as demi god and instrument of the other principal order they hold, that the woman be first, make which, by conjunction with one of the god, have child. all these people do general believe the immortality of the soul and that after death, good man be in rest and the wicked in pain. now, they that they esteem to be the wicked be their enemy and they the good man in such sort that in their opinion, they shall all, after death, be well at ease and special when they have well defend their country and kill many of their enemy. and as touch the resurrection of the fabulous tale of the resurrection body, there be yet some nation in those part that have some glimpse of it. for the virginian do tell tale of certain man rise again which say strange thing, as of one wicked man who after his death have be near to the mouth of popogusso, which be their hell. but a god, save he and give he leave to come again into the world for to tell his friend what they ought to do for to avoid the come into this miserable torment item. that year that the english man be there, it come to pass within 60. league off from they, as say the virginian, that a body be unbury like to the first, and do show that be dead in the pit, his soul be alive and have travel very far through a long and large way on both. side of which do grow very fair and pleasant tree, bear the rare fruit that can be see, and that in the end he come to very fair house, near to the which he find his father, which be dead, who express command he to return back and to declare unto his friend the good which it behoove they to do for to enjoy the pleasure of this place, and that after he have do his message, hist? gen of the indies, 4. book, the 124. chap, he shall come thither again. the general history of the west. indies report that, before the come of the spaniard into perou, they of cusco and thereabouts do likewise believe the resurrection of the body. for see that the spaniard, with a curse avarice, open the sepulchre for to have the gold and the riches that be in, they do cast and scatter the bone of the dead here and there. they pray they not to scatter they so to the end that the same shall not hinder they from rise again, which be a more perfect belief than that of the sadducee and of the greek, which the gospel and the luc 20. vers 27. act 17. vers 32. act of the apostle, witness unto we that they scoff at the resurrection, as also almost all the heathen. antiquity have. do some of our western indian expect this resurrection? have esteem that the soul of the good do get into heaven, and they of the wicked into a great pit or hole which they think to be far off, towards the sun set, which they call popogusso, there to burn for ever. and such be the belief of the virginian, the other as the brasilian, that the wicked go with aignan, which be the evil spirit that torment they. but as for the good, 4. esdras, 7. ver 31. 32. s paul to the heb, ch 11. at the end, orig 2. book of principle, that they go behind the mountain to dance and make good cheer with their father. many of the ancient christian ground. upon certain place of esdras, of s paul and other, have think that after death our soul be sequester into place under the earth, as in abraham bosom, attend the judgement of god and there origen have think that they be as in a school of soul and place of instruction, where they learn the cause and reason of the thing they have see on the earth and by reason make judgement of consequence of thing past and of thing to come. but such opinion have be reject by the resolution of the doctor of sorbone in the time of king philip the fair and since by the council of florence. now, if the christian have hold that opinion, be it much to these poor savage to be. enter in those opinion that we have recite of they as concern the worship of their god. of all they that be out of the spanish dominion, i find none but the virginian that use any divine service, unless we will also comprehend therein that which the floridian do, which we will recite hereafter. they then represent their god in the shape of a man which they call kevuasovuock. one only be name kevuas. they place they in house and temple make after their fashion, which they call machicomuck, wherein they make their prayer sing and s aug 4. cap 31.. offer to those god and see we be fall to speak of infidel. i praise rather the ancient roman, who be above 173. year, without any image. of god, as s augustin say, numa pompilius have wise, forbid to make any, because that such a foolish and senseless thing make they to be despise. and from this contempt come that the people do cast out all fear. nothing be better than to worship they in spirit. see they be spirit, and plin lib 2. cap 7.. indeed, pliny say that there be nothing which show more the weakness of man wit than to seek to assign some image or figure to god. for in what part soever that god show himself, he be all sense, all sight, all hear, all soul, all understanding and final, he be all of himself, without use any organ. the ancient german instruct in this doctrine, not only do admit no image of their god, as say tacitus, but also will not that they shall be draw or paint against the wall, nor set in any human form. esteem that to derogate too much from the greatness of the heavenly power it may be. say among we that figure and representation be the book of the unlearned. but leave disputation aside. it be fit that every one shall be wise and well instruct and that no body shall be ignorant. the savage have the industry both of paint and carve. our souriquois and armouchiquois savage, have the industry both of paint and carve and do make picture of beast, bird and man as well in stone as in wood, as pretty as good workman. in these part and notwithstanding, they serve not themselves with they in adoration, but only to please the sight and the use of some private tool, as in tabaccopipe. and in that, as i have say at the first, though they be without divine worship, i praise they more than the virginian and all other sort of people which, more beast than the very beast worship and reverence, senseless thing. the floridian captain laudonniere, in his history of florida, say that they of that country have no knowledge of god nor of any religion. but of that which appear unto they as the sun and the moon to who. nevertheless, i find not in all the say history that they make any adoration, save that when they go to wary the paracousi make some prayer to the sun, for to obtain victory, and which be obtain, he yield, he praise for it with song to the honour of he. as i have more particular speak in my first book, the 10. chapter, and notwithstanding belleforest- false report, de belleforest write to have take from the say history that which he mention of their bloody sacrifice. like to, they of the mexicains, assemble themselves in one field and set up there their lodge where, after many dance and ceremony, they lift up in. the air and offer to the sun, he upon who the lot be fall, to be sacrifice. if he be bold in this thing, he presume no less where he write, the like of the people of canada who he make sacrificer of human body, although they never think on it. for if captain james quartier have see some of their enemy head dress like leather set upon piece of wood, it do not follow that they have be sacrifice, but it be their custom to do so, like to the ancient gaulois, that be to say, to take off the head of their enemy who they have kill and to set they up, in or without their cabin as a trophy which be usual through all the west indies. to return to our floridian, if any one will call the honour they do to the sun to be a act of religion, i will not contrary he. for in the old time of the golden age, when that ignorance find place among man, many consider the admirable effect. of the sun and of the moon wherewith god use to govern thing in this low world, attribute unto they the reverence due to the creator, and this manner of reverence be expound unto job 31. vers 26. 27. we by job, when he say, if i have behold the sun in his brightness and the moon run clear, and if my heart have be seduce in secret and my mouth have kiss my hand, this also have be a iniquity to be condemn for. i have deny the great god above. as for the hand, kiss it be a kind of reverence which be yet observe in do homage. not be able to touch the sun, they stretch forth their hand towards it than kiss it, or they touch his idol and afterward do kiss the hand that have touch it. and into this idolatry do the people of israel sometime fall, as we see in ezechiel. ezech 8. ver 16. brasilian. in regard of the brasilian, i find by the discourse of john de leri, who i have rather follow than a spanish author in that which he have see that not only they be like unto we, without any form of religion or knowledge of god, but that they be so blind and harden in their anthropophagy that they seem to be in no wise capable of the christian doctrine. also, they be visible torment. and beat by the devil which they call aignan, and with such rigour that when they see he come sometime in the shape of a beast, sometime of a bird or in some strange form, they be as it be in despair. which be not with the other savage more hitherward towards newfoundland, at least with such rigour- for james quartier report- that he case earth in their eye and they call he cudouagni. and there, where we be, where they call he, i have sometime hear that he have scratch membertou be. then, as it be a kind of soothsayer of the country, when one tell the brasilian that one must believe in god, they like that advice. well enough, but by and by they forget their lesson and return again to their own vomit, which be a strange brutishness not to be willing at the least to redeem themselves from the devil vexation by religion which make they unexcusable. see also, they have some memory remain in they of the general flood and of the gospel, if it be so that their report be true, for they make mention in their song that the water be once overflow, do cover all the earth and all man be drown, except their grandfather who save themselves upon the high, in the first book, three chapter tree of their country and of this flood. other savage mention by i else where have also some tradition as concern the gospel. the say leri say that have once find occasion to show unto they the beginning of the world and how it be meet to believe in god and their miserable condition. they give ear unto he with great attention. be all amaze for that which they have hear, and that thereupon a ancient man take upon he to speak, say that in truth he have recite wonderful thing unto they which make he to call to mind that which many time they have hear of their grandfather, that of a long time sithence, a mair, that be to say a stranger clothe and beard like to the frenchman, have be there, think to bring they to the obedience of the god, which he declare unto they and have use the like exhortation unto they, but that they will not believe he. and therefore there come another thither who, in sign of acurse, give they their armour wherewith, since they have, kill one another, and that there be no likelihood they shall forsake that manner of life, because that all their neighbour nation will mock they for it. but our souriquois canadians and their neighbour be not so harden in their wicked life. no, neither the virginian nor floridians, but will receive the christian doctrine very easy when it shall please god to stir up they that be able to succour they neither, be they visible torment, beat and tear by the devil, as this barbarous people of brasil, which be a strange malediction more particular unto they than to other nation of those part which make. i believe that the voice of the apostle may have reach so far, according to the say of the say old, ancient man to which have stop their ear, they bear a particular punishment for it, not common to other, which, peradventure, have never hear the word of god since the universal flood, whereof all those nation in more than three thousand league of ground have a obscure knowledge which have be give they by tradition from father to son. chap 5 of the soothsaiers and master of the ceremony among the indian. i will not call, as some have do, by the name of priest- they that make the ceremony and invocation of devil among the west indies, but in as much as they have the use of sacrifice and gift that they offer to their god, hebr 8. vers 3.. for as much as, as the apostle say, every priest or bishop be ordain to offer gift and sacrifice, such as be they of mexico the great, whereof be call papas who offer incense to their idol, the chief of they be that of the god, who they do name vitzilipuztli, although nevertheless the general name of he who they hold for supreme lord and author. of all thing be viracocha, to who they attribute excellent quality, call he pachacamac, which be creator of heaven and earth, and vsapu, which be admirable, and other such like name. they have also sacrifice of man, as they of perou have, yet which they sacrifice in great number, as joseph acosta, joan acosta, lib 5., ch. 20. 21. discourse thereof. at large, those may be call priest or sacrificer, but in regard of they of virginia and florida, i do not see any sacrifice they make and therefore i will qualify they with the name of wizard or master of the ceremony of their religion, which in florida i find to be call jarvar and joanas. in virginia, vuiroances, in brasill, caribe, and among we i mean. the soriquois laudonniere speak of florida. they have, say he, their priest unto who they give great credit because they be great magician, great soothsaier and caller on devil. these priest do serve, they for physician and chirurgeon, and carry always with they a bag full of herb and drug to physic, they that be sick, which be the most part of the great pock, for they love woman and maiden very much, who they call the daughter of the sun. if there be any thing to be treat, the king, call the jarvar and the ancient man and demand their advice. see, moreover, what i have write heretofore in the six chapter of the first virginia book. as for they of virginia, they be no less subtle. than they of florida and do procure credit to themselves, make they to be respect by trick or show of religion, like to they that we have speak of in the last chapter 6.. book ch 19 speak of some dead man rise up again. it be by such mean and under pretect of religion that the inguas make themselves heretofore the great prince of america, and they of these part that will deceive and blind the people have likewise use of that subtlety, as numa, pompilius, lisander, sertorius and other more recent do. as say plutarch as the player of tragedy who, desirous to show forth thing, overreach the human strength. have refuge to the superior power of the god, the of the last land of the. indies which be the near unto we be not so blockish, but that they can make the common people to attribute some credit unto they, for by their imposture they live and make themselves esteem to be necessary. play the part of physician and surgeon as well as the floridian. let the great, the physician and surgeon of the savage sagamo membertou be a example thereof. if any body be sick, he be send for. he make invocation on his devil. he blow upon the part grieve. he make incision, suck the bad blood from it. if it be a wound, he heal it by the same mean: apply a round slice of the beaver stone. final, some present be make unto he, either of venison or skin. if it be question to have news of thing absent, have first question with his spirit. he render his oracle common, doubtful, very often false, but sometime true, as when he be ask whether panoniac be dead, he say that unless he do return within fifteen day, they shall not expect he any more and that he be kill by the armouchiquois. and for to have this answer he must be present with some gift, for there be a trivial proverb among the greek which bear that without money, phoebus oracle be dumb. the same membertou render a true oracle of our come to du pont, when that he part from port royal, for to return into france, see the 15. day of july pass without have any news, for he do maintain still and do affirm that there shall come a ship and that his devil have tell it he item. when the savage be a hunger, they consult with membertous oracle and he say unto they, go you to such a place and you shall find game. it happen sometime that they find some and sometime none. if it chance that none be find the excuse be that the beast be wander and have change place. but so it come to pass that very often they find some, and this be it, which make they believe that this devil be a god and they know none other, to who, notwithstanding, they yield not any service nor adoration. in any form of religion, how the invocate the devil, when that these make their mow and moppe. they fix a staff in a pit to which they tie a cord and put their head into this pit. they make invocation or conjuration in a language unknown to the other, that be about, and this with beat and howl until they sweat with very pain. yet i have not hear that they some at the mouth, as the turk do, when this devil be come, this master aoutmoin, make they believe that he hold he tie by his cord and hold fast against he force he to give he a answer before he let he go by. this be know the subtlety of this enemy of nature who beguile thus these miserable creature, and his pride withal in willing that they which do call upon he yield unto he more submission than ever the holy patriarch and prophet have do to god, who have only pray with their face towards the ground, a song to the praise of the devil. that do he begin to sing some thing, as i think, to the praise of the devil who have discover some game unto they and the other savage that be there, do answer, make some concordance of music among they. then they dance after their manner, as we will hereafter say, with song which i understand, not neither those of we that understand their speech. best, but one day go to walk in our meadow along the river, i draw near to membertous cabin and do write in my table book part of that which i understand, which be write there yet in these term: haloet ho, ho, he, he, ha ha, haloet ho, ho, he, which they do repeat diverse time. the tune be in my, say, table book in these note: re re, fa, fa, re, re, fa, fa. one song be end, they all make a great exclamation, say e. then begin again another song, say egrigna, have he he, hu, hu, ho, ho, have have hau the tune of this be fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, re, re, fa, fa, re, fa, fa, fa have, make the usual exclamation. they begin yet another song, which be tameia have have he he the tune whereof be i attentive, hearken upon this word, repeat sundry time and can never hear any other thing which make i think that these song be to the praise of the devil. if, notwithstanding, this word signify with they that which it signify in hebrew, which be: praise you, the lord. all the other nation of those country do the like, but no body have particulary describe their song, save john de leri, who say that the brasilian do make as good agreement in their sabbath and be one day at their solemnity, he do report that they say with this note: fa, fa, fa, fa, and that do they cry out and howl. after a fearful manner, the space of a quarter of a hour, and the woman do skip violent in the air until they foam at the mouth, then begin again their music say heu, heur aure heur a heur ovech. the note be fa re solsolfa mire mire re. this author say that in this song they bewail their decease, father, which be so valiant, and nevertheless they comfort themselves for that after their death they be assure to go to they behind the high mountain where they shall dance and be merry with they, likewise that they have, with all vehemency, threaten the ouetaca, their enemy, to be in very short time. take and eat by they, according as the caraibe have promise they and that they. have also make mention of the flood, speak of in the former chapter. i leave unto they that do write of demonomanie to philosophize upon that matter. but, moreover, i must say that while our savage do sing in that manner before say there be some other which do nothing else but say he or het, like to a man that cleave wood with a certain motion, the dance of the savage of the arm, and dance in round, not hold one another nor move out of one place, strike with their foot against the ground, which be the form of their dance, like unto those which the say leri report of they of brasill, which be above 1500.. league from that place, after which thing our savage. make a fire and leap over levit 20. 2., 3. deuter, 12. vers, 31. and 18. vers 10. and 4. of kin, 17. ves, 17. 31. psal 106. it as the ancient canaanite ammonite, and sometime the israelite do. but they be not so detestable, for they do not sacrifice their child to the devil through the fire. beside all this, they put half a pole out of the top of the cabin, where they be at the end, whereof there be some matachias or some thing else tie which the devil carry away. thus have i hear the discourse of their manner of do in this matter s john bonfire there may be here. consider a bad use to leap over the fire and to make the child to pass through the flame in the fire. make upon s john baptist day, which theod upon the 16. chap of the forth book of king, custom endure yet to this day among we and aught to be. reform for the same come from the ancient abomination that god have so much hate, whereof theodoret speak in this wise. i have see, say he, in some town, pile of wood kindle once a year, and not only child to leap over they, but also man and the mother bear their child over the flame, which do seem unto they to be as a expiation and purification, and this, in my judgement, be the sin. of achaz. these fashion have be forbiddeen by a ancient can 65. synod 6. in trullo, council hold at constantinople, whereupon balsamon. do note that the 23. day of june, which be saint john baptist eve, man and woman do assemble themselves at the sea shore and in house and the elder daughter be dress like a bride and after they have make good cheer and well drink, dance be make with exclamation and fire all the night, prognosticate of good and bad luck. these fire have be continue among we upon a better subject. but the abuse must be take away. the devil will be serve as god now, as the devil have always be willing to play the ape and to have a service like to. that which be give to god, so will he that his officer shall have the mark of their trade to the end to deceive the simple people. the better, and indeed membertou, of who we have speak as a learned aoutmoin, carry hang at his neck the mark of this profession, which be a purse, trianglewise cover with their imbrodery work, that be to say with matachiaz, within which there be i know not what, as big as a small nut, which he say to be his devil call, which they of canada do name cudovagni, as say james quartier. i will not mingle sacred thing with profane, but according as i have say that the devil play the ape. this make i to remember of the rational. or pectoral of judgement which the high priest do carry before he in the ancient law, on the which moses have put and thummim. now, rabbi david say that it be not know what these and thummim be, and it seem that they be stone. rabbi selomoh say that it be the name of god, jehovah, a in effable name which he do put within the fold of the pectoral whereby he make his word to shine. josephus do think that they be twelve precious stone s. jerome do interpret these two word to signify doctrine and truth and, as the priestly office be successive, not only in the house of aron but also in the family of the great priest of memphis, who office be assign to. his elder son after he, as thyamis say, in the ethiopian history of heliodorus. even so, among these people this office be successive and by tradition they do teach the secret thereof to their elder son. for membertous elder son who be name judas in jest, for which he be angry, understand it be a bad name. tell we that after his father he shall be aoutmoin in that precinct, which be a small matter, for every sagamo have his aoutmoin, if himself be not so, but yet they covet the same for the profit that come thereof. the brasilian have their caraibe who travel through the village, make the people believe that they have communication with spirit through who mean they can not only give they victory. against their enemy but also that of they depend, the fertility or sterility of the ground. they have common a certain kind of bell or rattle in their hand, which they call maraca, make with the fruit of a tree as big as a ostrich egg, which they make hollow, as they do here the bottle of the pilgrim that go to saint james and have fill those bottle or ratty be make of pompion, they with small stone, they make a noise with they in their solemnity, like the bladder of hog, and go from town to town. they beguile the world, tell the people that their devil be within the same. these maracas or rattle, well deck with fair feather, they stick in the ground, the staff that be through it and do place they all along and in the midst of the house, command that meat and drink be give to they in such wise that these, the imposture of the caraibe cog mate, make the other poor idiot to believe, as the sacrificer of the idol bel do heretofore, of who mention be make in the history of daniel, that those fruit do eat and drink in the night. every householder give credit thereto. do not fail to set near these maracas, meal, flesh, fish and drink, which service they continue by the space of fifteen day or three week, and during that time they be so. foolish as to persuade themselves that, in sound with these maracas, some spirit speak unto they and attribute divinity unto they in such sort that they will esteem it a great misdeed to take away the meat that be present before those fair bell, with which meat those reverend caraibe do mere fatten themselves and so, under false pretext, be the world deceive chap 7.. of their language, the effect of the confusion of babel be come in as far as to those people whereof we speak, as well as in the hither world, for i see that the patagons do speak another language than they of brasil, and they otherwise than the perouan, and the perouan be distinct sundry language from the maxican, the isle likewise have. their peculiar speech. they speak not in florida as they do in virginia. our souriquois and etechemins understand not the armouchiquois nor these the iroquois. brief, every nation be divide by the language. yea in one and the self same province there be difference in language, even as in gallia, the fleming, they of bretaigne, the gascon and the basque do not agree. for the author of the history of virgnia say that there every wiroan or lord have his peculiar speech. let this be, for example, that the chief man or captain of some precinct, who our historian james quartier and laudonniere do call by the name of king, be call in canada agohanna among the souriquois. sagamo in virginia, wiroan in florida, paracussi in the isle. of cuba, cacique, the king of perou, inguas, and so forth. i have leave the armouchiquois and other which i know not. as for the brasilian, they have no king, but the old, ancient man who they call peoreroupichech because of the experience they have of thing past. be they which do govern, exhort and dispose of all thing, the very tongue be change as we see that with we, we have not the language of the ancient gaullois, nor that which be in charolus magnus time, at least it do differ very much. the italian do speak no more latin, nor the grecian, the ancient greek, special in the sea coast, nor the jew, the ancient hebrew. in like manner, james quartier have leave unto we a. kind of dictionary of the language of canada, wherein our frenchman, that haunt there in these day, understand nothing and therefore i will not insert it here. only i have there find caraconi, which signify bread, and now they say caracona, which i esteem to be a word of basque. for the satisfaction of some i will set here some number of the ancient and new language of canada. conformity of language. for the conformity of language, there be sometime find word in these part which do signify some thing. there, as john de leri say that leri signify a oyster in brasil, but very few word be find which come in one and the self-same signification in maffeus, his orient. all sagamo do also signify a king. in the east indies history. i have read sagamo in the same signification as our souriquois do take it, to wit a king, a duke, a captain, and they that have be in guinee say that this word babougic signify there a little child or a fawn of a beast, in that sense, as the say souriquois take that word as this french word moustache, which come of mistax, and that which we say in french boire, a tire-larigot, which i construe in english to drink till one eye be out, come of larygx, lariggos, etc. and the greek word bosphoros come from the hebrew (@), (@), (@), (@), (@) and (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). the cause of the change of language, but concern the cause of. the change of the language in canada whereof we have speak, i think that it have happen by a destruction of people. for it be some eight year since the iroquois do assemble themselves to the number of 8000.. man and discomfit all their enemy who they surprise in their enclosure. to this i add the traffic which they make from time to time for their skin, since the french man come to fetch they. for in the time of james quartier, bever be not care for the hat that be make of it be in use. but since that time, not that the invention thereof be new, for in the ancient order, bever-hat of the hat-maker of paris, it be say that they shall make hat of. fine bever which be the castor, but whether it be for the dearness or otherwise, the use thereof have be long since leave off of the pronunciation. as for the pronunciation, our souriquois have the greek @, which we call five, and their word do common end in a as souriquois, souriquoa, captain, capitaina, normand, normandia, basque, basquoa, martre, a marten, a banquet, tabaguia, etc. but there be certain letter which they can well pronounce, that be to say a five consonant and f in stead, whereof they put b and p, as for which be a smith, they will say, and for sauvago, which signify savage, they say chabaia, and so call they themselves. not know in what sense we take that word, and yet they pronounce. the rest of the french tongue better than our gascon who, beside the turn of v into b and of the b into v, be yet discern in the last trouble and bad handle in provence, by the pronounce of in the book of judge, ch 12. vers 6.. the word cabre in stead, whereof they do say crabe, as aforetime the ephraiimte have lose the battle against the galaadite, think to escape away. be well know in pass the river jordan. in pronounce the word which signify a ear of corn in stead, whereof they do say shibboleth, which signify the ford of a river. ask if they may well pass. the greek have also a sundry pronunciation of the self-same word, because they have four distinct. tongue vary from the common speech. and in plautus we read that the peaenestin, not far distant from rome, do pronounce konia in stead of ciconia. yea, even at this day, the good wife of paris do yet say courin for cousin, which be my cousin, and mazi for mari, which signify husband. the savage have a particular tongue. now to return to our savage, although that, by reason of traffic, many of our frenchman do understand, they notwithstanding, they have a particular tongue which be only know. to they which make i to doubt of that which i have, say that the language which be in canada in the time of james quartier be no more in use for to accommodate themselves with we, they speak unto. we in the language which be to we more familiar, wherein be much basque mingle with it. not that they care great to speak our language, for there be some of they which do sometime say that they come not to seek after we, but by long frequentation they can but retain some word or other. their manner of number, i will far say that concern the number. see, we have speak of it. they do not reckon distinct as we do the day, the week, the month, the year, but do declare the year by number of sum. as for 100 year, they will say cachmetren achtek, that be to say 100 son achtek. 1000 son, that be to say 1000 year. metren knichkaminau, ten month metren. guenak 20.. day and for to show a innumerable thing, as the people of paris, they will take their hair or hand full of sand, and after that manner, do the holy scripture, like wise, use sometime to number, compare hiperbolicalie army to the sand that be on the sea shore. they also signify the season by their effect. as for to make a man to understand that the sagamo poutrincourt will come at the spring time, they will say: nibir betour sagmo for sagamo, a word shorten: poutrincourt betour kedretch, that be to say the leaf be come. then will the sagamo poutrincourt come. certain, therefore, as they have no distinction, neither of day nor of year. so be not. they persecute by the ungodliness of their creditor, as in these part, neither do their shorten nor lengthen the year for to gratify the broker and banker, as do, in ancient time, the idolatrous priest of rome, to who be attribute the government and dispose of. solin politi list, cap 5.. time ofseason and of year. as solin write, chap 8 of the use of letter, of letter, it be well know that these western nation have no use of letter, and it be that which all they that have write of they do say they have most admire: to see that by a piece of paper i give knowledge of my will from one end of the world to the other, and they think that there shall be enchantment in this paper. but that be not so much to be wonder at if we consider that in the time of the roman emperor many nation of these part know not the secret of letter. among who tacitus dutch man put the german who at this day do swarm with man of learning, and he add a notable sentence: that good manner be in more credit there, then good law elsewhere, gaullois. as for our gaullois, it be not so with they, for even from the old time of the golden age they have the use of letter yea, by the leave of those, godly doctor, who do call they barbarous before the greek and latin, for xenophon, who speak large of they and of their beginning in his do witness unto we that the letter which cadmus bring to the greek be not so much like to the letter as the galatee, be that be the gaullois wherein caesar do equivocate in. say that the druid do use of greek letter in private matter, for contrariwise, the greek have use of the. see hereafter the 17. chapter, gaullois letter. and berose say that the three king of the gaullois, after the flood, name sorron, do institute university in these part. and diodorus do add that there be in the gaulles philosopher and divine call saronides, much more ancient than the druid, which be great reverence and unto who all the people do obey. the same author do say that bardus, first king, lib ^ biblioth of the gaullois do invent both rhyme and music, bring in poet and rhethorician who be call bard, whereof caesar and strabo make mention, but the same diodore write that poet be among they in. such reverence that when two army be ready to strike, have their sword draw and the javelin in hand to give the onset, those poet come, every one do surcease and put up their weapon. so much do wrath give place to wisdom. yea, among the wild barbarian. and so much do mars reverence the muse, say the author. so i hope that our most christian, most august and most victorious king henry the four, after the thunder of besiege of town and battle be cease. reverence the king, elder daughter, be the university of paris in the treaty of serpent the muse and honour they, as he have already do. not only he will reduce his elder daughter to her ancient glory and give unto her be. a royal daughter, the propriety of that basilic, fasten to the temple of apollo who by a hide virtue do hinder that the spider shall weave their web along his wall, but will also establish his new france and bring to the bosom of the church so many poor soul which that country bear. all starve for the want of the word of god who be as a pray unto hell and that for to do this he will. this french zeal shall stir up the english courage for virginia. give mean to conduct thither. christian sarronides and bard bear the fleur-de-lis in their heart, who will instruct and bring to civility those barbarous people and will bring they to his obedience. chap 9 of their clothing and wear of their hair. god, in the beginning, do create man naked and innocent. make all the part of his body to be of honest sight. but sin have make the member of generation to become shameful unto we and not unto beast which have no sin. it be the cause why our first parent have know their nakedness destitute of clothes. do gens. 3. sow fig, leave together for to hide their shame therewith. but god, make unto. they coat of skin and clothe they with it, and this before they go out of the garden of eden. clothe, then be not only to defend we from cold, but also for decency and to cover our shame. and nevertheless, many nation have ancient live and at this day do live naked without apprehension of this shame, decency and honesty. and i marvel not of the brasilien savage that be such as well man as woman, nor of the ancient pict, a nation of great britain who, herodian say, have not any use of clothes in the time of severus the emperor, nor of a great number of other nation that have be and yet be naked, for one may say of they that they be people. fall into a reprobate sense and forsake of god, but of christian, which be in aethiopia under the great negus who we call prester-ihon. nakedness of the aethiopian, which, by the report of the portugese that have write history of, they have not their part, which we call privy member, any way cover. but the savage of new france and of florida have better learn and keep in mind the lesson of honesty than those of aethiopia. for they cover they with a skin, tie to a latch or girdle of leather which pass between their buttock, join the other end of the say latch behind and for the rest of their garment they have a cloak on their back, make with many skin, whether they be of. otter or of beaver, and one only skin, whether it be of ellan or stag skin bear or luserne, which cloak be, tie upward with a leather ribbon, and they thrust common one arm out but be in their cabin. they put it off unless it be cold, and i can better compare it than to picture that be make of hercules who kill a lion and put the skin thereof on his back. notwithstanding, they have more civility in that they cover their privy, the woman member. as for the woman, they differ only in one thing, that be they have a girdle over the skin they have on and do resemble without comparison the picture that be make of saint john baptist, but in winter they. make good beaver sleeve tie behind which keep they very warm and after this manner, be the ancient german clothe by the report of caesar and tacitus, have the most part of the body naked. as for the armouchiquois and floridian, they have no fur, but only chamois, yea the say. armouchiquois have very often but a piece of mat upon their back for fashion sake, have nevertheless their privy member. god, providence, cover. god, have so wise provide for man infirmity that in cold country he have give fur and not in the hot, because that otherwise man will make no esteem of they. and so, for that which concern the body, let we come to the leg and foot, than we will end with the head. of hose, our savage, in the winter go to sea or a hunt, do use great and high stocking, like to our bootehosen, which they tie to their girdle and at the side outward there be a great number of point without tag. i do not see that they of brasil or florida do use of they, but see they have leather, they may as well make of they if they have need, as the other, beside these long stocking shoe, our savage do use shoe which they call mekezin, which they fashion very proper but they can dure long, special when they go into watery place, because they be not curry nor harden but only make after the manner of buff, which be the hide of a ellan, howsoever it be. yet be they in better order than the gotte clothing, be the ancient gotte, which be not thorough hose but with buskin or half boot which come somewhat high than the ankle of the foot, where they make a knot which they bind with horse hair, have the calf of the leg, the knee and thigh naked, and for the rest of their garment they have leather coat, pleat as greasy as lard, and the sleeve down to the begin of the arm, and on those jerkin in stead of gold lace, they make red border as our savage do. behold the state of those that ransack the roman empire who? sidonius apollinaris, bishop of awergne, sidon carm 7. and ep 20. lib 4. do describe after this manner, go to the council of auitus the emperor for to treat of peace, etc. the savage head-attire. as for the head attire, none of the savage have any, unless it be that some of the hither land truck his skin with frenchman for hat and cap. but rather both man and woman wear their hair flitter over their shoulder, neither bind nor tie, except that the man do truss they upon the crown of the head, some four finger length, with a leather lace which they let hang down behind. but for the armouchiquois and floridian as well, man as woman, they have their hair much long and they hang they down low than the girdle when they be untruss. for. to avoid then the hindrance that they may bring to they, they truss they up as our horse-keeper do, a horse tail and the man do stick in. they some feather that, like they and the woman, a needle or bodkin with three point after the fashion of the savage woman wear bodkin the french lady who also wear their needle or bodkin that serve they partly for a ornament of the head. all the ancient have this custom to go bareheaded and the use of hat be but late. come in the fair absalon, be 2. sam 18.. vers 9: hang by his hair at a oak after he have lose the battle against his father army, and they do never cover their head in those day, but when they do mourn for some misfortune, as may be note by the example of david, who have understand his son conspiracy, flee 15.. ver 30. from jerusalem and go up the mountain of olive ester 6. vers 12. weep and have his head cover, and all the people that be with he, the persian, do the like, as may be gather by the history of aman who be command to honour he, who he will have to be hang, to wit mardochee. go home to his house, weep and his head cover, which be a thing extraordinary. the roman at their beginning, do the like, as i gather by the word which do command the hangman to do his office, recite by cicero and titus livius in these term: and if we will come to our westerly and northerly people, we shall find that the most part do be long hair, like unto, they that we call savage. that can be deny of the trans-alpin gaullois who, for that occasion, give the name to gallia, whereof martial speak, say flagellant colla, our french king, have be surname hairy, because they do wear their hair so long that they do beat down to the back and the shoulder, so that gregory of tours speak of king clovis hair. he call it the goth. do the like. and left to hang over their shoulder great flock of hair curl, which the author of that time do call which fashion of concil 1. can 29. hair be forbid to priest. also the secular apparel in a council of the goth. and jornandes in the history of the goth recite that king atalaric will that the priest shall be the thiare or hat, make two sort of people, some who he call pileatos, the other capillatos, which these take for so great a favour to be call hairy, that they make mention of this benefit in their song. and notwithstanding they braid, not their hair, but i find, by the testimony of tacitus, that the suevians, a nation of germany, do wreath knit and tie their hair. on the crown of their head, even, as we have say, of the souriquois and armouchiquois. in one thing the armouchiquois do differ from the souriquois and other savage of newfoundland, which be that they pull out their hair before which the other do not, contrary to who pliny recite: plin, 6 book, chap 13. that at the descent of the ripheen mountain, ancient be the region of the arimpheon, who we now call muscovite, who dwell in forest, but they be all shave as well, man as woman, and take it for a shameful thing to wear any hair. so we see that oneself, same fashion of live, be receive in one place and reject in another, which be familiary evident unto we in many other thing. in our region of these part, where we see manner and fashion of live all contrary, yea, sometime under one and the same prince chap x, of the form, colour, stature and activity, of the savage and incident of the fly in those western part and why the american be not black, etc. among all the form of live and bodily creature, that of man be the fair and the most perfect, which be very decent both to the creature and to the creator. see that man be place in this world to command all that be here beneath. but although that nature endeavour herself always to do good notwithstanding, she be sometime short and force in her action. and thereof it come that we have monster and ugly thing, contrary to the ordinary rule of other. yea, even sometime after that nature have do her office, we help by our art to render that which she have make ridiculous and misshapen, as for example, the brasilian be bear as fair as the common sort of man, but come out of the womb they be make deform in squize of their nose, which be the chief part wherein consist the beauty of man. true it be that as in certain country the brasilian be short nose, they praise the long nose, in other the hawk nose. so among the brasilian it be a fair thing to be flat nose, as also among the moor of africa, which we see to be all of the same sort and with these large nostril, the brasilian be accustom to make themselves yet more deform by art, make great hole in their cheek and under the low lip for to put therein green stone and of other colour, of the bigness of a tester, so that those stone be take away. it be a hideous thing to see those people. but in florida and every where on this side the tropic of cancer, our savage be general, goodly man as they be. in europe, if there be any short nose one, it be a rare thing they be. of a good stature and i have see no dwarf there, nor any that draw near to it. notwithstanding, as i have say elsewhere, in the mountain of the iroquois, which be beyond the great fall of the great river of canada, there be a certain nation of savage little man, valiant and fear every where, which be more often assailer than defender. but although that where we dwell, the man be of a good height, nevertheless, i have see none so tall as de poutrincourt, who tallness become, he very well. i will not speak here of the patagons, a people which be beyond the river of plate, who, pighafetta, in his voyage about the world, say to be of such a height that the tale among we can scarce reach to their girdle. the same be out of the limit of our new france. but i will willing come to the other circumstance of body, of our savage see the subject. call we thereunto. they be all of a olive colour, or rather tawny colour, like to the spaniard, not that they be so bear, but be the most. part of the time naked, they grease their body, the colour of the savage, the importunity of fly, and do anoint they sometime with oil for to defend they from the fly which be very troublesome, not only where we be but also through all that new world, and even in brasil, so that it be no wonder if belzebub, prince of fly, have there a great empire. these fly be the description of the fly of new france, of a colour draw towards red as of corrupt blood which make i to believe that their generation come but from the rottenness of wood. and indeed we have try that the second year be in a place somewhat more open. we have have few of they than at. the first, they can endure great heat nor wind, but otherwise, as in close dark weather, they be very noisome by reason of their sting, which they have long for. so small a body and they be so tender that if one touch they never so little they be squeeze. they begin to come about the 15. when the fly come in and when they go out of june and do retire themselves in the begin of september, be in the port in the month of august. i have not see nor feel any one whereof i do wonder see that the nature of the soil and of the wood be all one in september. after that this vermin be, go away there, grow other fly like unto. we but they be not troublesome and become very big. now, our savage, the savage remody against the fly. to save themselves from the sting of these creature, rub themselves with certain grease and oil, as i have say, which make they foul and of a tawnish colour. beside that, always they lie on the ground or be expose to the heat and the wind. but there be cause of wonder wherefore the brasilian and other inhabitant of america between the two tropike be not bear black as they of africa see that it seem it be the self-same case, be under one and the self-same parallel and like elevation of the sun. if the poet fable be sufficient reason for to take away this scruple, one may say that phaeton have do the foolish deed in conduct the chariot of the sun. only africa be burn and the horse set again in their right course before they come to the new world. but i have rather, from whence come the burn of africa? say that the heat of lybia be the cause of this blackness of man, be engender from the great land over which the sun pass before it come thither, from whence the heat be still carry more abundant by the swift motion of this great heavenly torch, whereunto the great sand of that province do also help, which be very capable of those heat special not be. water. from whence proceed the cool of america, with store of river as america be, which abound in river and brook as much as any province in the world, which do give perpetual refresh unto it and make the region much more temperate. the ground be also there more fat and retain better the dew of heaven, which be there abundant, and rain also for the reason abvesaid, for the sun find in the meeting of these land those great moistness. he do not fail to draw a good quantity of they, and that so much the more plentiful that his force be there great and marvelous, which make there continual rain. especial to they that have he for their zenith. i add one great reason: that the sun leave the land of africa give his beam upon a moist element by so long a course that he have good mean to suck up vapour and to draw together with he great quantity thereof into those part which make that the cause be much differ of the colour of these two people and of the temperature of their land: black hair. let we come to other circumstance and see that we be about colour. i will say that all they which i have see have black hair, some except which have abram colour hair, but of flaxen colour i have see none and less of red. and one must not think that they which be more southerly be otherwise, for the floridian and brasilian be yet black than the savage of new find land. the beard of the chin which our savage call be with they as black as their hair. they all take away the produce cause thereof, except the sagamo who for the most part have but a little membertou have more than all the other, and notwithstanding it be not thick as it be common with frenchman. if these people wear no beard on their chin, at the least the most part, there be no cause of marvel, for the ancient roman themselves esteem that that be a hindrance unto they do wear none until the time of adrian the emperor, who first begin to wear a beard, which they take for such a honour that a man accuse of any crime have not that privilege to shave his hair, as may be gather by the testimony of aulus gellius. speak a gel li 3 c. 4. of scipio, the son of paul. as for the inferior part, our savage, do not hinder the grow or increase of hair there. it be say that the woman have some there also, and according, as they be curious, some of our man have make they believe that the french woman have beard on their chin and have leave they in that good opinion so that they be very desirious to see some of they and their manner of clothing. by these particularity, one may understand that all these people have, general, lesser hair than we, for along the body they have none at all. so far be it, then, that they be hairy as some think. this belong to the inhabitant of the isle gorgade from. whence hanno, the carthaginien captain, bring two woman skin, which he do set up in the temple of juno for great singularity. but here be to be note what we have say that our savage people have almost all their hair black. for the frenchman in one and the self-same degree be not common. so the ancient author, the corporal quality of the ancient gaullois, polybius, caesar, strabo, diadore the cicilian and particular ammian marcellin, do say that the ancient gaullois have almost all their hair as yellow as gold. be of high stature and fearful for their ghastly look beside, quarrelsome and ready to strike a fearful voice, never speak but in threaten. at this time those quality be well. change for there be not now so. many yellow hair, nor so many man of high stature, but that other nation have as tall. as for the fearful look, the delicacy of this time have moderate that. and as for the threaten voice, i have scarce see in all the gaul, but the gascon and they of languedoc which have their manner of speech, some what rude which they retain of the goatish and of the spaniard by their neighbourhood. but as for the hair, it be very far from be so common black. the same author, ammian, say also that the woman of the gaul, who he note to be good shrew and to be too hard for their husband when they be in choler, have blue eye and consequent the man. and notwithstanding in that respect we be much mingle which make that one know not what the beauty of the eye, rareness to choose. for the beauty of eye. for many do love the blue eye and other love they green, which be also in ancient time most praise for among the sonnet of de couci who be in old time so great a clerk in love matter that song be make of it green eye be, praise the german have. keep better than we the quality which tacitus give they, likewise that which ammian recite of the gaullois. in so great a number of man say tacitus. there be but one fashion of garment. they have blue eye and fearful. their hair shine as gold and be very corpulent. pliny give the same bodily quality to the people of the taprobane. say that they have red hair, their eye blue and the voice horrible and fearful, wherein, i know not if i ought to believe, he consider the climate which be in the 8, 9 and 10. degree only, and that in the kingdom of calecute, far off than the equinoctial line, the man be black. but as for our savage concern, their eye they have. they neither blue nor green, but black for the most part, like to their hair, and nevertheless their eye be not small as they of the ancient scythian, but of a decent greatness, and i may say assure and true that i have see there as fair boy and girl as any can be in france. for as for the mouth, they have no big moorish lip as in africa and also in spain. they be well limbed, well bone and well body, competent, strong, and nevertheless we have many in our company who may have wrestle well enough with the strong of they, but be harden there will be make of they very good man for the war, which be that wherein they most delight, moreover monstrous. body, plin 6.. book cap 31.. among they, there be none of those prodigious man whereof pliny make mention, which have no nose in their face, or no lip or no tongue. item which be without mouth and without nose, have but two small hole, whereof one of they serve for to breath, the other serve in stead of a mouth. item. which have dog head and a dog for king item which have their head on the breast or one only eye in the midst of the forehead, or a flat, broad foot to cover their head when it rain, and such like monster. there be none also of they which our savage agohanna tell captain james quartier that he in this author, his second book chap. 25. have see in saguenay, whereof we have speak heretofore, if there be any blind with one eye or lame, as it happen sometime, it be a casual thing and come of hunt, be well compose. they can choose but be nimble and swift in run. we have speak heretofore of the nimbleness of the brasilian margaias and ouetacas nimbleness of body, lib 1. cap 25. but all nation have not those bodily disposition. they which live in mountain have more dexterity than they of the valley because they breathe a pure and clear air and that their food be better in the valley, the air be grosser and the land fat and consequent unholesom. the nation that be between the tropike have also more agility than the. other participate more with the fiery nature than they that be far off. this be the cause why pliny speak of the gorgone and isle gorgonides, which gorgone be, those of cap, say that the man be there so light of foot that scarce one may follow they by the eyesight in such manner that hanno the carthaginian can not catch any one of they. he make the like relation of the troglodyte, a nation of guinee who he say be call therothoen, because they be as swift in hunt upon the land as the ichthyophage, be prompt in swim in the sea, who almost be as seldom weary therein as a fish, and maffeus, in his history of the indies, report that the naire, so the noble. and warrior be call of the kingdom of malabaris, be so nimble and so swift- as it be almost incredible, and do handle so well their body at will that they seem to have no bone in such sort that it be hard to come to skirmish against such man, forasmuch as with this agility they advance and recoil as they list. but for to make themselves such they help nature and their sinew be stretch out. even sesame, a kind of corn, plini, li 18. ca 10. from seven year of age, which afterward be anoint and rub with oil of that which i say be know even in beast, for a spanish jennet or a barb be more lively and light in run than a roossin. or german curtal, a italian horse more than a french horse, now, although that which i have say be true. yet for all that, there be nation out of the tropike who, by exercise, hazael 2. samuel 2. and art come to such agility. for the holy scripture make mention of one hazael, a israelite, of who it witness that he be as light of foot as a roe buck of the field and for to come to the people of the north, the heruli be renown for be swift in run. by this verse of sidonius, and by this swiftness the german sometime trouble very much julius caesar. so our armouchiquois be as swift as grey hound, as we have say heretofore, and the other savage be. little inferior unto they, and yet they do not force nature, neither do they use any art to run. well, but as the ancient gaulois be addict to hunt, for it be their life and to war. their body be nimble and so little charge with fat that it do not hinder they from run at their will. their dexterity in swim, now, the savage dexterity, be not know only by run but also in swim, which they all can do, but it seem that some more than other. as for the brasilian, they be so natural in that trade that they will swim eight day in the sea if hunger do not press they, and they fear more that some fish shall devour they than to perish. through weariness, the like be in florida, where the man will follow a fish in the sea and will take it unless it be too big, joseph acosta. say so much of they of peru. and as for that which concern breathe, they have a certain art to sup up the water and to cast it out again, by which mean they will remain easy in it a long time. the woman likewise have a marvelous disposition to that exercise. for the history of florida, make mention that they can pass great river in swim, hold their child with one arm, and they climb very nimble up the high tree of the country. i will affirm nothing of the armouchiquois, nor of our savage, because i take no. heed to it, but it be very certain that all can swim very cunning. for the other part of their body they have they very perfect, as likewise the natural sense for membertou who be above a hundred year old, do see soon a shaloupe or a canow of the savage to come afar off unto port royal than any of we, and it be say, of the brasilian and other savage of peru hide in the mountain that they have the smell so good that in smell of the hand they know if a man be a spaniard or a french man. and if he be a spaniard they kill he without remission, so much do they hate he for the harm that they have receive of. they, which the abovesaid acosta do confess when he speak of. leave the indian acosta, lib 6. cap 1. to live according to their ancient policy. reprove the spaniard in that and therefore say he this be a thing prejudicial unto we because that they take occasion to abhor. we note that he speak of they who do obey they as man, who in all thing, whether it be in good, whether it be in evil, have always be and still be contrary unto they. chap 11 of the paint mark, incision and ornament of their body. it be no marvel if the lady of our time do paint themselves for of a long time and in many place that trade have have beginning, but it be reprove. in the holy book and make a reproach by the voice of the prophet, as when jeremy threaten the city of jerusalem, jerem 4. vers 30.. when thou shall be destroy, say he, what will thou do? though thou clothe thyself with scarlet, though thou deck thyself with ornament of gold, though thou painte thy face with colour, yet shall thou trim thyself in vain, for thy lover will abhor thou and seek thy life. the prophet ezech 23. vers 40. ezechiel make the like reproach to the city of jerusalem and samaria, which he compare to two lewd harlot who have send to seek out man, come from far and be come. they have wash themselves and paint their face and have put on their fair ornament. the 4. king, 9, vers. 30.. plin, lib 33.. cap 7. queen jesabel do the same, be for all that cast down out of a window and bear the punishment of her wicked life. the roman do ancient, paint their body with vermilion, as pliny say, when they enter in triumph into rome. and he add that the prince and great lord of ethiopia make great account of that colour, wherewith they whole paint themselves red also. both the one and the other do serve themselves therewith to make their god fair, and that the first expense which be allow of by the censor and master of account in rome be of the money bestow for to colour with vermilion the face of jupiter. the same author recite in another place, plin, lib 6.. cap 30.. that the anderes, mathites, mosagebes and hipporeens, people of libya do plaster all their body over with red chalk. brief. this fashion do pass as far as to the north, and thereof be come the name that be give to the pict, a ancient people of scythia, neighbour to the goth, who, in the year 87.. after the nativity of our lord jesus christ, under the empire of domitian, make course and spoil through the isle which lie north ward. where have find man who make they resistance? they return back without do any thing and live yet naked in their cold country until the year of our lord 370.. at which time, under the empire. of valentinian be join ammian, lib 26. and 27. with the saxon and scot they torment very much. they of great britan, as ammian marcellin recite, and be resolve to remain there as they do. they demand of the briton, which now be englishman, wife in marriage, whereupon be deny they retire themselves to the scot, of who they be furnish, upon condition that the masculine race of the king come to fail among they, that then the woman shall succeed in the realm. now these people be call pict because of the paint which they use upon their naked body, which say herodian. they will not cover with herod. 3. book any clothing for fear to hide and darken the fair paint they have set upon it. where be set out beast of all sort and print with iron instrument in such sort that it be unpossible to take they off, which they do, as solin say, even from their infancy, in manner that as the child do grow, so do grow those fix figure even as the mark that be grave upon the young pompion. the poet claudian do also give we many witness of this in his panegyriques, as when he speak of the emperor honorius, his grandfather, and in the gothicke war, not at as figure as this have be note by de belleforest and afterward by the learned savaron, upon the observation that sidoine de polignac make thereof, and albeit that our celtique poitevins call by the latin pictones be not. descend from the race of those, for they be ancient gaullois even in julius caesar time. nevertheless, i may well believe that this name have be give they for the same occasion as that of the pict, and as custom once, bring in among a people, be not lose. but by the length of many, age as we see. yet the folly of shrove-tuesday to continue. so the use of paint whereof we have speak remain in some northerly nation. for i have hear sometime le comte d'egmond tell that he have see in his young year they of brunzwich come into his father house with their face grease with paint and their visage all black, from whence peradventure this word of bronzer may be derive, which signify in picardy to black and general. i believe that all those northerly people do use paint when they will make themselves brave for the gelon and agathyrse nation of scythia, like the pict be of this fraternity and with iron instrument do colour their body. the englishman tertul veland, virgin jornandes got isidor, lib 16. cap 23.. likewise, then, call briton by the say of tertullian. the goth beside the iron instrument do use vermilion to make their face and body red. brief, it be a sport in the old time to see so many antike man and woman for there be find yet old picture which he that have make the history of the englishman voyage into virginia have cut in brass, where the pict of both sex be paint out with their fair incision and sword hang upon the naked flesh. as herodian describe they the west indian. this humour of paint have be so general in these part. there be no cause of mock if the people of the west indies have do and yet do the like, which be universal and without exception among those nation, for if any one of they make love, he shall be paint with blue or red colour and his mistress also. if they have venison in abundance or be glad for any thing, they will do the like general, but when that they be sad or plot some treason, than they overcast all their face with black and be hideous, deform, touch the body, our savage, apply no paint to it, which the brasilian and floridian do, the most part whereof be paint over the body, the arm and thigh with fair branch who paint can never be take. away because they be prick within the flesh, notwithstanding, many brasilian do paint only their body without incision when they list, and this with the juice of a certain fruit which they call genipat, which do black so much that though they wash themselves, they can be clean in ten or twelve day after they. of virginia, which be more of this side virginia, have mark upon their back, like to those that our merchant do put upon their pack by the which, even as the slave, one may know under what lord they live, which be a fair form of government. for this people see that the ancient roman emperor have use the like towards their soldier, which be mark with the imperial mark as saint augustine. saint ambrose and aug parmen, lib 2. cap 13. ambros, in the funeral oration of valentin other do witness unto we which thing constantine the great do likewise, but his mark be the sign of the cross which he make to be print upon the shoulder of his soldier, as himself say in a epistle which he write to the king of persia. report by theodoret in the ecclesiastical history, and the first christian as march under the banner of jesus christ, do take the same mark which they print in their hand or on the arm. to the end to know one another, special in time of persecution. as procopius say, expound this place of isaiah. one will say i be the lord and the other will call isai 44, 5. himself with the name of jacob, and the other will write with his hand i be the lord and will surname himself with the galat. 6. name of israel. the great apostle s paul do bear the mark of the lord jesus christ in his flesh, but it be yet after another manner, that be to say by the bruise which he have on his body of the stripe that he have receive for his name. and the hebrew have for mark the circumcision of the foreskin, by the which they be sequester from other nation and know for god people. but as for other bodily incision, such as ancient the pict, do. make and the savage do yet make at this day. they have be ancient, very express forbid in the law of leu 19, 28. deut 14.. 1. god give to moses for it be not lawful for we to disfigure the image and the form that god have give unto we. yea, the picture and paint have be blame and reprove by the prophet, as we have note elsewhere. and tertullian say that the angel which have discover and teach unto man their paint and counterfeit thing have be condemn of god. allege for proof of his say, the book of enoch prophecy. by these thing above recite, we know that this hither world have ancient be as much deform and savage as they of the west indies. but that which seem unto i most worthy of wonder be the nakedness of those people in a cold country wherein they delight even to harden their child in the snow, in the river and among the ice as we touch heretofore. in a other chapter speak of the cimbre and frenchman which also have be their chief strength in the conquest that they have make chap 12 of their outward ornament of the body, bracelet, carcanet, earring, etc. we that do live in these part under the authority of our prince and civilize commonwealth, have two great tyrant of our life, to who the people of the new world have not be yet. subject: the excess of the belly and the ornament of body and brief, all. that which belong to bravery, which, if we shall cast off it, will be a mean to recall the golden age and to take away the calamity which we see in most part of man. for he which possess much, make small expense, will be liberal and will succour the needy whereunto he be hinder will not only to maintain but also to augment his train and to make show of himself, very often at the cost of the poor. psal 14., ver 4. and 53. vers 5.. people who blood he suck, say the psalmist. i leave that which belong to food not be my purpose to speak plin lib 33. cap 11. of it, in this chapter, i leave also the excess which consist in household. implement. send the reader back to pliny, who have speak ample of the roman pomp and superfluity, as of vessel, after the furvienne and clodienne fashion of bedsteade, after the fashion and of table, all wrought with gold and silver emboss, where also he set out a slave, drusillanus, who be treasurer of the high spain cause, a forge to be make for to work, a piece of siluer-plate of five quintal weight, accompany with eight other all weigh half matuchias, be bracelet, carcanet and other jollity a quintal. i will only speak of the matachias, of our savage, and say that if we do content ourselves with their simplicity, we shall avoid many trouble that we put ourselves unto to have superfluity without which we may live. content because nature be satisfy with little and the covet whereof make we very often to decline from the right way and to stray from the path of justice. the excess of man do consist the most part in thing which i have say i will omit, which notwithstanding, i will not leave untouched if it come to purpose. but lady have always have this reputation to love excess in that which the first book padag, cap 10. concern the deck of their body and all the moralist who have make profession to repress vice have mention they wherethey have find a large subject to speak of. clement alexandrine make a long numeration of woman, trinket which he have the most part take out of the prophet isaiah. say in the end that he be weary to speak so much of it and that he marvel that they be not kill with so great a weight. let we take they then, by those part wherein they be, tert in the book of woman ornament, complain of tertullian, marvel of the audaciousness of man which set himself against the word of our saviour, which say that it be not in we to add any thing to the measure or height that god have give unto we. and notwithstanding, a lesson for the woman of our time. lady, endeavour themselves to do to the contrary: add upon their head cage, make of hair fashion like to loaf of bread, to hat, to pannier or to the hollowness of scutcheon. if they be not ashamed with this superfluous enormity, at least say he. let they be a shame of the filth which they bear. and not to cover a holy and a christian head with the leave of another head, adventure unclean or guilty of some crime and ordain to a shameful death. and in the same place, speak of they which do colour their hair. that be call crecuphantia, i see some say he who do change the colour of their hair with saffron. they be ashamed of their country and will be gauloise woman or german woman, so much do they disguise s cypr in the book of the virgin clothing s hierom epi to themselves, whereby be know how much red hair be esteem in the old time, and indeed the holy scripture praise that of david which be such, but to seek it out by art s cyprian and s jerome, with our tertullian, do say that the same do presage the fire of hell. now, our savage in that which consist in the borrow of hair, be not reprovable for their vanity stretch, not so far, but for the colour of they, for as much as when they be merry and paint their face, be it with blue. or with red. they paint also their hair with the same colour. now let we come to the ear, to the neck, to the arm and to the hand, and there we shall find wherewith to busy ourselves. these be part where jewel be easy. see which lady have learn very well to observe the first man which have have piety in. they have make conscience to offer any violence to nature and to pierce the ear for, to hang any precious thing at it. for none be lord of his own member to abuse, they so say, the civilian ulpian and therefore when the servant of abraham gens. 24. ver 22. go into mesopotamia for to find out a wife for isaac, and have meet with rebecca. he put upon her forehead a jewel of gold, hang down between her eye, and also bracelet of gold upon her hand. for which reason it be say in the proverb that a fair woman which lack discretion, prou 11. ver 22. be like a golden ring in a swine snout, but man have take more licence than they ought and have deface the workmanship of god in they to please their own fancy, wherein i do not wonder at the brasilian, of who we will hereafter speak, but of civilize people which have call other nation barbarous, but much more of the christian of this age, when seneca do complain, senec 7. of benefit of that which be in his time, the folly of woman, say he. have not make man subject enough, but it have be yet behooveful to hang two or three patrimony at their ear. but what patrimony they carry, say, tertullian island and farme-house upon their neck and great register in their ear contain the revenue of a great rich man, and every finger of the left hand have a patrimony to play withal final, he can compare they better than to condemn man that be in the cave of ethiopia, which the more they be culpable, so much the rich be they, because that the fetter and bolt wherewith they be tie be of gold. but he exhort the christian woman not to be such for as plin, lib 9, cap 35.. much as those thing be certain mark of. lasciviousness which do belong to those mischievous oblation of public unchastity. pliny, albeit he be a heathen, do no less abhor those excess. for our lady, say he, for to be brave, do bear hang at their finger those great pearl which be call in fashion of pearl, and have two of they, yea three, at their ear. yea, they have invent name to serve themselves therewith in their curse and troublesome superfluity, for they call bell, they which they carry in number at their ear, as if they do take pleasure to hear pearl jingle at their ear. and that which be more, the housewifely woman, yea, the poor woman also deck themselves therewith, say that a woman ought to go as seldom without pearl as a. consul, without his usher final, they be come so far as to adorn their shoe with they, and garter yea, their buskin be yet full and garnish therewith in such sort that it be not now any more question to wear pearl, but they must be make to serve for pavement, fol. 736.. to the end to tread, but upon pearl. the same author do recite that lollia paulina forsake by caligula in the common feast of mean man, be so overload with emerald and with pearl on her plin, lib 33.. c 3. head, her hair, her ear, her neck, her finger and her arm as well, in collar necklace as bracelet that all do shine at it and that she have of they to the worth. of a million of gold, the same be excessive. but she be the great princess of the world and yet he do not say that she do wear any on her shoe, as he do, yet complain in some other where that the dame of rome do wear gold on their foot. what disorder say he? let we permit the woman to wear as much gold as they will in bracelet, at their finger, at their neck, at their ear and in carcanet and bridle, etc. must they, for all that, deck their foot with it, etc. i shall never make a end if i shall continue this speech. the spanish woman in peru do go beyond that, for their shoe be set over with nothing but plate. of gold and silver and garnish with pearl. true it be that they be in a country which god have bless, abundant with all these riches. but if thou have not so much of they, do not vex thyself at it and be not tempt through envy. such thing be but earth. dig and purify with a thousand trouble, in the bottom of hell, by the incredible labour and with the life of man. like unto thou, pearl be but dew. receive within the shell of a fish which be pearl what they be, fish by man that be force to become fish, that be to say to be always dive in the depth of the sea and for to have these thing and to be clothe in. silk and for to have robe with infinite fold. we turmoil ourselves, we take care, which do shorten our day, gnaw our bone, suck out our marrow, weaken our body and consume our spirit. he that have meat and drink be as rich as all these, if he can consider it, and where those thing do abound, there, delight do abound and consequent vice. and to conclude, behold what god say by his prophet: they shall cast their silver out into the street and their gold shall be but dung and shall not deliver they in the ezec 7.. 19, day of my great wrath. he that will have further knowledge of the chastisement wherewith god do threaten the woman that abuse carcanet and jewel which have no. other care but to attire and deck themselves, go with their breast open their eye, wander and with a proud gate. let he read the three chapter of the prophet isaiah. i will not for all that blame the virgin which have some golden thing or chain of pearl or other jewel, also some modest vesture, for that be comeliness, and all thing be make for the use of man, but excess be that which be to be blame, because that under that very often be lasciviousness hide. happy be the people which not have the occasion to sin, do pure, serve god and possess a land which furnish they of that which be necessary for life. happy be our savage people if they have the full knowledge. of god, for in that case they be without ambition, vainglory, envy, avarice, and have no care of these bravery which we have now describe, but rather do content themselves to have matachias hang at their ear and about their neck, body, arm and leg. the brasilian, floridian and armouchiquois do make carcanet and bracelet, call bower in brasill and by we matachias, of the shell of those great sea cockle which be call vignols, like unto snail, which they break and gather up in a thousand piece, then do smooth they upon a hot stone until they do make they very small and have pierce they, they make they bead with they, like unto that which we call porcelain. among those bead they intermingle between space, other. bead as black as those which i jet have speak of to be white, make with jet or certain hard and black wood which be like unto it, which they smooth and make small as they list. and this have a very good grace. and if thing be to be esteem for their fashion as we see it, practise in our merchandise, these collar scarf and bracelet make of great periwinkle or porcelain, be rich than pearl notwithstanding, none will believe i herein so do. they. esteem they more than pearl, gold or silver, and this be that which they of bead much esteem. the great river of canada in the time of jam quartier, do call esurgin, whereof we have make mention heretofore, a word which i have have much ado to know and which belleforest, the cosmographer, understand not when he will speak of it. at this day they have not any more of they, or else they have lose the knowledge to make they, for they use mattachias very much that be bring unto they out of france. now, as with we, so in that country woman do deck themselves with such thing and will have chain that will go twelve time about their neck, hang down upon their breast and about their hand wrest and above the elbow. they also hang long string of they at their ear. which come down as low as their shoulder. if the man wear any, it will be only some young man that be in love. in the country of virginia, where pearl in virginia, copper, some pearl- be find, the woman do wear carcanet, collar and bracelet of they or else of piece of copper make round like small bullet which be find in their mountain where some mine of it be. but in port royal and in the confine thereof and towards new-found land and at tadoussac, where they have neither pearl nor vignol, the maid and woman do make mattachias with the quill or bristle of the porc-epine which they die with black, white and red colour as lively as possible may be for our scarlet have. no better lustre, excellent scarlet dye than their red dye. but they more esteem the mattachias which come unto they from the armouchiquois country and they buy they very dear. and that because they can get no great quantity of they by reason of the war that those nation have continual one against another. there be bring unto they from france mattachias make with small quill of glass, mingle with tin or lead, which be truck with they and measure by the for want of a ell and this kind of merchandise be in that country, that which the latin do call. they also make of they small square of sundry colour sow together which they tie behind on the little child hair. the man do not much. care for they, except that the brasilian do wear about their neck half moon of bone very white, which they call yaci of the moon name. and our souriquois do likewise wear some jollity of like stuff without excess. and they which have none of that do common carry a knife before their breast, which they do not for ornament but for want of pocket and because it be a implement which at all time be necessary unto they. some have girdle make of matachias, wherewith they serve themselves only when they will set out themselves and make they brave. the or soothsaiers do carry before their breast some sign of their vocation, as we will hereafter say. but as for the man of the armouchiquois, they have. a fashion to wear at their hand-wrest and above the ancle-bone of the foot, about their leg plate of copper fetterwise and about their waste girdle fashion with copper quill, as long as the middle finger file together the herodian, the 3. book length of a girdle, even just of that fashion, which herodian recite to have be in use among the pict whereof we have speak, when he say that they gird their body and their neck with iron, esteem that to be a great ornament unto they and a testimony of their great riches. even savage scot, as other barbarian do, to have gold about they. and there be yet in scotland, savage man which neither age nor year nor the abundance of man can yet reduce unto civility. and although that, as we have say, the man be not so desirous of matachias as the woman. notwithstanding, the man of brasill not care for clothing, take great pleasure to deck and garnish themselves with the feather of bird and do use those wherewith we use to fill our bed whereon we lie, and chop they as small as tear-cat, which they die in red with their brasill-wood, then have anoint their body with certain gum which serve they in stead of paste or glue. they cover themselves with those feather and make a garment at one clap, after the antic fashion which have make, say, john de leri in his history of america, the first of our man, that go thither to believe that the man which be call savage be hairy over all their body, which be nothing so for, as we have already say, the savage, in what part soever, have lesser hair than we. they of florida do also use this kind of down, but it be only about their head to make themselves more ugly. beside this that we have, say, the brasilian do make frontlet of feather which they tie and fit in order of all colour, those frontlet be like in fashion to those racket or periwig which lady use in these part, the invention whereof they seem to have learn of those savage, as for they of our new france, in the day that be of solemnity and rejoice among they. and when they go to the war they have about their head, as it be, a crown. make with long hair of a ellan or stag, paint in red, past or otherwise, fasten to a fillet of leather of three finger breadth, such as james quartier say he have see with the king, so do he call he and lord of the savage which he find in the town of hochelaga. but they do not use so many ornament of feather as the brasilian, which make gown of. they cap, bracelet, girdle and ornament for their cheek and target upon their loin, of all colour which will be more tedious than delightful to specify, since it be a easy matter for every one to supply the same and to imagine what it be. chap 13 of marriage have speak of the savage garment, deck, ornament and paint. it have seem good unto i to marry they to the end, the generation of they be not lose, and that the country remain not desert. for the first ordinance that ever god make be to increase and multiply and every creature capable of generation to bring forth fruit according to his kind and to this be in the gloss of the talmud in the treaty of idolatry, the end. to encourage young folk that do marry the jew have a custom ancient to fill a trough with earth in the which, a little before the wedding, they do sow barley, and the same be spring, they bring it to the bridegroom and the bride say: bring forth fruit and multiply as this barley which bring forth soon than all other seed. now to return to our savage. many think, as i believe, that they be some log of wood or imagine a commonwealth. of plato do demand if they have any marriage and if there be any priest in canada to marry, they- wherein they seem to be very raw and ignorant canadians- captain james quartier speak of the marriage of the canadians in his second relation- say thus: they observe the order of marriage, save that the man take two or three wife and the husband be dead. the woman do never marry again, but do mourn for his death all their life long and do daub their face with coal beat to powder and with grease, the thickness of a knife, and thereby be know to be widow. then he go further. they have another bad custom with their daughter, the prostitute of maiden, for be come to be. marriageable, they be put all in a stew house, abandon to all comer until they have find out a match. and all this have we see by experience, for we have see the house as full of these maiden as be a school of boy in france. i will have think that the say james quartier, have touch this prostitute of maid, add somewhat of his own. but the discourse of monsieur champlein, which be but six year since, do confirm the same thing unto i, save that he speak not of assembly which keep i from souriquois, contrary it. but among our souriquois there be no such thing. not that these savage have any great care of continency and virginity, for they do not think to do. evil in corrupt it. but whether it be by the frequentation of frenchman or otherwise, the maid be ashamed to do any unchaste thing public. and if it happen that they abandon themselves to any one, it be in secret. the first book, ch 4. moreover, he that will marry a maid, it behoove he to demand she of her father, without who consent, she shall be none of. he, as we have already say heretofore and bring forth the example of one that have do otherwise. and if he will marry, he shall sometime make love, not after the manner of the esseen who as josephus, josephus of the war of the jew, lib 2., cap 12. say: do try the maiden, by the space of three. year before they marry they, but by the space of six month or a year, without abuse of they will paint his face that he may seem the fair and will have a new gown of bever or otter or of some thing else, well garnish with matachias guard and lay over in form of parchment, lace of gold and silver, as the goth do use heretofore. it be meet, moreover, that he show himself valiant in hunt and that they know he able to do some thing, for they do not trust in a man mean which be none other than that which he get by his day labour, not care any wise for other riches than hunt, unless our manner make they to have a desire. of it, the prostitute of the maiden in brasil. the maiden of brasill have liberty to prostitute themselves, assoon as they be able, for the same even as they of canada. yea, the father do serve for pander to their daughter and they repute for a honour. to communicate they to the man of these part that go thither to the end to have of their race. but to consent unto it will be too damnable a abomination and that will deserve rigorous punishment, as indeed for the slackness of man. god have punish this vice in such wise that the fore have be communicate in these part, even to they that have be too much addict, after christian wench and woman, the pox, by the sickness which be call the pox, which, before the discovery of those land, be unknown in europe, for these people be very much subject to it, and even they of florida, but they have the guayac, the esquin, and the sasafr guayac, esquin, sassafras, annida, as tree very sovereign for the cure of that leprosy, and i believe that the tree who wonder we have recite be one of these kind. one may think that the nakedness of this people will make they more lecherous, but it be not so, for as the chastity of the ancient german and of the savage of new france, caesar, give the germane this commendation that they have in their ancient, savage life such a continency as they repute it a thing most vile for a youngman to have the company of a woman before he come to the age of 20. year, and in their own disposition also, they be not move thereunto, although that pell-mell all together, man and woman, yongue and old, do bathe themselves in river. so also may i say for our savage that i never see among they any unseemly gesture or unchaste look, and i dare. affirm that they be lesser give to that vice than we in these part. i attribute the cause thereof partly to this: their nakedness and chief to the keep bare of their head, from whence the matter of generation have his original. partly to the want of hot spice of wine and of meat that do provoke to that which be primary sign: itiphalle tobacco, contrary to venus of unclean desire, and partly to the frequent use which they have of tobacco who smoke, dull the sense and mount up to the brain, hinder the function of venus. john de leri praise the brasilian for this continency. nevertheless, he add that when they be angry they call sometime one another, that be to say so, domite, whereby it. may be conjecture that this sin reign among they, as captain laudonniere say it do in florida, and that the floridian love the feminine sex very much, and indeed i have hear that, for to please the woman, the more they busy themselves very much about that, which be the primary sign of unclean desire, whereof we speak even now, and that they may, the better great store of ambergris do it, they furnish themselves with ambergris, whereof they have great store, which first they melt at the fire, then iniect it with such pain that it make they to gnash their tooth, even so far as to the bone sacrum, and, with a whip of nettle or such like thing, make that idol of maacha to swell. which king asa make to be, consume into ash and cast it into the brook cedron. on the other side, the woman use certain herb and endeavour themselves as much as they can to make restriction for the use of the say ityphalle and to give either party their due contract of marriage. let we return to our marriage, which be better than all these roguery. the contracter do not give their faith between the hand of notary, nor of their soothsaiers, but, simple, do demand the consent of the parent. and so they do every where. but here be to be note that they keep, and in brasill also, three degree of consanguinity, degree of consanguinity in the which they be not use to contract marriage. that be, to wit, of the son with the mother, of the father with his daughter and of the brother with the sister. these except all thing be permit. as for dowry, there be no mention of it. also, when any divorce happen, the husband be bind to nothing and although that as it have be say there be no promise of loyalty give before any superior power. nevertheless, in what part soever the wife keep chastity and seldom be any find that break it. yea, i have hear oftentimes say that in yield the savage woman, in the venereous action, the duty to the husband, they make themselves oftentimes to be constrain, which be rare in these part. for the gaulloise woman be renown by strabo to. be good porter, i mean fruitful and breeder, and contrariwise, the fruitfulness of the woman of the gaul. i do not see that the people do abound as in these part, although that they all labour for generation and that polygamy be ordinary with they, which be not among the ancient gaullois, nor among the german, though they be a more rustic people. true it be that our savage do kill one a other daily and be always in fear of their enemy, keep watch upon their frontier. this frigidity of venus bring a admirable and incredible thing among these woman, and which be not to be find even among the wife of the holy patriarch jacob, which be that, although they be many, wife to one husband. for polygamy be receive, through all that new polygamy world notwithstanding, there be no jealousy among they, which be in brasill, a hot country as well as canada. but as for the man, they be in many place very jealous, and if the wife be find faulty, she shall be put away or in danger to be kill by her husband. and in that, as for the spirit of jealousy, there need not so many ceremony as those that be do among the jew recite in the number 5., vers 12. and so follow s aug against the 19 book, chap 26. book of number. and as for divorcement, not have the use of letter, they do it not in writing, in give to the wife a bill. sign by a public notary, as s augustin. do note, speak of the say jew, but be content to cell to the parent and unto she that she provide for herself and then she live in common with the other. until that some body do seek after she. this law of put away have be receive almost among all nation, exexcept among the christian which have keep this precept of the gspell, that which god have, join together. let no man put a sunder which be most expedient and less see the commentor of ben-sira, scandalous and very wise. do ben-sira answer who be say to have be nephew to the prophet jeremy? be ask of one who have a lewd wife how he shall do by she. gnaw, say he, that bone which be fall to thou. as for the widow, i will not affirm that which james quartier have say of they in general, but i will say that where we have be, they stain their face with black when they please, and not always. if their husband have be kill, they will not marry again nor eat flesh until they have see the revenge of his death. and so we have see the daughter of membertou to practice it, who after the war make to the armouchiquois hereafter describe: do marry again. except in that case, they make no other difficulty to marry again. when they find a fit match sometime. our savage have many wife will give one of they to their friend if he have a desire to take she in marriage and shall be thereby so much disburden touch. maiden that be loose if any man have abuse of abominable whore. doom among the infidel. a note for the english magistrate in virginia, numb 25., 11., 12., 13. they, they will tell it at the first occasion and therefore it be bad jest with they, for the chastisement ought to be very rigorous against they that mingle the christian blood with the infidel. and for the keep of this justice. villegagnon be praise even by his enemy and phinees, the son of eleazar, the son of aron, because he be zealous of the law of god and appease his wrath, which be about to exterminate the people for such a sin. have the covenant of perpetual priesthood promise to he and to his posterity. chap 14: the tabagie the savage. do say tabaguia, that be to say a feast. the ancient have say that be without ceres and bacchus. venus be cold. have then marry our savage. it be meet to make dinner ready and to use they after their own manner. and for to do it, one must consider the time of the marriage, for if it be in winter, they will have venison from the wood. if it be in the spring time or in summer, they will make provision of fish. as for bread, there be no talk of it from the north of newfoundland until one come to the country of the armouchiquois, unless it be in what savage country? have come truck with frenchman for who they tarry upon the sea shore, sit on their tail like ape as soon as the spring time be come and receive in exchange for their skin- for they have no other merchandise- biscuit, bean, peasen and meal. the armouchiquois and other nation more remote beside hunt and fish, have wheat, call maize and bean, which be a great comfort unto they in time. of necessity, they make no bread with it, for they have. neither millnor oven, and they can knead it otherwise than in stamp it in a mortar and in gather those piece the best they can. they make small cake with it which they bake between two hot stone. most often they dry this corn at the fire and parch it upon the plin, lib 18. cap 2. and 10. coal, and after that manner do the ancient italian live, as pliny say, and therefore one must not so much wonder at these people see that they which have call other barbarous have be as barbarous as they. if i have not recite heretofore the manner of the savage tabagi or banquet, i will make here a large description. but i will only say that when we go to the river saint john be, in the town of ouigoudi- so may i well call a place, enclose, replenish with people we see in a great thicket, 80. savage, all naked except the middle part, make tabaguia with meal they have of we, whereof they have kettle full every one, have a dish make with the bark of a tree and a spoon as deep as the palm of one hand or more, and with this they have venison beside. and here be to be note that he which entertain the other do not dine but serve. the company, as very often the bridegroom do here in france, the woman do not eat with the man. the woman be in a other place apart and do not eat with the man. wherein may be note a bad use among those people which have never be use among the nation of these part, special the gaullois and germains which have admit the woman not only in their banquet but also in their public counsel, special with the good condition of the woman among the gaullois. see yet hereafter, in the 16. chapter of the constancy of woman. the gaullois, after they have pacify a great war which arise between they and do decide the controversy with such equity as plutarch say that thereby ensue a great love than ever before. and in the treaty that be make with annibal, be enter into gallia to go against the roman itw as say that if the carthaginienses have any difference against the gaullois, it shall be decide by the advice of the gaulloise woman. it be not so in rome, where their condition be so base that by the law voconia, the very father can not make they to inherit more then of the one three part of his good, and the emperor justinian forbid they in his decree to accept the awardship which have be defer. unto they which show either a great severity against they or a argument that in that country they have a very weak spirit, and after this sort be the wife of our savage yea, in worse condition in not eat, with the man in their tabagy. and notwithstanding, it seem unto i that their fare be not in their feast, so delicate, which ought not to consist only in eat and drink, but in the society of that sex which god have ordain unto man for to help he and to keep he company. it will seem to many that our savage do live very poor in not have any season in those few mess that i have name, but i will reply that it be not caligula. what man have raise rome to her greatness. nor heliogabalus, nor such like that have raise the roman empire to his greatness. neither be it that cook who make a imperial feast all with hog flesh, disguise in a thousand sort, nor those likerish companion who, after they have destroy the air, the sea and the land, now know what to find more. to assuage their gluttony, go a seek worm from the tree yea, do keep they in mew and do fatten they for to make thereof a delicate mess. but rather it be one curius dentatus, who do eat in wooden dish and do scrape radish by the fire. side item: those, good husbandman, the manner of live of the ancient roman and other nation who the senate do send for from the plough for to conduct the roman army, and, in one word, those roman which do live with sodden food after the manner of our savage, for they have not the use of bread but about 600. year after the foundationof the city, have learn, in tract of time, to make some cake, gross dress and bake under the embre or in the oven. pliny, author of this report, plin, lib 18. ca 8., 10. 11.. say, moreover, that the scythian, now tartar, do also. live with sodden food and raw meal, as the brasilian, and nevertheless they have always be a warlike and mighty nation. the same say that the arympheens, which be the moscovite, do live in forest, as our savage do, with grain and fruit which they gather from the tree, without mention neither of flesh nor of fish. and indeed the profane author do agree that the first man do live after that manner, to wit of corn, grain, pulse, acorn and mast. from whence come the grerke word phagein, to wit to eat some particular nation, and not all have fruit, as pear be in use among the argive, fig with the athenian, almond with the mede, the fruit of can with the ethiopian, the cardamuin with the. persian, the date with the babylonians, the treffle or three leave grass with the egyptian. they, which have have none of those fruit have, make war against the beast of the wood and forest, as the getulians and all the northern man yea also, the ancient german notwithstanding. they have also meat, make of milk. other ichthyophage, aethiopian do live of grasshopper, dwell upon the shore of the sea or lake and river, live on fish and be call ichthyophage. other live of tortese, be call chelonophage. part of the aethiopian do live of grasshopper which they salt and harden in the smoke in great quantity for all season. and therein do the historian of this day agree with pliny, for there be sometime cloud of they, that be to say such infinite number that they hide the cloud, and in the east, the food of s john baptist s. hierom 2. book against jovian s augnstin, upon the 14. chap to the roman, vers 15.. niceph, li 1. cap 14. ammian, l 18. likewise, which destroy all the field so that nothing remain unto they to eat, but those grasshopper which be the food of saint john baptist in the desert, according to the opinion of saint jerome and augustine, although nicephorus think that they be the tender leaf of the top of tree, because that the greek word achride signify both the one and the. other. but let we come to the roman emperor best qualify ammian mercellin, speak of their manner of life, say that scipio, aemiliar, metellus, trajan and adrian do content themselves ordinary with the meat of the camp, that be to say with bacon, cheese and bruvage. if then our savage have sturgeon, salmon and other fish, venison and fish abundant, i do not think they ill furnish for many time. we have receive of they quantity of sturgeon, of salmon and other fish, beside their venison and bever, which live in pond and live partly on the land, partly in the water. at least one laudable antropophage thing be know in they: that they be not man eater as the scythian have be aforetime and many other nation. of these part of the world and as yet be at this day. the brasilian, cannibal and other of the new world bred the inconvenience which be find in their manner of life, be that they have no bread. indeed, bread be a food very natural for man, but it be easy to live with flesh or with fish, then with bread only if they have not the use of salt- the most part of the world do use none. it be not altogether necessary, and the principal profit thereof consist in preserve whereunto it be altogether proper notwithstanding. if they have any, to make some provision, they will be more happy than we. but what time be hard for the savage. for want of that, they sometime suffer some need, which happen when the winter be too mild or the latter end of the same, for than they have neither venison nor fish, as we will declare in the chapter of hunt, and be then constrain to feed upon the bark of tree and on the pare of skin and on their dog, which, upon this extremity, they do eat. and the history of the floridian say that, in extremity they eat a thousand filth, even to the swallow down of coal and to put earth in their spoon meat. true it be that in port royal there be always shell fish, so that in all case one can die there for hunger. but yet have they one superstition, superstition of the savage and of the christian, plin, lib 22. ca 2. that they will not feed on mussel and they can allege no reason for it, no more than our superstitious christian which will not be thirteen at a table, or which fear to pair their nail on the friday, or which have other scrupulosity. true apish-toy, such as pliny recite a good number of they in his natural history notwithstanding, in our company, see we to eat of they, they do the like, for we must say here, by the way, that they will eat no. unknown meat, but first they must see the trial of it by the savage, suspicious other. as for beast of the wood, they eat of all they, the wolf, except. they also eat egg, which they go gather along the shore of water, and they do lade their canoe with they when the goose and outarde have do lay in the spring time, and they use all as the sobriety and gluttony of the savage, well, they that be old as new. as for modesty, they use it be at table with we and eat very sober, but at home, in their own house, as the brasilian, they stretch out their belly as much as they can and do not leave eat as long as there be any. meat, and if any of we be at their tabagie, they will bid he do as they do. notwithstanding hercules ox eater, i see no gluttony like to that of hercules, who alone do eat whole ox and do devour one from a paisan call diadamas, by reason whereof he be call butheve or buphagos oxe-eater. and without go so far, we see, in the country of these part, great gluttony. then, that which one will impute to the savage, for in the diet of ausbourg be bring to the emperor charles the five, a great whoreson which have eat a calf and a sheep and yet be not full. and i do not know that our savage do waxfatte or that they have great belly, but that they be nimble and swift, like to our ancient gaullois and high alleman or german, who by their agility do trouble very much. the roman army. the meat of the brasilian, the food of the brasilian, be serpent, crocodill, toad and great lizard, which they esteem as much as we do, capon, leveret and coney. they also make meal of white root which they call maniel, have the leaf of paeoniamas and the tree of the height of the elder tree, those root, as big as the thigh of a man, which the woman do crumble very small and eat they raw, or else they make they to seethe well. in a great earthen vessel, stir it always as the comfit-maker do make sugar plum. they be of very good taste and of easy digestion but they be not fit to make bread because they dry and burn themselves and always return into meal. they have also with this mahis or maize which grow in two or three month after it be sow and that be a great succour unto they, but a strange prostitution. they have a curse and a unhuman custom to eat their prisoner after they have well fat they yea a most horrible thing they give they in marriage, the fair maiden. they have put about their neck as many halter as they will keep he moon, and when the time be expire, they make wine of the say maize and root wherewith they make themselves drink. call all their friend then he that have, take he, knock he on the head with a club and divide he into piece and make carbonnadoe of he which they eat with a singular pleasure, above all meat in the world. commonalty of life. furthermore, all savage general do live every where in common: the most perfect and most worthy life of man. see that he be a sociable creature, the life of the ancient golden age which the holy apostle will have restore again, but be to establish the spiritual life they. hospitality can not execute that good desire. if it happen then that our savage have venison or other food, all the company have part of it. they have this mutual charity which have be take away from we since that mine and thou have come into the world. they have also hospitality, a virtue peculiar to the ancient gaulois, according to the witness of parthenius in his erotigue of caesar saluian and other, who do constrain traveller and stranger to come into their house and there to take their refresh. a virtue which seem to have conserve herself only with the nobility and gentry, for among the other sort we see she very weak and at the point of death. tacitus, give the same praise to the german. say that with they all house be open to stranger and there they be in such assurance that, as if they be sacred, none dare do they any injury. charity and hospitality which be mention levit 19, ver 34.. in the law of god who say to his people: the stranger which sojourn among you shall be unto you as he which be bear among you, and you shall love he as yourselves. for you have be stranger in the land of egypt. so do our savage, which stir up with a human nature, receive all stranger except their enemy, who they accept in their commonalty of life, of drink. but we have speak enough of eat. let we now speak of drink. i know not whether i ought to place among the great blindness of the west indian to have abundant the most excellent fruit that god have give unto we, and they know not the use thereof, for i see that the plin, lib 18.. cap 4. ancient roman be a long time, as pliny say, without either vine or vineyard, and our gaulloas do make beer, the use whereof be yet frequent in all gallia, belgica. and this kind of drink do the egyptian also use in former time, as say diodorus, who attribute the invention thereof to osiris. notwithstanding after that, the use of wine be come among the roman, the guallois take so good a taste in it in the voyage that they make there with. their army that they continue afterward the same strabo way, and afterward the italian merchant do draw much money from the gaullois with their wine that they caesar bring thither. but the german know their own nature: subject to drink more than be needful will have none bring to they, for fear that be drink they, tacitus, may be a pray to their enemy and content themselves- wine forbibden among the german- with beer, and notwithstanding because the continual drink of water engender crudity in the stomach and thereby great indisposition, the nation have common find better the moderate use of wine which psal 104. vers 16. 17. have be give of god to rejoice the heart as bread, for to strengthen he, as the psalmist say, and the apostle s paul himself, do council his disciple timothy to use it by reason of his infirmity for wine, say oribasius, recreate oribasius in the first book, of thing commodious and easy, ch 12. and quicken our heat, whereby, by consequence, the disgesture be make better and good blood be engender and good nourishment through all the part of the body where the wine have force to pierce, and therefore they which be weaken by sickness do recover by it a strong being and do likewise renew by it a appetite to their meat. it break the sleame, it purge choleric humour by the urine and with his pleasant odour and lively substance, glad the heart of man and give strength to the body. wine, take moderate, be the procurer of all those goodeffect, but if it be drink unmeasuable, it produce effect quite contrary. and plato will plate in his timoeo to show forth in one word the nature and property of wine: that which warm, say he, body and soul be that which be call wine the savage, which have no use of wine nor of spice, have find out another mean to warm the same stomach and in some sort to break so many crudity, proceed from the fish that they eat, which otherwise will extinguish their natural heat. it be the herb which the brasilian do call petun, that be to say tobacco, tobacco, the smoke whereof they take almost every hour, as we will declare more at large when we come hereafter to speak of that herb, then, as in these part, one drink to another. in present the glass to he to who one have drink, which be do in many place. so the savage willing to feast some body and to show he sign of amity, after they have well take of that smoke, they present the tobacco pipe to he that they like best. which custom to drink one to another be not new nor particular to the fleming and german. for holiodorus in the holiodor first book, 1. cha and 3.. book ch 3. aethiopian history of chariclea witness that the same be a custom altogether use in the country whereof he speak, to drink one to the other in token of friendship and because it be abuse and man be appoint to constrain, they that will not pledge assuerus, king of the persian at a banquet that he make to all the principal ester. 1. ver 8. lord and governor of his country, do forbid by a express law to force any and do command that every one shall be serve after his own will. the egyptian do use no force but not withstand. they drink up all, and that by great devotion, for after they have find out the invention to apply paint and matachiz upon silver. they take great delight to see their god anubis plin lib 33.. cap 9 paint in the bottom of their cup, as pliny say. our savage canadians, souriqnois and other be far from these delight and have nothing but the tobacco speak of by we to warm their stomach after the crudity of water and to give some smatch to the mouth. have that in common with many other nation that they love, that which be bite, such as the, say, tobacco be which even as wine or strong beer take, as it be say, in smoke, make giddy the sense and in some sort procure sleep, so that this word drunkard be among they, by this word, the floridian drink, escorken, as well as among we, the. floridian have a certain sort of drink, call casine, which they drink all hot, which they make of certain lean of tree, but it be not lawful for every one to drink of it, but only to the paraousti and to they that have make proof of their valour in the war. and this drink have such virtue that as soon as they have drunken it they become all in a sweat which be pass, they be feed for 24. hour by the nourish, the drink of the brasilian force of the same as for they of brasil, they make a certain kind of drink which they call caou-in, with root and a grain, call mil, which they put to seethe and soften in great earthen vessel make. in the manner of a tub over the fire and be soften. it be the office of the woman to chaw it all and to set they again to seethe in other vessel. then have leave all to be, settle and skim. they cover the vessel until that it must be drunken. and this drink be as thick as lees, after the manner of the of the latin and of the taste of sour milk, white and red as our wine be, and they make it in every season because that the say root do grow there at all time. furthermore, they drink this cou-in somewhat warm, but with such excess that they never depart from the place where they make their feast until that they have drink. all out, though there be of the same a tun for every one, so that the fleming high duchman and swisser be but yongue novice in that trade. in regard of they, i will not speak here of the cider and pery of normandy, nor of the hidromels, the use whereof by the report of plutarch be long before the invention of wine. plutar in the 4. of the symposiaq, cha 5. see our savage use. none of it, but i have think good to mention the fruit of the vine. by reason that new france be plentiful, furnish therewith chap 15 of their dance and song. when the belly be full than come mirth, say the proverb. it will not be then unfit to speak of dance. after feast, for it be also say of the people of israel that after they have well fill their belly. exod 31. ver 6. 19. dance: institute in divine thing they arise for, to play and dance about their golden calf. dance be a thing very ancient among all people, but it be first make and institute in divine thing, as we do now, mark a example of it. and the canaanite, who do worship the fire, do dance about it and sacrifice their child unto it. which manner of dance be not invent by the idolater, but rather by the people of god. for judge 21. v 19. 21. 2. king 6. c. we read in the book of judge that there be a solemnity to god. in silo, where the maiden come to dance at the sound of the. and david bring back the ark of covenant into jerusalem, go before it in his shirt, dance with all his strength. as for the heathen, they have follow this fashion for plutarch in the life of nicias, say that the town of greece have a custom every year to go into dellos for to celebrate the dance and song in the honour of apollo. and in the life of lycurgus the orator, say that he do ordain a very solemn dance in the pyree unto the honour of neptune, with a wager of a hundred crown price to the best dancer and to the second of 80.. crown and the muse dance to the three. of 60.. the muse, daughter of jupiter, do love dance, and all they that have speak of they make we to go seek for they. upon the mountain parnassus, where, say they, they dance at the sound of apollo harp, the college of the. as for the latin, the same plutarch say, in the life of numa pompilius, that he do institute the coledge of the salian, which be priest, dance and gambol and sing song in the honour of god mars, when that a buckler of brass fall miraculous from heaven, which be a gage from that god for the conservation of the empire, ancyle, and that buckler be call ancile. but for fear that it shall be steal away, he cause 12. other to be make. a like name, ancilia, which be carry in the war, as we do heretofore our oriflamme, and as the labarum, emperor constantine, do, the labarum, now, the foremost of those salian that do lead the other in the dance, festus, lib 16.. be call, that be to say first dancer, say festus, who take from that the name of the french-people which be call salian because they do love to dance, to skip and to gambole. and of salic law, these salian be come the law, which we call salique, that be to say law of dance. so then, to come again to our purpose, the dance have be first institute for holy thing, whereto i arrian of the gest of alexander. dance profitable for health, will add. the testimony of arrian, who say that the indian, which do worship the sun rise, do not think to have due salute he, unless their song and prayer be accompany with dance. this kind of exercise be since apply to another use, that be to say for the government of health, as plutarch say in the treaty for the same, so that socrates himself, howsoever precise and reform, take pleasure therein, for which cause he desire to have a house large and spacious, as xenophon write in his bancquet and the persian xenophon duris do express use, the same as duris write in the seven of his history. but the delight, lasciviousness and disorder do convert they since to their own use, and the dance have serve for. proxenete and broker of unchastity, as we find it, but to much, whereof we have testimony in the gospel, where we find that it cost the life of the great that ever arise among man, which be saint john baptist. and arcesilaus say very well that dance be venom sharp than all the poison that the earth bring. plutar in the 7. of the sympose, quest 5. forth, for as much as by a certain incitement they insinuate into the soul, wherein they communicate and imprint voluptuousness and delectation which the body proper do affect. all savage do dance. our savage and general, all the people of the west indies have time out of mind the use of dance, but lascivious pleasure have not yet so far prevail. against they as to make they dance at the pleasure thereof, a thing which ought to serve as a lesson to the christian. the use, then, of their dance be for four end: either to please their god- let who will call they devil it be all one to i, as we have mark in two place before- or to cheer up some body, or to rejoice themselves of some victory, or to prevent sickness. in all these dance, they sing and make no dumb show. as in those dance whereof the pythienne oracle speak, when he say it behoove that the beholder understand the dance stage player, although he be dumb, and that he hear. he, though he dombe gesture, do not speak. but as in delos, they do sing to the honour of apollo the salian, to the honour of mars. likewise the floridian do sing to the honour of the sun, to who they attribute all their victory. not for all that, so filthy as orpheus, inventor of the heathenish of who saint gregory nazianze mock himself in a oration. because that, among other folly, in a a foolish, filthy song to jupiter himme, he speak of jupiter in this wise o glorious jupiter, the great of all, the god which be resident in all sort of dung, as well of sheep as of horse and mule, etc. and in another himme that he make to ceres, he say that she discover her thigh for to submit her body to her paramour and to make herself to be till our souriquois. do make. also dance and song to the, the song of the christian to god, honour of the devil, which show they their game and that they think to gratify he, whereof one need not to marvel, because that we ourselves that be better instruct. do sing psalm and song of praise to our god. for that he give we our daily food and i do not. cicero, in the oration for murena, see that a man who be a hunger have any great lust either in sing or dance. say cicero also, when they will feast any body, they have no fair the dance and song of the souriquois, savage gesture in many place. then dance as in like manner if any one make they a feast. for all thanks give. they betake themselves to dance as it have be see. sometime when monsieur de poutrincourt do give they their dinner, they do sing song of praise unto. he say that he be a brave sagamo who have make they good cheer and which be their good friend, which they do comprehend. very mystical under these three word. i say mystical for i can never know the proper signification of every of these word. i believe that it be of the ancient language of their forefather, which be out of use, like as the old hebrew, be not the jew language at this day and be already change in the time of the apostle. praise of the brave captain. they sing also in their common. tabagy, the praise of the brave captain and sagamo that have kill many of their enemy, which be practise ancient in many nation and be practise yet among we at this day and be find to be approve. and of decency in the holy scripture, in the canticle of deborah, after the overthrow, judge cha. 5. of king sisara, and when young david have kill the great goliath, as the king do, return victorious into jerusalem, the woman come out of all the town and meet he 1. of samuel, 18. ver 6., 7. with tabret, rebeck and timbrel dance and sing merry, say by course and answer one another, saul have slay his thousand and david his ten thousand. atheneus, gaullois, diodo atheneus. in the 6. book. of the banquet of the wise say that the gaullois have poet name bard, who they reverence very much. and those poet do sing the deed of virtuous and famous man, but they do write nothing in public because that writing make man slothful and negligent in learning. notwithstanding charolus magnus be of a other opinion for the song of the frenchman, he cause song to be make in the vulgar tongue, contain the deed and act of the ancient and command that the child shall be make to learn they by heart and that they shall sing they to the end, that their memory shall remain from father to son and from race to race, and by this mean other shall be stir up to do good. and to write the action and deed of valiant man. i will further say here, by the way, that the lacedaemonian, plutar in the life of lycurgus lacedaemonian, have a certain manner of dance which they use in all their feast and solemnity, which do represent the three age, to wit the time past by the old man, which do say, in sing this burden, we be heretofore valorous. the present by the young man, in the flower of their youth, say we be so now, at this time. the future by the child, who do say we shall be so too when our turn come. what be the savage dance. i will not busy myself in describe all the fashion of the gambol of their ancient predecessor. but it suffice, i, to say that the dance of our savage be make without remove from one place, and notwithstanding they be all in a round, or very near, and do dance with vehemency, strike with their foot upon the ground and lift themselves up as in half a leap. and as for their hand, they hold, they close, and their arm in the air in form of a man that threaten with a motion of they. as for the voice, there be but one that sing, be it man or woman. all the rest do and say haet, het, as some that breathe out with vehemency. and at the end of every song they all make a loud and long exclamation, say heeee. for to be more nimble, they common, put themselves stark naked, because that their gown make of skin do hinder they, and if they have any of their enemy head or arm they will carry they about their neck. dance with this fair jewel which they will sometime bite, so great be their hatred, even against the dead. and for, to end this chapter as we begin it, they never make any tabagie or feast, but that there be a dance after it. and afterward, if the sagamo be dispose, according to the state of their affair, he will make a oration of one, two, the oration of the sagamo of. one, 2. or 3. hour continuance or three hour continuance, and at every demonstration ask the advice of the company. if they approve his proposition, every one will cry out aloud: he, e, e, e, in sign of allow and ratify of the same, wherein they give he very attentive audience, as we have see many time, and also when that de poutrincourt do feast our savage memberton after dance, make a oration with such vehemency that he make the world to wonder, show the courtesy and witness of friendship that they receive of the frenchman, what they may hope of they hereafter and how much their presence be profitable, yea necessary unto they, because that they do sleep in security and have no fear of their enemy. etc. chap 16, of the disposition of their body and of their physic and cheirurgie. we have say in the last chapter that dance be profitable for the preservation of health also. it be one of the cause why our savage do delight so much in it. but they have yet some other preservative which they use very often, that be to say sweat, whereby they prevent sickness, for they be sometime touch with this phthisie, wherewith the man of captain phthisie, first book, chap 16.. james quartier and mont be annoy, which, notwithstanding, be but seldom, but when it happen. they have in canada the tree call annedda, which annedda i term the tree of life for the excellency thereof wherewith they heal themselves, and in the country of the armouchiquois they have sassafras, and in florida, esquine, sassafras, esquine, the souriquois, which have none of these kind of wood, do use sweat, as we have say, and they have their for physician who, for that purpose, do dig in the, the savage stow or hot house ground and make a pit which they cover with wood and big, flat stone over it. then they put fire to it by a hole and the wood be burn. they make a raft with pole which they cover with all the skin and other cover which they have. so as no air enter therein. they cast water upon the say stone which be fall in the pit and do cover they. then they put themselves under the same raft and with motion, the aoutmoin sing and the other say, as in their dance: haet, het, het. they put themselves into a sweat if they happen to fall into sickness, for one must die in the end. the aoutmoin do blow with exercise upon the member grieve, do lick it and suck it, and if that be not sufficient, he let the patient blood scotch his flesh with the point of a knife or some thing else. if they do not heal, they always. one must consider that our physician do not always cure their patient neither. the physician in florida. in florida, they have their jarvar who continual carry a bag full of herb and drug hang about their neck to cure the sick, which be for the most part sick of the pox, and they blow upon the part affect until they draw the very blood from it. the brasilian physician, the brasilian physician, be name among they page. they be not their caraibe or soothsayer who, in suck, as aforesaid, they endeavour themselves to heal disease. but they have one sickness which be uncurable, which they call proceed of lechery, which, notwithstanding little child sometime have even as they in these, our part, that be full of pock-hole, which come unto they, as i think, from the corruption of their parent. this contagion do convert itself into boil broad than the thumb, which disperse themselves throughout all the body and even as far as the face and be touch therewith. they bear the mark thereof all their life time, foul than leper as well brasilian as other nation. as for the sick body, his diet, they give he not any thing unless he ask for it, and without take any other care of they, they cease not to make their noise and hurly-burly, before they drink, skip and sing according to their custom, the souriquois cheirurgeon. as for the wound, aoutmos of our souriquois and their neighbour do lick and suck, they use the bever kidney, whereof they put a slice upon the wound and so do heal itself. with that the ancient german say tacitus, not have yet the art of cheirurgie. do the like. they bring, say he, their wound to their mother and to their wife, who be not afraid neither to number they nor to suck they yea. they bring they victual to the camp and exhort they to fight valiant so that sometime army ready to run away have be restore by the prayer of the woman, open their breast to their husband and afterward they willing use the woman advice and counsel wherein they esteem some holy thing to be. and among the christian many not care for god no long than they receive good gift of he, do seek for the heal of their disease by charm and help of. witch. so among our savage the aoutmoin, have some sore in cure, inquire often of his devil to know whether he shall heal or no, and have never no answer, but doubtful by if or- and there be some of they which sometime do make incredible cure as to heal one that have his arm cut off, which notwithstanding, i know not why. i shall find it strange when i consider what write in his discourse of his embassy into turkey. the four epistle come near unto buda, the bassa send some of his household servant to meet we with many herald and officer, but among the rest a fair troop of young man on horseback, remarkable for the novelty of their order. they have their head bare. and shave upon the which they have make a long, bloody slash, and thrust diverse feather of bird within the wound, from whence the very pure blood do trickle down. but instead of shrink at it, they go lift up their head with a laugh countenance before i march some foot man. one of they have his arm naked and hang down on his side. both which arm above the elbow be thrust quite through with a knife that stick fast in they. another be naked from his head to the navel, have the skin of his-backe so jagged up and down in two place achwart which he have make to pass a hatchet of arm, which he do carry in scarf, wise as we will do a. cuttleaxe. i see another of they who have fix upon the crown of his head a horse shoe with many nail and of so long continuance that the nail be so fix and fast in the flesh that they stir not. we enter into buda in this pomp and be bring into the bassa house with who i treat of my affair, all this youthly company, little care for their wound, be in the low court of the house and as i be a look on they, the bassa, ask of i what i think of it all. well, say i, except that these man do with the skin of their body that which i will not do with my coat, for i will seek to keep it. whole the bassa laugh and we take our leave. the trial of the savage constancy. our savage do very well sometime make trial of their constancy, but we must confess that it be nothing in regard of the thing above. rehearse for all that they do be to put burn coal upon their arm and to suffer their skin to burn so that the mark thereof do remain there for ever, which thing they do also on other part of the body and show these mark to say that they, roman, have a great courage. but the ancient mutius scevola do much more than that: burn, courageous, his arm in the fire after he have miss the kill of king porsenna. if this be of my purpose, i will declare the custom lacedaemonian of the lacedaemonian, who do make every year a feast to the honour of diana, where the young boy do show their trial by whip of themselves. item the custom of the persian, ancient persian, who worship the sun which they call mithra. none can be receive to that fraternity until he have give his constancy to be know by fourscore kind of torment of fire, of water, of fast, of solitariness and other thing. but let we return to our savage physician and chierurgeon, although the number of they be but small. yet so it be that the hope of their live do not consist whole in healthful country that trade. for as concern the ordinary sickness, they be so rare in those part that the verse of ovid may be very well apply unto they in say, for these do also live a great age, which be common seven score or eight score year long life, and if they have our commodity to live by, forecast and industry to gather up in summer for the winter, i believe they will live above three hundred year, which may be conjecture by the report that we have make heretofore of a old man in florida who have live that great age in such sort that it be no particular miracle of that which pliny say that the pandorian do live 200. year or that they of taprobane be lively and nimble at a 100 year old. for membertou be above a 100 year old and yet have not one white hair on his head and so ordinary be the other and that which be more in every age. they have all their tooth and go bareheaded, not care at least to make any hat of their skin as the first do that use they in these part of the world, for they of peloponesus, the first original of hat, the lacedaemonian do call a hat cynen, which julius pollux say to signify a dog skin, and of these hat do yet the northerly people use at this day. but they be well, fur concord be a cause of long. life. that which also procure the health of our savage be the concord which they have among they and the small care they take for the commodity of this life, for the which we torment and vex ourselves. they have not that ambition which, in these part, gnaw and fret the mind and spirit and fill they with care, make blind man to go to the grave in the very flower of their age and sometime to serve for a shameful spectacle to a public death. i dare also, and that very well, attribute the cause of this disposition and long health of our savage to their manner of life which be after the ancient fashion, without curiosity. for every one. do grant that sobriety be the mother. of sobriety, health, and although they sometime exceed in their tabagy or feast, they diet themselves afterward well enough, live very often eight day more or less with the smoke of tobacco, not return to hunt until they be a hungry, and that beside be nimble. they want no exercise some way or other. brief, there be no mention among they of those short age which do not out pass forty year, which be the life of certain people of aethiopia, as pliny say, which do live of locust or grashoper. multitude of officer be the sign of a corrupt estate. salt in the smoke. also, corruption be not among they, which be the foster mother of physician and of magistrate, and of the multiplicity of officer and of public extortioner which be create and institute for to give order unto it and to cut off the abuse. they have no suit in law, the plague of our life, to the prosecute whereof we must consume both our year and our mean. and very often one can obtain justice, be it either by the ignorance of the judge to who the case be disguise, or by his own malice, or by the wickedness of a attorney that will sell his cliant. and from such affliction do proceed the tear, fretfulness and desolation which ecclesiast 30.. at the end of the chapter, bring we to the grave before our time. for sorrow, say the wise man. have kill many and there be no profit in it. envy and wrath shorten the life and care bring old age before the time. but the joy of the heart be the life of man, and a man, gladness prolong his day. chap 17: the exercise of the men. after health, let we speak of exercise, which be the maintainer and protector thereof. our savage have no base. exercise all their sport, be either the war or hunt, whereof we will speak several, or in make implement fit for the same as caesar, witness of the ancient german, or a dance- and of that we have bow and arrow already speak- or in pass the time in play. they make then bow and arrow. bow which be strong and without fineness. as for the arrow, it be a admirable thing how they can make they so long and so straight with a knife, yea, with a stone. only where they have no knife, they feather they with the feather of a eagle tail, because they be firm and carry themselves well in the air, and when they want they, they will give a beaver skin yea. twain for one of those tail for the no wise trade to sell any weapon to they head, the savage that have traffic with frenchman do head, they with iron head which be bring to they, but the armochiquois and other more remote have nothing but bone make like serpent tongue. or with the tail, sicnau or seekanauk, a fish in virginia, of a certain fish call sicnau, the, which fish be also find in virginia by the same name- at least the english historian do write it. this fish be like to a cravise, lodge within a very hard shell, which shell be of the greatness of a dish, a long tail, likewise hard for it, be shell and sharp his eye, be upon his back and be very good meat. mases or club shield. they also make wooden maze or club in the fashion of a abbot, staff for the war and shield which cover all their body, as do our ancient gaullois. as for the quiver that be the woman trade fish line. hemp for fish. the armouchiquois which have hemp, do make fish line with it, but we that have not any manure of the ground do truck, for they with bowe-string, make with gut, racket, frenchman, as also for fish hook to bait. for fish only, they make with gut, bowstring and racket which they tie at their foot to go upon the snow, a hunt, and for as much as the necessity of life do constrain they to change place often, whether it be for fish, for every place have his particular fish which come thither in certain season. they have need of horse in their remove for to carry their stuff, those horse be canowes, canowes, or boat and small boat make of bark of tree which go as swift. as may be without sail. when they remove, they put all that they have into they: wife, child, dog, kettle, hatchet, matachiaz, bow, arrow, quiver, skin and the cover of their house. they be make in such sort that one must not stir nor stand up when he be in they but crouch or sit in the bottom, otherwise the merchandise will overturn. they be four foot broad or thereabouts in the midst, and be sharp towards the end, and the nose be make rise for to pass commodious upon the wave. i have say that they make they of the bark of tree for the keep, whereof in measure, they garnish they within with half circle of cedar wood, a wood very supple and pliable, whereof noah. ark be make and to the end they leak not. they cover the seam which join the say bark together, which they make of root with the gum of firre-tree. they also make some with willow, very proper, which they cover with the say gum of firre-tree, a thing which witness that they lack no wit. where necessity press, they, many nation of these part, have have the like in time past. if we seek in the holy scripture we shall find that moses mother, see, she can hide her child. no, exod 2. v 3. long she do put he in a little chest, that be to say in a little canowe for noah ark. and this same small chest be one same word: (@), (@), (@). (@)- (@) in hebrew. make of reed and canowes, make of willow, daub it with slime and pitch, then put the child in it and lay it among the bulrush by the shore of the river. and the prophet isaiah threaten the aethiopian and assyrian. woe, say he unto the country which send by sea ambassador in paper vessel. or rush upon the water, say paper canowes, messenger, go you quick, etc. the egyptian neighbour to the aethiopian have, in the time of julius caesar, the same vessel, that be to say of paper, which be a rind of a bark of a tree. witness lucan in these lucani 4. book, verse plin, lib 4. ca 16.. but let we come from the east and south to the north. pliny say that ancient the englishman and scotishman fetch tin in the land of mictis with canowes of willow sew in leather solin say as much. and isidore, isidor li 19, cap 1. which call this fashion of canowes, carabus, make of willow and environ with ox hide all raw. which say he, the saxon pirate, do use who with those instrument, be swift in flight. sidoneus de polignac speak of sidon carm 7.. the same saxon say, and lembo, the savage of the north, towards labrador, have certain small canowes of thirteen or fourteen foot long and two foot broad, make of this fashion all cover with leather yea over head and there be but one hole in the midst where the man put himself on his knee. have half his body out so that he can perish. furnish his vessel with before he come in it. i, the original of the siren fable, dare believe that the fable of the siren or marmaiden come from, that the dunce esteem that they be fish, half man or woman, as they have feign centaur by. see man on horseback. canowes of hollow tree. the armouchiquois, virginian, floridian and brasilian do make another. fashion of canowes, for have neither hatchet nor knife except some copper one. they burn a great tree very straight at the foot and fall it down than they take such length as they will and use to burn it in steed of saw it scrape the burn part of the tree with stone and for the hollow of the vessel they do continue the same. in one of those boat six man will sail with some stuff and will make long voyage, but these kind of canowes be heavy than the other. long voyage in the wood. they also make long voyage by land as well as by sea and they will undertake a thing uncredible: to go twenty or thirty yea forty league through the wood. without meet with any path or inn and without carry any but tobacco and a tinder box, with their bow in hand and their quiver at their back. and we in france be much trouble when we have never so little lose our way in some great forest. if they be press with thirst, they have the skill to suck the tree from whence they be common birch tree do trickle down a sweet and very pleasant liquor, as myself have try it sometime. in the country where they use tillage, as in that of the armouchiquois, and far off the man do make a infinite quantity of earthen pot, like in fashion to pottery of earth night cap in which they see their meat, flesh, fish, bean. corn, pompion, etc. our souriquois do so ancient, and do till the ground. but since that frenchman do bring unto they kettle, bean, peason, biscuit and other food, they be become slothful and make no more account of those exercise. but as for the armouchiquois, which have yet no commerce with we, and they that be further of they till the ground, do fatten it, the till of the ground german, with shell of fish. they have their family distinct and their plot of ground about. they, contrary to the ancient german which, as caesar say, have not any field proper, neither do they dwell above a year in one place, have almost no other, live then milk, flesh and cheese. think it too tedious a thing for. they to tarry a whole year of purpose for to reap a harvest which be also the savage, be not laborious, the humour of our souriquois and canadians who, and all other as we must needs, confess be nothing laborious. but in hunt for the manure of the ground, the woman do take the great pain in it. who, among they, do not command at home and do not make their husband to go to the market as they do. in many province in these, our part and especial in the country of jealousy, the floridian tillage sow twice a year. as for the tillage of the floridian- hear what laudomniere say of it- they sow their corn twice a year, that be to say in march and in june, and all in one and the self same land, the say mill from the time that it be sow until it be ready to be reap, be not above three month in the ground. the six other month they suffer, plough the ground to rest. they also gather fair pompians and very good bean. they do not dung their land, only when they will sow they set the weed on fire which be grow during the six month and burn they all. they till their land with a instrument of wood which be make like to a broad pickaxe. wherewith they dig their vine. in france, they put two grain of mill together. when the land be to be sow, the king command one of his man to call his subject together every day to come to labour, during the which the king cause great store of that drink whereof we have speak, to be make, in the season that the corn be gather, it be all carry into the common storehouse where it be distribute to every one according to his quality. they sow, but so their live. during the winter, much as they think will serve they for six month, and that very hardly, for during the winter, they retire themselves three or four month of the year into the wood where they make little. house of palm leave to lodge themselves in, and there do live of acorn, of fish which they take, of oyster, of stag turkey, hen and other beast that they take the town of the savage and see they have town and house, or cibane, i may yet well put this among their exercise. as for the town, they be multitude of cabin, make somewhat pyramid wise, other in form of a cottage, other like garden bower, compass as it be, with high pale of tree, join one near the other, even as i have set out the town of hochelaga in my map of the great river of canada. furthermore, one must not marvel of this shape of a town which may seem simple. see that the fair town of moscovie have no better enclosure. the ancient lacedaemonian will have no other wall. then their courage, the beginning of town, and valour before the general 'slud cain do build a town which he name henoch. i believe it be no otherwise. make then those of our savage. but he do feel the wrath of god which pursue he and have, lose all assurance, gen 4. 20. man have but cabin and pavilion, and as it be, write of jabal, the son of hada, that he be the father of the dweller in tabernacle and of shepherd. after the flood they build the tower of babel. but this be folly. tacitus. write of the manner of the german say that in his time. they have not any use, neither of lime nor stone. the english briton, much less our gaullois, be then from many age before come to civility, but yet the first builder in the gaulles, be they along time in the begin, without any other habitation than cabin, and the first gaullois king that build town and house, be magus, who succeed his father, the wise samothe, three hundred year after the flood, eight year after the nativity of abraham and the one and fifty year of the reign of ninus. as the chaldean do say, and although they have building, they lie, notwithstanding, on the ground, upon skin like to our savage, and as in the ancient time, the name be give, which contain the quality and act. of person, magus be so call because he be the first builder, for in the scythian and armenian language from whence our gaullois come, short after the flood, and in the ancient gaullois tongue magus signify a builder, say the same author. and so have john annius of viterbe. very well, mark from whence come our name of the, the gaullois philosopher diog laert, in the begin of the life of philosopher game of the savage town of rothomagus, neomagus, noviomagus. so likewise, samothe signify wise, and the old gaullois philosopher be before the druid call samothean, as diogenes laertius report, who confess that philosophy do begin from they who the greek vanity do call barbarous. i will add here, for a exercise of our savage, their play. at hazard, whereunto they be so addict that sometime they play out all that they have and james quartier write the same of they of canada in the time that he be there. i have see a kind of game that they have but not think then to write this treaty. i take no heed to it. they put some number of bean, colour and paint of the one side in a platter and have stretch out a skin on the ground. they play there upon strike with the dish upon this skin, and by that mean the bean do skip in the air and do not all fall on that part that they be colour and in that consist the chance and hazard. and, according to their chance, they have a certain number of quill make of rush which they distribute to he that win for to keep the reckon. chap 18 of the woman exercise the woman be give in the begin unto man, not only for to aid and assist he, but also to be the store house of generation. their first exercise, then, that i will attribute unto she, after that she be marry, be to bring forth goodly child and to assist her husband in this work, for this be the end of marriage and therefore be she very well and fit. call in hebrew: (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). the woman be call pierce, that be to say pierce, because it be meet that she be. pierce if she will imitate our common mother, the earth which in the spring time, desirous to bring forth open her bosom for to receive the rain and dew which the marriage requisite for planter in a new possess land. great encouragement for the honest mind that go to inhabit in those part heaven pour upon she. now. i find that this exercise shall be requisite for they that will inhabit new france to bring forth there store of creature which shall sing the praise of god. there be land enough to nourish they, so that they be willing to work and their condition shall not be so miserable as it be with many in these part which do seek to employ themselves and do not find wherein. and albeit they find it yet very often be their labour unrewarded and unfruitful. but in that country, he that will take pleasure and, as it be, sport himself with sweet labour, he shall be assure to live out of bondage and that his child shall yet be in better state than himself. be the first exercise, then, of the woman be to work in generation, which be a labour so fair and so meritorious. ^ tim 2. 15. that the great apostle s paul, to consolate they in the pain they take in that labour, have say that the woman shall be save through bear of child if they remain in faith and love and holiness, with modesty, that be to say, if she instruct they in such sort that the godliness of the mother may be know by the good institution of the child. this first and chief article be mention. let we come to the other, our savage woman. after they have bring forth the fruit of this exercise by i know not what practice do observe without law, that which be levit 12. purification command in the law of moses, touch purification, for they shut up themselves a part and know not their. husband for thirty yea, forty day, during which time they do not leave for all that from go here and there where they have business, carry their child with they and take care for they here above chap 14.. i have say in the chapter of the tabagie that among the savage, the woman be not in as good a condition as they be ancient among the gaullois and german, for by the report of james quartier himself, they labour more than the man, say he, whether it be in fish, be it in till or in any thing else, and notwithstanding they be neither force nor torment, but they be neither in their tabagy nor in their counsel and do the servile business for want of servant. if there be any venison kill, they go to flay it and to fetch it, yea be it, three league off, and they must find it out by the only circumstance that shall be describe to they by word. they that have prisoner do also employ they to that and to other labour, as to go fetch wood with wife, which be folly in they. to go fetch, dry and rot wood very far off for to warm they, although they be in the midst of a forest, true it be that the smoke be very irksome to they, which it may be be the cause thereof- touch their small exercise. when the winter do approach, they prepare that which be necessary to oppose themselves against this rigorous. adversary and make mat of rush wherewith they garnish their cabin mat and other to fit upon, and all very artificial yea also colour their rush. they make partition in their work, like to they that our gardener do make in their garden knot, with such measure and proportion as nothing be find amiss therein. and because that the body, the curry and dress of skin must also be clothe, they curry and supple the skin of bever, stag and other as well as can be do here. if they be little, they few many together and make cloak, sleeve, stocken and shoe upon all which thing. they make work which have a very good grace item. they pannier, make pannier of rush and root for to put. their necessity in as corn, bean, peason, flesh, fish and other thing. they make also purse of leather, upon which purse they make work worthy of admiration, with the hair of porckepine colour, with red, black, white and blue, which be the colour that they make so lively that we seem in nothing to be comparable to they. they also exercise dish themselves in, make dish of bark to drink and put their meat in, which be very fair, according to the stuff, item: scarf, necklace and bracelet, which they, matachia, and the man do wear, which they call matachia, be of their make. when the bark of tree must be take off in the spring-time or in summer, therewith to cover their house, it be they which. do that work, as likewise they labour in the make of canowes and small boat, when canowes they be to be make, and as for the till of the ground in the country where they use it, they take therein more pain then the man who do play the gentleman and have no care, but in hunt or of war, and notwithstanding all their labour yet common, they love their, the woman, love to their husband, husband, more than the woman of these, our part, for none of they be see to marry again upon their grave, that be to say present after their decease, but rather do tarry a long time, and if he have be kill, they will eat no flesh, nor will condescend to. second marriage until they have see the revenge thereof, make a testimony both of true love, which be scarce find among we, and also of chastity. also, it happen very seldom that they have any divorcement, but such as be voluntary, and if they be christian they will be family with who god will dwell and be well. please, as it be, meet it shall be so for to have perfect contentment for otherwise fair observation upon the name of the man and the woman, aben hezra, on the 2. cha of the prover 17. verse: marriage be but torment and tribulation, which the hebrew, great speculator and searcher into holy thing, by a subtle animadversion, have very well note. for aben hezra say that in the name. of the man, (@), (@), (@), (@), (@) and of the woman, (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), the name of god jah be contain. and if the two letter which do make this name of god be take away, there shall remain these two word, (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), which do signify fire, and fire that be to say that god be take away, it be but anguish, tribulation, bitterness and grief. chap 19 of their civility, math 15. v 2. one must not hope to find in our savage that civility which the scribe and pharisee do require, in the disciple of our lord, for which, their over great curiosity, he make they such answer as they deserve, for they have: bring in ceremony and custom. which be repugnant to god commandment which they will have straight to be observe. teach ungodliness under the name of piety, for if a wicked child do give and put into the common box of the temple that which appertain to his father or to his mother, they for to draw this profit. do justify this wicked son against the commandment of god, who have, above all thing, commend and command the child obedience and reverence towards they that have, bring they into the world which be the image of god, who have no need. god will have no oblation make of another body good of our good, and do not accept the oblation that be make unto he of the good of another. the same scribe and pharisee do also bring in a civility to wash hand, which our lord do not blame, but in as much as they make the not observe of it to be a great sin, savage. i have no cause to praise our savage in those kind of civility, for they wash not themselves at meal unless they be monstrous, foul and not have any use of linen. when their hand be greasy they be constrain to wipe they on their hair or upon their dog hair. they make no curiosity of belch be at meal, which the german and other in these part do as well. as they not have the art of joiner work they dine upon the broad table of the world spread. a skin where they eat their meat and sit on the ground. the turk gaullois also do the same. our ancient gaullois be no better than they who diodorus say, do use the same, spread on the ground, dog skin or wolf skin upon which they do dine and sup make themselves to be german. serve by yongue boy the german. be more rude, for they have not learning philosophy nor so much delicateness as our nation, which caesar say to have have- the use of a thousand thing by the mean of their navigation on the sea, whereby they help the border people of germany who use some small civility and more humanity than the other of their nation by reason of the communication they have with our people, savage arrive in some place. as for the compliment that they use one towards another, come from far. they may very brief be recite, for we have many time see savage stranger to arrive in port royal, who be land without any discourse, go straight to membertous cabin where they sit down, take tobacco and have well drunken of. it do give the tobacco-pipe to he that seem to be the worthy person, and after consequent to the other, the savage salutation. then, some half a hour after, they do begin to speak when they arrive at our lodging, their salutation, be ho, ho, ho. and so they do ordinary, but for make of courtesy and kiss of hand, they have no skill, except some particular which endeavour themselves to be conformable unto we, and seldom come they to see we without a hat. to the end they may salute we with a more solemn action: the floridian salutation. the floridian do make no enterprise before they assemble their counsel diverse time, and in these assembly, when they arrive, they salute one another. the paraousti who laudonniere. call king, place himself alone upon a seat which be high than the other where one after another they come to salute. he and the elder begin their salutation, lift up twice both their hand as high as their face, say ha he, ya, ha ha, and the other do answer ha ha. and they sit every one upon seat which be about the counsel chamber. now, whether the salutation ho ho do signify any thing or no, for i know no particular signification in it yet, notwithstanding it be a salutation of joy, and the only voice ho ho can be make, but almost in laugh, testify thereby that they be glad to see their friend. the greek have never have any thing else in the greek. salutation, plato in charmide, the salutation of the latin and hebrew, their salutation, but a witness of joy, by their word chair, which signify be you merry, which plato dislike be of advice that it be better to say sophroney, be you wise. the latin have have their, which be a wish of happiness sometime also salve, which be a wish of health to he who one salute. the hebrew have the verb shalum, which be a word of peace and of health, according unto which our saviour do command math 10.. 12. his apostle to salute the house where they shall enter in, that be to say, according to the interpretation of the common translation, to pronounce peace unto they. which salutation of peace be from the first age among the people of god. for it be write that jethro moses, father in law, come to rejoice with he for the grace that god have do unto he and unto his people by the deliver of they from the land of egypt, moses go, exod 18. 7. out to meet his father in law and have bow himself, kiss he and they salute one another with word of peace. we frenchman do say: guard that be god, keep you, god give you good morrow. item. good evening notwithstanding, there be. many who, ignorant, do say, that be to say i give or bid you good morrow, good evening, a manner of speech which will be more decent by desire and pray to god that it be so angel, have sometime. salute man, as he who do say to gedeon, most strong and valiant man, the lord be judg 6. 12.. with thou but god, salute no body, for it belong to he to give salvation and not to wish it by prayer. salutation in sneeze. the heathen have yet a civility in salute, they which do sneeze, which custom we have, keep of they. and the emperor tiberius, the sad man in the world, say pliny will be salute in sneeze, although he be in his coach, etc. all those ceremony and institution say the same author be come from the opinion of they which think that the god will assist our affair. out of these word may be easy conjecture that the salutation of the heathen be prayer and vow for health or other felicity that they make to the god, the ancient fashion, in the begin of letter, and as they do such thing in meeting. so do they use the word vale, be you well, be you in health, as we use to say in english: fare you well at the departure. yea. in letter and epistle, which also they begin always with these word: if you be in health, it be well. i be in senec, ep 15.. health but seneca say that this good custom be break. in his time, as at this day among we, it be to write clownish, like to put in the begin of a letter: god keep you in health which be in time past a holy and christian manner of writing. in stead of this vale which be often find in the holy scripture, we say in our language of a god be with you, a god be with you wish not only health to our friend, but also that god do keep he but our savage have not any salutation at the departure, but only the a which they have learn of we. and to finish this discourse where we begin, they be to be commend for their obedience, that they yield the savage obedient to their parent, to their father and mother, to who commandment they obey do, nourish they in their old age and defend they against their enemy. and here with we, oh, miserable thing there be often see the child suit in law against their parent. book of the fatherly power be see publish, concern the child, withdraw from their obedience. a unworthy act for child that be christian. to who may be apply the speech tit lib 1. decad 1, deut 27. 16. of turnus herdonius recite in titus: say that there be no speedy decide and take up of any matter then between the father. and the son, a thing that may be dispatch in few word, for if he will not obey and give place to his father, undoubted evil shall come to he, and the word of god, which be a thunder build, say: curse be he who honour not his father and his mother, and all the people shall say amen. chap 20 of the virtue and vice of the savage. virtue like unto wisdom, disdain, not to be lodge under a mean roof. the northerly nation be the last that have be bring to civility, and notwithstanding before that civility they have, do great action. our savage, although they be naked, be not void of those virtue that be find in man of civility for every one, say aristotle. have in he even from his arist 6, eth, chap 13.. birth, the principle and seed of virtue. take then the four virtue by their spring, we shall find that they participate much of they for first concern, fortitude and courage. they have thereof as much as any nation of the savage. i speak of our souriquois and of their ally, in such sort that ten of they will always adventure themselves against twenty armouchiquois. not that they be altogether without fear, a thing which the fore-allege aristotle do reproach to the ancient celtien-gaullois. the ancient gaullois be without fear, who fear nothing, neither the motion of the earth nor the tempest of the sea. say that this be the property of a hairebraine fellow. but with that. courage they have. they esteem that wisdom give unto they much advantage. they fear then, but it be that which all wise man do fear, and that be death which be terrible and dreadful, as she that rifle all through which she pass. they fear shame and reproach, but this fear be cozen germane to virtue. they be stir to do good by what it be that the savage do honour, for as much as he among they be always honour and get renown to himself that have do some fair exploit. have these thing proper unto they. they be in a mediocrity which be the very seat of virtue. one point: make this virtue of force and courage unperfect in they that be, they be too revengeful. and in that they put their sovera contentment, which incline, savage, revengeful, to brutishness. but they be not alone, for all those nation, how far soever they may stretch themselves from one pole to the other, be infect with this vice. the christian religion only may bring they to reason, as in some sort she do with we. i say in some sort because that we have man, very unperfect, as well as the savage temperance. temperance be another virtue consist in the mediocrity in thing that concern the pleasure of the body. for as for that which concern the mind, he be not call temperate or untemperate who be move with ambition or with desire to learn, or that employ his time in toy, and for that. which concern the body. temperance or untemperance be not apply to all thing that may be subject to our sense, unless it be by accident, as to colour, to a picture, item to flower and good, item, to song and hear of oration or comedy, but rather to that which be subject to feeling and to that which smell, seek by art, as in eat and drink, in perfume, in the venerean act, to tennis play, to wrestle, to run and such like. now, all these thing do depend of the will which be, so it be the part of a man to know how to bridle his appetite. our savage have not all the quality requisite for the perfection of this virtue. for, as for meat, we must acknowledge their untemperance when they have wherewith, and they do eat perpetual yea so far as to rise in the night to banquet. but see that in these our part, many be as vicious as they, i will not be to rigorous a censurer of they. as for the other action, there be no more to be reprove in they, then in we yea. i will say less in that which concern the venerean action whereto they be little addict, not comprehend, here heretofore, chap 13.. for all that, they of florida, and in hot country of who we have speak heretofore liberality. liberality be a virtue as worthy praise as avarice and prodigality, her opposite, be blame worthy. it consist in give and receive, but rather in give in time and place and according to occasion, without excess. this virtue be proper and befit great personage which be, as it be, steward of the good of the earth which god have put into their hand for to use they liberal, that be to say to distribute they to he that have none. not be excessive in needless expense, nor too spare where magnifiicencie be to be. show our savage be praise worthy in the exercise of this virtue according to their poverty. for, as we have say before, when they visit one another they give mutual present one to the other, and when some french sagamo come to they, they do the like with he cast. at his foot some bundle of bever or other fur, which be all their riches, and so do they to de poutrincourt, but he take they not to his own proper use, but rather put they into mont, his storehouse, because he will not go against the privilege give unto he this custom of the say savage proceed, but from a liberal mind, and which have some generosity, and although they be very glad when the like be do unto they. yet so it fall out that they begin the venture and put themselves in hazard to lose their merchandise. and who be he among we that do more than they, that be to say which give but with intention to receive. the poet say there be no. body that give intend to lose. if a great personage give to a mean man, that be for to draw some service from he, even that which be give to the poor be to receive the hundred fold, according to the promise of the gospel, and for to show the galantness of our say savage, they do not willing cheapen and do, content themselves with that which be give. they honest, with a willing mind, disdain and blame the fashion of our petty merchant, which be a hour, a heretofore 1 book, chap 17.. cheapen for to buy a beaver skin, as i see be at the river saint john, whereof i have speak, heretofore that they call a young merchant of saint maloe, which be a word. of reproach among they borrow of the baske, signify as it be a hagle fellow final. they have nothing in they but frankness and liberality in their exchange and see the base manner of some of our man. they demand sometime what they come to seek for in their country. say that they come not into we and see that we be rich than they. we shall give they, liberal, that which we have out of this virtue there. grow in they a magnificence which can appear and remain hide, but for all that they be provoke by it, do all they can for to welcome their friend and membertou be very desirous that so much honour shall be do unto he as to shoot off our canon. when he do arrive, because he see that the same be do to the french captain in such a case, say that it be due unto he see that he be a sagamo, page 224.. here hospitality may be mention, but have speak theereof. heretofore i will refer the reader to the chapter of the tabagi where i give they the praise attribute to the gaullois and ancient frenchman for this respect. true, it be that in some place there be some which be friend for the time and take their advantage in necessity, as have be note in laudonniere his voyage. but we can accuse they in that, lest we also accuse our the piety, of the savage towards their parent self which do the like one. thing i will say that belong to fatherly piety, that the child be not so curse as to despise their patent in old age, but do provide for they with venison, as the stork do towards they that have engender they, a thing which be the shame of many christian who be weary of their parent long life do. oftentimes strip they before they go to bed and so do leave they naked. they use also humanity and mercy towards their enemy wife and little child, who life they spare but they remain their prisoner for to serve they, according to the ancient right of servitude, bring in among all the nation of the other world against the natural liberty. but as for the man of defence, they. spare none but kill as many of they as they can catch. as for justice, they have not any law, neither divine nor human, but that which nature teach they that one must not offend another. so have they quarrel very seldom, and if any such thing do chance to happen, the sagamo: quiet all and do justice to he that be offend, give some bastanadoe to the wrong doer, or condemn he to make some present to the other for to pacify he which be some form of dominion, if it be one of their prisoner that have offend he be in danger to go to the pot. for after he be kill, no body will revenge his death. the same consideration be in these part of the world. there be no account make of a man life that have no support, execution of justice make by the savage. one day there be a armouchiquois woman prisoner who have cause a countryman of she prisoner to escape away and to the end to travel and pass on the way she have, steal from membertous cabin a tinderbox- for without that they can do nothing- and a hatchet which be come to the knowledge of the savage. they will not proceed on the execution thereof near unto we, but they go to cabin themselves, four or five league from port royal, where she be kill and because she be a woman, our savage wife and daughter do execute. she kinibech-coech, a young maid of eighteen year of age, fair and well, spot with colour, give she the first stroke in the throat, which be with a knife. a other maid of the same age, handsome enough, call metembroech, follow on and the daughter of membertou, which we call membertou-ech-coech, make a end. we reprove they sharp for this cruelty whereof they be all ashamed and dare not show themselves any more. this be their form of justice. another time, a man and a woman prisoner go clean away without tinderbox or any provision of meat which be hard to be. perform as well for the great distance of way, which be above 300.. league by land, because it behoove they to go secret and to take. heed from meet with any savage. nevertheless, those poor soul pull off the bark of certain tree and make a little boat with the bark of they, wherein they cross the bay francoise and get to the other shore over against port royal, shorten their way above one hundred and fifty league and get home into their country of the armouchiquois, wherein the savage be diligent and slothful. i have say in some place that they be not laborious, but in hunt and fish love also the labour take by sea slothful at all other painful exercise, as in the manure of the ground and in our mechanical trade, also to grind corn for their own use. for sometime they will rather seethe it in grain then to. grind it by handy strength. yet notwithstanding, they will not be unprofitable, for there will be some mean to employ they to that whereunto they be incline by nature, without force it, as heretofore do the lacedaemonian to the yongue man of their commonwealth. as for the child have yet take no bias. it will be easy to keep they at home and to employ they in those thing that shall be think fit. howsoever it be, hunt be no bad thing, nor fish neither. let we see, then, how they behave themselves therein. chap 21 of their hunt gens 1. v 29.. god, before sin, give for food unto man every herb, bear seed upon all the earth and every tree wherein be the fruit of a. tree bear seed, without make mention of the spill of the blood of beast, and notwithstanding after the banishment from the garden of pleasure, the labour ordain for the punishment of the say sin require a strong and more substantial food than the former. so, man, full of carnality, accustom himself to feed upon flesh and do tame certain number of beast for to serve he. to that effect, though some will say that before the flood, no flesh be eat for in vain. genes 4., vers 4.. 20. have abel be a shepherd and jabel father of shepherd. but after the flood, god renew his covenant with man. genes 9, vers 2, 3. the fear and dread of you, say the lord, shall be upon every beast. of the earth and upon every fowl of the heaven, with all that move on the earth and upon all the fish of the sea they be give into your hand all that move, have the beginning of the right of hunt. life shall he unto you for meat upon this privilege be form the right of hunt, the noble right of all right that be in the use of man. see that god be the author of it. and therefore, no marvel if king and their nobility- why it appertain to king and to their nobility- have reserve it unto they by a well conclude reason that if they command unto man, with far better reason may they command unto beast. and if they have the administration of justice to judge malefactor, to overcome rebel and to bring to human society wild and savage man, with far better reason shall they have it for to do the same towards the creature of the air, of the forest and of the field as for they of the sea. we will, for what end king have be choose, speak of they in another place and see that king have be. in the beginning, choose by the people for to keep and defend they from their enemy whilst that they be at their necessary work, and to make war as much as need be for the reparation of injury and recovery of that which have be wrongful usurp or take away. it be very reasonable and decent that as well they as the nobility that do assist and serve they in those thing, have the exercise of hunt, which be a image of war, to the end, to rouse up the mind and to be always nimble ready to take horse for to go to encounter with the enemy, to lie in ambush, to assail he, to chase he, to trample he under foot. there be another and first aim, the first end of hunt in hunt, it be the food of man, whereunto it be destinate, as be know by the place of scripture afore: allege yea, i say so destinate- that in the holy language it be but one and the self same word- (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), for to signify hunt or venison and meat, as among a hundred, place this of the one hundred thirty two psalm, where our god have choose zion for his habitation and perpetual rest. promise unto she that he will abundant bless interpretation her victual and will satisfy her poor with bread, upon which place saint jerome term venison, that which the other translator do call victual. better to the purpose, then widow in the common translation hunt, then have be grant unto man by a heavenly privilege, the savage throughout all the west indies do exercise themselves therein without distinction of person. not have that fair order establish in these part, whereby some be bear for the government of the people and the defence of the country, other for the exercise of art and the tillage of the ground in such sort that by this fair economy every one live in safety, this hunt be make among they chief in the the winter dwell, winter for all the spring and summer time and part of autumn have fish abundant for they and their friend, without take any pain they do not much seek for. other food. but in winter, when that fish go away, feel the cold, they forsake the sea shore and cabin themselves within the wood where they know to have any prey, which be do as far as the country that approach near to the tropic of cancer, in the country where bever be, as throughout all the great river of canada, and upon the coast of the ocean as far as the country of the armouchiquois. they do winter upon the shore of lake for the fish of the say bever, whereof we will speak in due place. but first let we the descripon of the ellan, or stag, speak of the ellan, which they call aptaptou and our basques orignac. it be the tall creature that be. next unto the dromadaire and camel, for it be high than the horse. his hair be common of gray colour and sometime of dun or fallow, almost as long as the finger of one hand. his head be very long and have almost a infinite order of tooth. he bear his horn double like the stag, but as broad as a plank and three foot long. garnish with sprig grow upward all along upon one side. his foot be fork as the stag but much more flat. his flesh be short and very delicate. he feed in the meadow and live also of the tender cropes of tree. it be the plentiful thing that the savage have. next to fish. fit time to hunt, we may say then. that the best and fit time for the say savage to all hunt by land be the winter season, when that the forest be hoary and the snow deep and especial. if upon the snow there come a hard frost which do harden it, then be well. clothe with a cloak, fur with bever and sleeve on the arm. tie together with a latch item stocken. make with the leather of ellans, like to buff, which they tie at their girdle and shoe on their foot of the same leather, very fine. make they go with their bow in hand and the quiver on their back, that way that their aoutmoin have. show they, for we have say heretofore that they consult with the oracle when they be. a hungry or some where else where they think they shall not lose their time and labour. they have dog or hound, almost like to fox, in form and bigness and of hair of all colour, which follow they, and although they do not spend nor call, nevertheless they can very well find the haunt of the beast which they seek, for which be find. they pursue she courageous, and they never give she over until they have she down. and for to follow the game more easy, they tie racket at their foot, racket thrice as great as we under their foot, with the which they run swift upon that hard snow without sink. if it be not hard enough. yet they give not over hunt but will follow the chase three day together if their constancy in hunt need be final. have wound she to death. they so tire she with their hound that she be force to fall down. then they cut and rip her belly, give relief to the hunter and take their share of it. one must not think that they eat the flesh raw, as some do imagine and as james quartier himself do write. for they carry always go the savage, do carry tinderbox in the wood, through the wood, a tinderboxe before their breast for to make fire when hunt be do where the night do force they to tarry. we go once to the spoil of a ellan leave dead upon the brinck of a great brook, about two league and a half within the land where we pass the night have take the snow for to lodge. we we make there a very dainty feast with this venison, more tender than any other kind of flesh, and after the roast we have sodden meat and broth abundant, make ready at a instant by a savage who do frame with his hatchet a tub or trough of the body of a tree in which he boil. his fair invention of a savage for the kitchen flesh, a thing which i have admire and have propound it to many who think themselves to have good wit, can not. find out the invention of it, which, notwithstanding, be but brief, which be to put stone, make red hot in the fire in the say trough, and to renew they until the meat be sod. joseph accosta recite that the savage of perou do the same. the chief hunter be return to the cabin, tell the woman what he have do and that, in such a place which he name to they, they shall find the venison. the woman duty, it be the say woman duty, to go and flaie the ellan, the dear stag bear or other game and to bring it home. then they make good cheer, as long as there be any provision, and he that have hunt be he that have the lesser share. for their custom be that he must serve the other and eat none of his own purchase as long as the winter continue. they lack none of it, and there have be some, one savage that, in a hard season have kill fifty of they. for his part, as i have sometime hear why the beaver be not take in summer. as for the hunt of the beaver, it be also in winter that chief, they use it for two reason. one of they we have allege heretofore, the other because that after winter this beast shed her hair and have no fur in summer. beside that, when, in such a season, they will seek out for bever, hardly shall they meet with any because this creature be amphibie, that be to say earthly and waterish amphibie, and more waterish than otherwise, and have no invention to take she in the water, they may be in danger to lose their pain, notwithstanding if, by chance, they meet any in summer time, spring time or autumn, they fail not to eat it. the description and fish of the beaver. behold then how they catch they in winter time, and with most profit. the beaver be a beast very near as big as a shear sheep. the young one be lesser, the colour of his hair be of a chest-nut colour, his foot be short. the fore-foot have claw and the hinder foot with fin, like goose. the tail be as it be skail, almost of the form of a solefish. notwithstanding, the skaile go not off, it be the best and delicate part of the beast. as for the head, it be short and almost round, have two rank of jaw at the side and before, four great sharp tooth, one by another, two above and two beneath. with these tooth he cut small tree and pole in sundry piece wherewith he build his house, that which i say be a admirable and incredible, the bever cabin or den thing. this creature lodge himself upon the brincke of lake and there he first make his couch with straw or other thing fit. to lie upon as well for he as for his female, raise a vault with his wood cut and prepare, which he cover with turf in such sort that no wind enter therein for as much as all be cover and shut up except one hole which lead under the water, and by that way he go forth to walk where he list, and because the water of the lake do sometime rise, he make a chamber above the low dwelling for to retire himself, if, in case, any inundation shall happen in such sort that some bever cabin be above eight foot hight, all make with wood, pyramid wise, and daub with mud. moreover, it be hold that be amphibie, as we have say, he must always. participate with water and that his tail be dip in it, which be the cause why he lodge himself so near a lake. but be subtle, he content not himself with that which we have say, but have, moreover, a issue into another place, out of the lake, without any cabin, by which way he go on the land and beguile the hunter. but our savage be aware of it, take order for the same and stop this passage. how the beaver be take when they will then take the beaver they pierce through the ice of the freeze lake about his cabin, than one of the savage thrust his arm into the hole. tarry the come of the say beaver, while that another go upon this ice. strike with a staff upon it for to astonish he and make he to return into his lodging, than one must be nimble for to seize on his neck. for if one catch he by any part where he may bite, he will bite very sore. the flesh thereof be very good, almost as if it be mutton. and as every nation have common something peculiar that it bring forth which be not so common with other, so ancient the realm of pontus have the same for the produce of bever, as i learn it out of virgil, where he say sidon apol, in carm 5. and after he of sidonie de polignac, bishop of auvergne, in these verse: chaldaeus, assirius, ser, sabaeus, attis, phoenix, lacedaemon, argos, epirus. gallus, calyb, frumentalibe, campanus, lydus, arab, panchaia, pontus, tyrus, corinthus, etc. but at this day the land of canada bear the bell away for that respect. although that some of they be bring out of moscovy, buy they be not so good as we, our savage have also make we to eat of bever flesh, which be very good and tender and like to beef item of leopard, resemble much the wild cat, and of a beast which they call nibathes, which have his paw almost nibathes, like to the ape paw by mean, whereof he climb easy upon the tree. yea, he lay his young one there. he be of graiesh hair and his head like to a fox, but he be so fat that it be. almost incredible, have describe the principal game. i will not stand to speak of wolf, for they have some and yet eat none of they, nor of lucerns, otter, coney and other, which i have mention in my farewell to new france, whereto i refer the reader, and to the recital of captain james cartier, hog. nevertheless, it be good to show here that our french cattle profit very well. in those part we have hog which have multiply very much and although they have a stigh they do lie a broad, even in the snow and during the frost. we have but one weather which prove a wether very well, although he be not take in by night but be in the midst of our yard in. winter time de poutrincourt, make he twice to be shear, and the will of the second year have be esteem in france better by two in the pound than that of the first. we five sauce make six penny english outard, a kind of wild goose, have no other houshould-cattell but hen and pigeon which fail not to yield the accustom tribute and to multiply abundant, the say de poutrincourt, take, come out of the shell, small outard which he do very will breed and give they to the king at his return. when the country be once store with those creature and other, they will increase so much that marvelous multiplication of beast one shall not know what to do with they like, as in perou, where be at this day and long since, such quantity of ox, kine, swine, horse and dog that they have no more owner but do appertain to the first that do kill, they be kill. they carry away the hide to traffic withal and the carcase be leave there, which i have many time hear of. they that have be there beside the witness of joseph acosta, the beast of florida and virginia, come into the country of the armouchiquois and go far towards virginia and florida. they have no more ellan nor bever. but only stag, hind, roebuck, deer, bear, leopard, lucerne, once wolf, wilde-dogge, hare and coney, with who skin they cover their body, make chamois of they, of the big beast, but as the heat be there great than in the country more northern, so they do not use fur but pluck out the hair from their skin and very often for all garment they have but half bretche or a small cushion make with their mat which they wear on that side that the wind do blow. but they have in florida crocodile also which do assail they oftentimes in swim. they kill some of they sometime and eat they the flesh, whereof be very fair and white but it smell of musk. they have also a certain lion kind of lion, which little differ from they of africa, brasilian. as for the brasilian, they be so far from new france, that be as it be in another world, their beast be quit tapirroussou differ from those that we have name as the tapiroussou, which, if one desire to see, he must imagine a beast, half a ass and half a cow, save that her tail be very short, his hair draw towards red, no, horn, ear hang and a ass, foot. the flesh thereof be like to beef. they have a certain kind of small stag and hind stag which they call seou-assous, who hair be as long as goat hair. but they be persecute with a evil beast which they call janou-are, almost as tall and swift as a greyhound, much like to the once. she be cruel and do not spare they if she can catch they. they take sometime some of they in snare and do kill they with long torment. as for their crocodile, they be not dangerous wilde-boare. their wilde-boare be very lean and unfleshie and they have a fearful grunt and cry. but there be in they a strange deformity which be that they have a hole upon the back through which they blow and breath. those three be the. big beast of brasill. as for small one, they have seven or eight sort of they by the take whereof they live, and also of man flesh, and be better and more provident husband, then we for one can find they unprovided, but rather have always, upon the boucan, that be to say a wooden grate somewhat high, build upon four, fork some venison or fish or man flesh, and with that they live merry and without care. anthropophage man eater. the savage of new france, be true, noble. now leave there those anthropophage brasilian. let we return to our new france, where the man there be more human and live, but with that which god have give to man, not devour their like. also, we must say. of they that they be true, noble, not have any action but be, whether we consider their hunt or their employment in the war, or that one search out their domestical action, wherein the woman do exercise themselves in that which be proper unto they and the man in that which belong to arm and other thing befit they, such as we have say or will speak of in due place. but here one must consider that the most part of the world have live so from the beginning and by degree man have be civilize when that they have assemble themselves and have form commonwealth for to live under certain law, rule and policy. chap 22 of hawk. see that we hunt on the land. let we not overstray ourselves least. if we take the sea, we lose out prou 1. 17. fowl for the wise man say that in vain the net be spread before the eye of all that have wing. if hunt then be a noble exercise, wherein the very muse themselves take delight by reason of silence and solitariness which bring forth fair conceit in the mind in such sort that plin, second, epist 6. of diana, say pliny, do not more frequent the mountain than minerva. if i say hunt be a noble exercise, hawk the 1. book, psal 8.. 9 be far more noble because it aim at a high subject which do participate of heaven. see that the inhabitant of the air be call in the. sacred scripture, the fowl of the air, moreover, the exercise thereof do belong. but to king and to the noble above which their brightness shine, as the sun brightness do above the star, and our savage be of a noble heart which make no account but of hunt and martial affair, may very certain have right of usage over the bird that their land do afford they which they do likewise, but with much difficulty, because they have not, as we have, the use of gun. they have enough and too many bird of prey, as eagle, laynards, falcon, tiercelet, sparow-hauke and other, which i have specify in my farewell to new france, but they have neither the use nor industry to a sport they have in france. to shoot at the picture of a bird set at a stake. bring they to service as the french gentleman, and therefore they lose much. good fowl have no other mean to seek after they or to take they, but only with the bow and arrow, with which instrument they do like. unto they who, in france, shoot at the geay in time of middle-lent or creep along the grass and go to assail the outarde or wild goose which do graze in the spring time and in summer along the meadow. sometime also, they carry themselves, soft and without make any noise, in their canowe and light vessel make, with bark of tree, even to the shore where the malards and other water foul be, and there strike they down. but the great abundance they have come from certain land where such quantity of they be, to wit of malards, margaux, roquettes, outard, or great abundance of water foul, wild goose, curly, cormorant and other, that it be a wonderful thing. yea, that which captain james quartier recite will seem to some altogether uncredible. when we be upon our return into france be yet beyond campseau, we pass by some of those land where, in the space of a quarter of a hour, we lade our bark with they. we have no need but to strike down with staff and not to go about to gather until one be weary a strike. if any man do ask why they fly not away, one must consider that they be bird only of two, three or four month old, which have be there, hatch in the spring time and have not yet wing great enough to take slight though they be well fleshy and in good plight. as for the dwell of port royal, we have the foul of port royal, many of our man that furnish we with they, and particular one of mont, his household servant, call addeni, who name i insert here to the end. he be have in memory because he always provide for we. abundant with it. during the winter he make we to live only of mallards, crane, heron, woodcock, partridge, blackbird and some other kind of that country bird. but in the spring time it be a sport to see the gray goose and the big outarde, a kind of wild goose, to keep their empire and dominion in our meadow. and in autumn the white goose, of which some do always remain for a pawn, then the sea lark fly in great flock upon the shore of the water, which also very often be pay home, touch the bird of prey. some of our man take from the nest a eagle from the top of a pineapple tree of the monstrous height that ever i see any tree which. eagle de poutrincourt do breed for to present she to the king, but she break her tie, seek to take her flight and lose herself in the sea. come home, the savage of campseau have six of. they parch near to their cabin at our come thither, which we will not truck for because they have pull off their tail to to feather their arrow. there be such a quantity of they in those part that often they do eat our pigeon and it do behoove we to look narrow to they, the bird that be know unto we. i have enroll they, as i have say in my farewell to new france, but i have omit many of they because i know not their name there also. may be. see the description of a little niridau, a admirable little, small bird, fly, small bird, which the savage do call niridau, which live but with flower, and she do come, noise in my ear, pass invisible, so small be she. when in the morning i go to take a walk in my garden, there will be. see also the description of certain fly shine in the evening, in the spring time, which do fly up and down the wood in such a multitude that it be wonder for the bird of canada. i also refer the reader to the report of captain james quartier, a wonderful foul. the armouchiquois have the same bird, whereof there be many which be not know unto we in these part. and particular there be one kind of water foul which have their bill make like two knife, have the two edge one upon another and that which be worth the wonder at the uppermost part of the say bill be short by the one half than the lower-most, in such wise that it be hard to think how this bird take her food. but in the spring turkey-cock time the cock and hen which we call or turkey cock do fly thither as wander bird and sojourn there without pass further hitherward. they come from the part of virginia and florida there be yet beside come from virginia bird and fowl of virginia and florida, these partridge parrot, pigeon, stocke-dove, turtle-dove, blackbird, crow, tiercelet, falcon lanier, heron, crane. storcke, wild-goose, mallards, cormorans, white, aigret, red, black and gray, one and infinite sort of foul. as for the brasilian, they also have store of turkey-cock and hen, which they name arignan-ouslou, of who they make no account, nor of their egg in such manner that the say turkie-henne breed their young one as they can, without so much a do as in these part. they have also duck, but because they go heavy they eat none of. they say that they will hinder they from run. swift item, a kind of pheasant which they call jacous. other fowl which they name mouton as big as peacock, some kind of partridge as big as goose, call mocacoua, parrot of sundry sort and many other kind altogether unlike unto. we chap 23 of their fish oppian, in the book that he have make upon this subject, say that in the hunt of beast and of comparison between hunt hawk and fish bird beside the facility, there be more contentment and delight then. in fish, because that a man have many retreat, one may get himself into the shadow, one may meet with brook to quench his thirst, one may lie down on the grass, one may take his repast under some shelter. as for bird, one may take they in the nest and with bird-lime yea of themselves. very often they fall into the net, but poor fisherman cast their bait upon a uncertainty yea, double uncertainty as well, because they know not what adventure shall happen. unto they as because they be upon a unconstant and untameable element who very sight only be fearful, they be always, wander from place to place, subject to tempest and beat with storm and wind, but yet in the end he conclude that they be not destitute of all pleasure, but rather that they have enough when they be in a ship well build, well tight, well close and swift in sail. then cut the wave, they go to sea where the great skull of devour fish be, and cast into the sea a line, well twist the weight of it be no soon in the bottom, but that as soon the bait be snatch up and sudden the fish be draw up with a emperor delight in. fish great pleasure. and in this exercise do marc antonia, the son of the emperor severus, delight himself very much, notwithstanding plato reason who form his commonwealth, have forbid his citizen the exercise of fish as unnoble and iliberall and fosterer of idleness. wherein he do gross, equivocate special when he charge fisherman with idleness which be so evident that i will not vouchsafe to refute he. but i marvel not of that which he say of fish. see that with the same he also reject hawk. upon the same reason, plutarch say that it be more laudable to take either a hart, a roebuck or a hare, then to buy they, but he wade not so far as the other. howsoever, it be the church which be. the first order in human society, who, priesthood, be call royal by the great apostle saint peter, have permit fish to churchman and forbid hunt and hawk, and indeed, to say that which be most probable: the food of fish be the best and find of aristotle 8.. of the history of beast, c 9, all for as much as aristotle say that it be not subject to any sickness. from whence come the common proverb: sound than a fish. so that in the ancient hieroglyphicke, a fish be the symbol of health, which notwithstanding, i will mean eat while it be new, for otherwise, as plautus say, it be nothing worth. now our savage do eat it, new enough, as long as it last, which i believe. to be one of the best instrument of their health and long life. when winter come, fish do retire themselves. in winter, all fish be astonish and shun the storm and tempest, every one where he may. some do hide themselves in the sand of the sea, other under the rock, other do seek a mild country where they may be better at rest. but as soon as the mildness of the spring time do return and the sea do calm itself, as after a long siege of a town, truce be make the people be before a prisoner, issue forth by troop to go and take the air of the field and to rejoice themselves. so those citizen of the sea, after the gust and furious storm. be past, they come to enlarge themselves through the salt field. they skip, they trample, they make love, they approach to the shore and come to seek the refresh of fresh water. and then our say, the fish rendezvous, savage that know the of every one and the time of their return, go to wait for they, in good devotion to bid, they welcome the smell, be the first fish of all that present himself in the spring. and to the end we go no further to seek out example. then, at our smelt in great quantity, port royal, there be certain brook where such skull of these smelt do come that for the space of five or six week one may take of they sufficient to feed. a whole city there be other brook where after the smell herring come the herring with like multitude, as we have already mark else, where item the pilcher do come in their season in such abundance that sometime, willing to have some thing more for our supper, then ordinary, in less than the space of a hour we have take enough of they to serve we for three day. the dolphin sturgeon, dolphin sturgeon, salmon and salmon do get to the head of the river in the, say, port royal, where such quantity of they be that they carry away the net which we have lay for they. by reason of the multitude of they that we see there in all place, fish abound there in like manner. as we our fish of the savage self have see the savage do make a hurdle or wear that cross the brook, which they hold almost upstraight, prop against wooden bar archwise and leave there a space for the fish to pass, which space they stop when the tide do retire and all the fish be find, stay in such a multitude that they suffer it to be lose. and as for the dolphin, sturgeon and salmon, they take they after that manner, or do strike they with harp iron so that these people be happy, for there be nothing in the world so good as these fresh meat. and i find by my the abuse of pythagoras reckon that pythagoras be very ignorant, forbid in his fair. golden sentence the use of fish without distinction one may excuse he in that fish be dumb, have some conformity with his sect, wherein dumbness or silence be much. commend it be also say that he do it because that fish be nourish in a element enemy to mankind. item that it be a great sin to kill and to eat a creature that do not hurt we. item that it be a delicious and luxurious meat. not of necessity, as indeed in the hieroglyphiques of orus apollo, fish be put for a mark of delicacy and voluptuousness. item that he, the say pythagoras, do eat but meat that may be offer to the god, which be not do with fish and other such toy. recite by plutarch. in his convivial question. but all those superstition be foolish, and i will fain demand of such a man if be in canada he have. rather die for hunger then to eat fish. so many ancient to follow their own fancy and to say these be we have. forbid their follower the use of meat that god have give to man and sometime lay yoke upon man that they themselves will not bear now whatsoever. the philosophy of pythagoras, be i be none of he. i find better the rule of our good religious man, which please themselves in eat of flesh, which i like well in new france. neither be i, yet displease when i meet with such fare, if this philosopher do live with ambrosia, and of the food of the god and not of fish, of which none be sacrifice unto they, our say. good religious as the cordelier or franciscan of saint maloe and other of the maritime town, together with the priest, may say that in eat sometime fish. they eat of the meat consecrate to god. for when the the french man that go there, a fish, new find land man, do meet with some wonderful fair cod, they make of it a, so do they call it, and do vow and consecrate it to saint frances, saint nicholas, saint leonard and other head and all, whereas in their fish they cast the head into the sea. i shall be force to make a whole book if i will discourse of all the fish that be common to the brasilian, floridian, armouchiquois, canadians and souriquois, but i will restrain myself to two or three. have first tell that in port royal there be great bed of muscle wherewith muscle we do fill our shallop when that sometime we go into those part there be. also scallop, twice as big as scalloppe oyster in quantity. item cockle, which have never cockle sea chestnut fail we, as also there be chatagnes, deemer sea chestnut the most delicious fish that be possible to be. item crab and lobstart: those be the shell fish but one crab lobstart. a port of eight league compass must take the pleasure to fetch they and be not all in one place. now the say: port be eight league compass there be by the abovesaid philosopher. leave good sport to row in it for so pleasant a fish, the fish of cod, and see we be in the country where the cod be take. i will not yet leave off work until i have speak something thereof for so many. people and in so great number go to fetch they out of all the part of europe every year that i know not from whence such a swarm may come. the cod that be bring into these part be either dry or wet. the fish of the we fish be on the bank in the open sea. on this side new find land, as may be note by my geographical map, fifteen bank, see heretofore in the 1. book, chap 12.. or twenty more or less mariner have every one a line. it be a cord of forty or fifty fatham long at the end, whereof be a hook, bait and a lead of three pound weight to bring it to the bottom. with this implement they fish. their cod which be so greedy that no soon let down but as soon catch where good fish be, the fish be draw a shippe-boord. there be board in form of narrow table along the ship where the fish be dress. there be one that cut off their head and cast they common in the sea. another cut their belly and garbel they and send back to his fellow the big part of the backebone which he cut away. that do they be put into the salt tub for four and twenty hour. then they be lay up and in this sort do they work continual, without respect the sunday which be the lord day, for the space of almost three month, their sail down until the lade. be full make, and because the poor mariner do endure there some cold among the fog, special they that be most hasty, which begin their voyage in february. from thence come the say that it be cold in canada, dry of the cod. as for the dry cod, one must go a land. there be, in newfoundland and in bacaillos, great number of port where ship lie at anchor for three month. at the very break of day the mariner do go two or three league off in the sea to take their lade. they have every one fill their shaloupe by one or two a clock in the afternoon and do return into the port where be there, be a great scaffold, build one the sea shore. whereon the fish be cast. as one cast sheaf of corn through a barn window, there be a great table whereon the fish cast, be dress as above say. after six hour they be turn, and so fundry time. then all be gather and pile together and again at the end of eight day put to the air. in the end be dry, it be lay up, but there must be no fog when it be a dry, for than it will rot. not too much heat, for it will become red, but a temperate and windy weather, whether the cod do sleep. they do not fish by night because then the cod will not bite. i dare believe that they be of the fish which suffer themselves. to be take sleep, although that oppian be of opinion that fish war and devour one another, as do the brasilian and cannibal be always. why fish sleep, not watchful, and sleep not, except, nevertheless, the sargot only, which he say, put himself in certain cave to take his sleep, which i may well believe, and this fish deserve not to be war upon see. he make war upon none other and live of weed by reason, whereof all the author do say that he chaw his cud like the sheep, but as the same oppian say that this fish only in chaw his cud do render a moist voice, and in that he be deceive, because that myself have hear many time the seal or sea wolf. heretofore. first book, chap 17.. in open sea, as i have say elsewhere- he may also have equivocate in this- the same cod leave bite after the month of september, be pass, but retire himself to the bottom of the broad sea or else go to a hot country until the spring time, whereupon i will here allege what pliny plin, lib 9, c, 16.. note that fish which have stone on their head do fear winter and retire themselves. betimes of who number be the cod which have within her brain two white stone make gundole, wise and jagged. about which stone in the cod head have not those that be take towards scotland, as some learned and curious man have tell i this fish be wonderful. greedy and devour other almost as big as himself, yea even lobster, which be like big langouste. and i marvel how he may digest those big and hard shell of the liver of cod. our new-found-land-man do make oil, cast those liver into barel, set in the sun where they melt of themselves. there be great traffic make in europe of the oil of the fish of newfoundland and for this only cause many fish, oil or train go to the fish of the whale and of the hippopotames, which they call the beast with the great tooth or the morse of who some thing we must say. fish of the whale, plin li 9, ca 3.. the almighty willing to show unto job, how wonderful be his. work will thou draw, say he, leviathan with a book and his tongue with a string which thou have cast in the water. by this leviathan be the whale mean and all fish of that reach who hugeness and chief of the whale be so great that it be a dreadful thing, as we have show elsewhere. speak of one that be cast on the coast of brasill by the tide. and pliny say that there be some find in the indies which have four acre of ground in length. this be the cause why man be to be admire, yea, rather god who have. give he the courage to assail so fearful a monster which have not his equal on the land. i leave the manner of take of. she describe oppian of fish, the 5. book s basil, 10. ho, upon the 6. day of creation, the river where the whale be fish by oppian and s basil. for to come to our frenchman and chief, the basques, who do go every year to the great river of canada for the whale common the fish thereof be make in the river call lesquemin towards tadoussac, and for to do it they go by skowte to make watch upon the top of rock to see if they may have the sight of some one, and when they have discover any forth with, they go with four shaloupe after it and have cunning board she. they strike she with a harp. iron to the depth of her lard and to the quick of the flesh. then this creature feel herself rude, prick with a dreadful boisterousness, cast herself into the depth of the sea. the man in the mean while be in their shirt, which veer out the cord whereunto the harp iron be tie, which the whale carry away. but at the shaloupe side that have give the blow, there be a man ready with a hatchet in hand to cut the say cord, lest, perchance, some accident shall happen, that it be mingle or that the whale force shall be too violent, which notwithstanding, have find the bottom and be able to go no further. she mount up again leisurely above the water and then again she be set upon with glave-stave or pertuifane, very sharp, so hot that the salt-water pierce within her flesh. she lose her force and remain there than one tie she to a cable at who end be a anchor which be cast into the sea. then at the end of six or eight day they go to fetch she when time and opportunity permit it. they cut she in piece and in great kettle do seethe the fat which melt itself into oil wherewith they may fill 400.. hogshead, sometime more and sometime less, according to the greatness of the beast and of the tongue. common they draw five yea, six hogshead full of train. how the indian do take the whale. joseph acosta (@) 5. c, 15. if this be admirable in we that have industry, it be more admirable in the indian. people, naked and without artificial instrument, and nevertheless they execute the same thing which be recite by joseph acosta. say that for to take those great monster, they put themselves in a canow or bark, make of the bark of tree and board the whale. they leap, nimble on her neck and there do stand as it be on horseback, attend the fit mean to take she and see their opportunity. the bold of, they put a strong and sharp staff which he carry with he into the gap of the whale, nostril. i call nostril, the condut or hole through which they breathe forth with. he thrust it in far with another very strong staff and make it to enter in as deep as he can. in the mean while the whale beat the sea furious and raise up mountain of water, dive down with great violence, then mount up again not know what to do, through very rage, the indian notwithstanding, remain still, sit fast and for to pay she home for this trouble, fix yet another like stalk in the other nostril, make it to enter in in such wise that it stop her wind quite and take away her breath and he come again into his canow which he hold tie at the side of the whale. with a cord, then retire himself on land, have first tie his cord to the whale which he ver out on she which, while she find much water, skip here and there as touch with grief and in the end draw to land where, forth with for the huge enormity of her body, she remain on the shore not be able to move or stir herself any more. and then a great number of indian do come to find out the conqueror for to reap the fruit of his conquest, and for that purpose they make a end of kill of she, cut she and make morsel of her flesh which be bad enough, which they dry and stamp to make powder of it which they use for. meat that serve they a long time morse. as for the hippopotames, or morse, we have say in the voyage of james quartier that there be great number of they in the gulf of canada and special in the i will of, i will, brion brion, and in the seven isle, which be the river of chischedec. it be a creature which be more like to a cow, then to a hippopotame or river horse, horse, but we have name it hippopotamus, that be to say the horse of the river, because pliny do so call they, that be in the river nilus, which, notwithstanding, do not altogether resemble the horse but do participate also of a ox or a cow. he be of hair like to the seal, that be to say daple grey and somewhat towards the red, the skin very hard, a small head like to a barbary cow, have two rank of tooth on each side, between which there be two of. they, of each part, hang from the upper jaw downward, of the form of a young elephant tooth, wherewith this creature help herself to climb on the rock. because of those tooth, our mariner do call it ' dent, the beast with the great tooth. his ear be short and his tail also. he low as a ox and have wing or fin at his foot, and the female call her young one on the land and because that he be a fish. of the whale, kind and very fat. our basques and other mariner do make oil thereof, as they do with the whale, and they do surprise he on the land, plin li 8. c 25.. those of say, pliny be cleave footed, the main, the back and the neigh of a horse, the tooth issue forth as to a wild boar, and he add that when this creature have be in the corn for to feed, he go away backward upon his return for fear he shall be follow by his trace. i do not purpose to discourse here of all the sort of fish that be in choose part the same be too spacious a subject for my history, because also that i have specify a good number of they in my farewell to new france. i will say only that, by manner of pastime, on the coast of new france i will take in one day fish enough for to serve as food for a long time than six week in the place where the abundance of cod be for that kind of fish be there most frequent. and he that have the industry to take mackerel at sea may there take so many that he shall infinite multitude of mackerel not know what to do with they. for in many place i have see infinite number of they close together which do occupy more space. there, three time then, the market hall of paris do contain, and notwithstanding, i see a the idleness of people in these day, number of people in our country of france so reckless and so idle in these day that they have rather die for hunger or live in slavery, at the least to languish upon their miserable dunghill then to endeavour to get out of the mire and to change their fortune by some generous action or to die in it. chap 24, of the quality of the soil. we have make provision in the three last chapter of venison, of foul and of fish, which be much, but in our old ancient france, bread and wine be our usual sustenance. it will be hard unto we to make here our abode, unless the land be fit for the same. let we then enter into consideration of it and let we put our hand into our bosom to see if the dug of this mother will yield any milk to nourish her child. and as for the rest, we will take what may be plin l 18. c 5. which be the good land hope for of she. attilius regulus, twice consul in rome, do common say that one. must not choose place over rank, because they be unhealthful, neither place over barren, although one may live healthy in they. and with such a soil do cato content himself, the ground of new france be such, for the most part, of fat sand under which we have often find clay ground, and of that earth do de poutrincourt cause a quantity of brick to be make, wherewith he build a furnance to melt the gum of the fir tree and chimney. i will say far that one may make with this earth such operation, the earth of new france, have the same effect as as with the earth which we call or bolus, as in many occasion our apothecary master jew hebert, most sufficient in his art. have make trial of it by the advice of de poutrincourt. yea, even when that du pont, his son, have three finger cut off with a musket-shot which do burst be overcharge in the country of the armouchiquois, this province, have the two nature of earth that god have give unto man for to possess who may doubt, but that it be a land of promise when it shall be manure. we have make trial of it and have take pleasure therein, which never do. all they that have go before we the blessing of god upon our labour, whether it be in brasill, whether it be in florida or in canada. god have bless our labour and have give unto we fair wheat, rye, barley, oat peason. bean, hemp, turnip and garden herb, and this so plentiful that the rye be as high as the tall man that may be see, and we do fear that this height shall hinder it from bring forth seed, but it have so well fructify that 150.. ear of corn from one grain, one french-graine sow, there have yield. one hundred and fifty ear of corn, such as, by the testimony of my lord chancellor, the island of cicilia, nor the country of do yield none fair. i do sow wheat without suffer my land to rest and without dung it at all, and nevertheless it grow up in as fair perfection as the fair wheat in france, although the corn and all that we do sow be to long keep. but the new corn which the say de poutrincourt do sow before his departure from thence, grow up so beautiful that it be wonderful. according to the report of they that have be there a year after our departure, whereupon i will say that which be of my own, do that in the month of april in the year 1607, have sow, too thick and too near one to the other, some few grain of the rye that be gather at saint croix, the first dwell of s croix, be 25.. league from port royal, mont, some twenty five. league from port royal. these grain do multiply so abundant that they choke one another and come to no good perfection. the fertiity of the ground mend. but as for the ground mend dung with our hog dung or with the sweep of the kitchinne shell of fish or such like thing, i will not believe, unless i have see it, the excessive loftiness of the plant that it have produce. every one in his kind, yea, the son of de poutrincourt, a young gentleman of great forwardness, have sow grain of orange and of citron. in orange citron, his garden they spring plant of a foot high. at three month end. we do not expect so much and notwithstanding, we take pleasure therein, emulate one another. i refer to any man judgement, if the second trial will be do with a good courage. and here i must say, by the way, that the secretary of the say mont, be come into those part before our departure, do say that he will not for any thing in the world but to have make the voyage and that unless he have see the abuse of they that have discredit the country of canada, our corn, he will not have believe it. behold how continual the country of canada have be discredit under who name all that land be comprise, not know what it be, upon thereport of some mariner who only do go to fish for cod, and upon the rumour of some sickness which may be avoid in maintain of mirth so that man be well furnish of necessary. but to continue our purpose of the mend of the ground whereof we speak even now, one certain ancient author say that the censor of rome do let to farm the dunghill and other uncleanness which be draw out of sink for 1000 talent a year, which be worth 600000 french-crown to the gardener of rome, because that it be the excellent dung of all and there be to. that end, commissioner, ordain for, to cleanse they likewise the bottom and channel of the river tybre. as certain ancient inscription which i have sometime read do record, the land of the armouchiquois do bear yearly such corn as that which we call sarrazen wheat. turkey, plin l 18. c, 7. and 10. the virginian have two harvest in the year: the manner of fat till and sow the ground wheat and indian wheat, which be the irio or erysimon of pliny and columella. but the virginian, floridian and brasilian more southerly, make two harvest a year. all these people do till their land with a wooden pickeaxe, weed out the weed and burn. they fatten their field with shellfish, have neither tame cattle nor dung, then they heap their ground in small heap, two foot distant one from another, and the month of may be come, they set their corn in those heap of earth as we do plant bean, fix a stick and put four grain of corn, several, one after another, by certain superstition, in the hole and between the plant of the say corn, which grow like a small tree and be ripe at three month end. they also set bean spot with all colour, which be very delicate, which, by reason they be not so high, do grow very well among these plant of corn. we have sow of the say corn this last year in paris. in good ground but with small profit, have yield every plant but one ear or two, and yet very thin. where in that country one grain will yield four, five and six ear, and every ear one with another, above 200 grain, which be a marvelous increase which theophrastus, in the 8. book of plant, show the proverb report by theophrastus to be very true, that it be the year that produce the fruit and not the field. that be to say that the temperature of the air and condition of the weather be that which make the plant to bud and fructify more than the nature of the earth. wherein be to be wonder that our corn grow, our corn profit better in their ground then their corn in we, better there than their corn here. a certain testimony that god have bless that country since that his name have be call upon there. also that in these part, since some year, god beat we, as i have say elsewhere, with rod of iron and in that country he have spread his blessing abundant upon our labour, and that in one parallel and elevation of the sun. this corn grow high, as we have say, the stalk of it be as big as cane yea big. the stalk and corn take green, have a sugar taste, which be the cause why the mole and field rat do. so covet it for they spoil. i a plot of it. in new france, the great beast, as stag, and other beast, as also bird do spoil it. and the indian be constrain to keep. they as we do the vine here, barn under ground, the harvest be do this. people lay up their corn in the ground, in pit which they make in some descent of a hill for the run down of water. furnish those pit with mat, and this they do because they have no house with loft nor chest to lay it up. otherwise then the corn conserve after this manner be out of the way of rat and mouse. sundry nation of those part have have the same invention to keep corn in. pit for suidas make mention of it upon the word, and procopius in the second book of the gothicke war, say that the goth besiege rome fall within the pit where the inhabitant be wont to lay their corn. tacitus report also that the german have such pit, and without particularize any far, in many place of france that keep at this day ^4 chap their corn after that manner. we have declare heretofore in what fashion they stamp their corn and make bread with it and how, by the testimony of pliny, the ancient italian have no better industry than they. the cause why the canadians have give over their tillage. they of canada and hochelaga in the time of james quartier do also till after the. same manner and the land do afford they corn, bean, peason, million pompion and cucumber. but since that their fur have be in request and that for the same they have have bread and other victual without any other pain, they be become sluggish, as the souriquois also, who do addict themselves to tillage in the same time hemp, but both the one and the other nation have yet at this time, excellent hemp which the ground produce of itself. it be high, fine, white and strong than we in these, our part, but that of the armouchiquois bear, at the top of the stalk thereof, a cod fill with a kind of cotton, cotton like unto silk, in which lie the seed of this cotton or whatsoever. it be good bed may be. make more excellent a thousand time then of feather and soft than common cotton. we have sow of the say seed or grain in diverse place of paris but it do not prove. we have see by our history how along the great vine and grape river beyond tadoussac, vine be find innumerable and grape at the season. i have see none in port royal, but the land and the hill be very proper for it. france have none in ancient time, unless peradventure along the aurel victor in prob, when the vine be first plant in france coast of the mediterranean sea and the gaullois have do some notable service to the emperor probus, they demand of he for recompense permission. to plant vine, which he grant unto they, but they be first deny by the emperor nero. but why do i allege the gaullois see that in brasill be a hot country, there be none, until that the frenchman and portugese have plant some there. so there be no doubt but that the vine will grow plentiful in the say port royal. see likewise that at the river saint john, which be twenty league more northward than the say port, there be many of they. yet for all that, not so fair as in the country of the armouchiquois, where it seem that nature do delight herself in plant of they there. and for as much as we have handle this subject, speak of the voyage that de. poutrincourt make thither. we will pass further to declare unto you that the most part of the wood of this land be oakes and walnut-tree. oakes, nut-tree, plumb-tree, bear, small-nut with four or five side, so sweet and delicate as any thing may be, and likewise plumb-tree, which bring forth very good plumb, as also sassafras, a tree have leaf like to oake-leave, but sassafras, less jagged, who wood be of very good send and most excellent for the cure of many disease, as the pox and the sickness of canada, which i call phthisie, whereof we phthisie 1., book c 13. have discourse at large heretofore. they also plant great store of tobacco, a thing most precious with they and universal among all those nation it be a plant of the bigness of the tobacco and the use of it, smoke whereof they suck up with a pipe in that manner that i will declare unto you for the contentment of they that know not the use of it. after that they have gather this herb, they lay it to dry in the shade and have certain small bag of leather hang about their neck or at their girdle, wherein they have always some and a tobacco-pipe with all which be a little pan hollow at the one side, and within who hole there be a long quill or pipe out of which they suck up the smoke which be within the say pan, after they put fire to it with a coal that they lie upon it. they will sometime suffer hunger eight day, have no other sustenance than that smoke, and our frenchman, who have frequent they be so bewitch with this drunkenness of tobacco that they can no more be without it, then without. meat or drink, and upon that do they spend good store of money for the good tobacco which come out of brasil. do sometime, foolish greediness of some man, after tobacco cost a french-crown a pound, which i deem foolishness in they, because that notwithstanding, they do not spare more in their eat and drink. then other man, neither do they take a bit of meat nor a cup of drink, the less by it but it be the more excusable in the savage. by reason. they have no great deliciousness in their tabagy or banquet and can make cheer to they that come to visit they with no great thing, as in these. our part, one present his friend with some excellent wine in such sort that if one refuse to take the tobacco-pipe, it be a. the savage do think that god have take tobacco, sign that he be not a friend. and they which among they have some obscure knowledge of god, do say that he take tobacco as well as they and that it be the true nectar describe by the poet. this smoke of tobacco take by the mouth in suck the virtue and property of tabaco as a child that suck his dug, they make it to issue through the nose and pass through the conduit of breathe. the brain be warm by it and the humidity of the same dry up it do also in. some sort make one giddy and, as it be, drink it, make the belly soluble, mitigate the passion of venus, bring to sleep, and the leaf of tobacco or the ash that remain in the pan heal wound. yea, i will say more that this nectar be unto they so sweet that the child do sometime sup up the smoke that their father cast out of their nostril to the forest end that nothing be lose. and because that the same have a tart bite taste de belleforest recite that which james quartier, who know not what it be say of it, will make the people believe that it be some kind of pepper. but whatsoever sweetness be find therein, i can never use myself to it, neither. do i care for the use and custom to take it in smoke root afrodille. there be yet in the land of the armouchiquois, certain kind of root as big as a loaf of bread, most excellent for to be eat, have a taste like the stalk of artichoke but much more pleasant. which be plant do multiply in such sort that it be wonderful. i believe that they be those which be call afrodille according to the description that pliny make of they. these root plin l 21. c 17. these seem to be ground nut, say he be make after the fashion of small turnip and there be no plant that have so many root as this have. for sometime one shall find four score afrodille. tie together. they be good, roast under the embers or eat raw with pepper or oil and salt. consideration of the misery of many, consider all this. it seem unto i that these be man very miserable, who be able to live a country life in quiet and rest and take the benefit of the ground which do pay her creditor with so profitable a usury. do pass their age in town in follow of suit in law, in toil here and there to seek out the mean, how to beguile and deceive some one or other, take such pain as do even bring they to their grave for to pay their house rend, for to be clothe in silk, for to have some precious movable brief, for. to set out and feed themselves with all vanity, wherein contentment be never to be. find poor fool, say hesiod, which know not hesiod in the book of work and day how one half of these thing, with quiet, be more worth than all heap together with freatfullnesse. nor how great benefit be in the malous and the daffodil the god certain have hide from man the manner of live, happy for otherwise. one day, labour will be sufficient for to nourish a man a whole year, and the day follow he will set his plough upon his dunghill and will rest his ox, his mule and himself. the till of the ground, full of innocency. this be the contentment which be prepare for they that shall inhabit. new-france, though fool, do despise this kind of life and the till of the ground, the most harmless of all bodily exercise and which i will term the most noble as that which sustain the life of all man. they disdain, i say, the tillage of the ground and, notwithstanding all the vexation wherewith one torment himself, the suit in law that one follow, the war that be make be but for to have land, poor mother, what have thou do that thou be so despise the other element, be very often contrary unto we. the fire consume we the air do, infect we with plague. the water swallow we up. only the earth be that which come into the world and die. receive we kind it be. she alone that nourish we, which warm, we which lodge we, which clothe, we which contrary we in nothing, and she be set at nought, and they that do manure she be laugh at. they be place next to the idle and bloodsucker of the people. all this be do here among we, but in new-france the golden age must be bring in again. the ancient crown of ear of corn must be renew, and to make that to be the first glory, pli 18. book ch 3. which the ancient roman do call a glory of wheat. to the end, to invite every one to till well his field. see that the land present itself liberal to they that have none be assure to have corn and wine there rest, but to furnish the country with tame cattle, for they will breed there very well. as we have say in the chapter of hunt, of fruit-tree there be but few beside nut-tree, heretofore ch 21.. plumb-tree and small cherytree and some hazellnut-tree. true it be that all that which be within the land, orenge-tree, fruit-tree be not yet discover. for in the country of the iroquois there be oreng-tree and they make oil with the fruit of tree, but no frenchman nor other christian have be there yet that want of fruit-tree be not to be find very strange for the most part of our fruit be. come out of other place and very often the fruit bear the name of the country from whence they have be. bring the land of germany. be good and fruitful. but tacitus say the tree and fruit of the land in port royal that in his time there be no fruit-tree. as for the tree of the forest, the most common in port royal be oakes, elm ash, birch- very good for joiners-worke- mapel, sicomore, pine-tree, firre-tree, white-thorne, hazell-tree, willow, bay-tree, bay tree common grow in warm country, and some other beside which i have not yet mark. there be in certain place store of strawberry and raspise item in the wood, small fruit, blue and red. i have see there small pear, very delicate, and in the meadow all the winter long. there be certain small fruit, like to small apple colour with red, whereof we make marmelade for to eat after meat. there bestore of gooseberry, like unto we, but they grow, read item, those other small round gooseberry, which we do call guedres and peason. in great quantity along the sea shore guedres be a kind of corinth, the leaf whereof we take in spring time and put among our old peason, and so it do seem unto we that we do eat green peason. beyond the say bay francoise, that be to say in the river s john and saint croix, there be store of cedar tree. beside those tree that i have name. as for they of the great river of canada, they have be specify in the second book in the relation of the voyage of captain james quartier and of monsieur champlein. tree of florida. those of florida be pine tree, which bear no kernel in the fruit that they produce, oakes, walnut tree, black cherry tree, lentiske, chest-nut tree, which be not natural as in france, cedar tree, cypress tree, palm tree, holy tree and wild vine, which climb up to the tree and bring forth good grape. there be a kind of meddler, the fruit whereof be better and big than that of france. there be also plumb tree, which bear a very fair fruit but not very good raspise. a small grain which we call, with we bleve, blewe, which be very good to be, eat, item root, which they call, whereof in their need they make bread tree of brasill. the province of brasill have take her name, as we think of a certain tree which we call bresil and the savage of the country, arabouton. it be high and as big as our oak and have the leaf like to the box leaf. our french man and other do go into that country for to lade their ship with it. the fire of it be almost without smoke. but he that will think to whiten his linen with the ash of that wood will far deceive himself, for he shall find it die in red. they have also palm tree of sundry sort and tree the wood, whereof of some be yellow and other violet. they have also some that have the send of rose and other stink who fruit be dangerous to be eat item, a kind of guayac, which they name hinourae, which they use for to cure a disease, call among they as dangerous as the pox. the tree which bear the fruit that we call the indian nut, be call among they sabaucaie. they have also cotten tree, of the fruit whereof they make bed which they hang between two fork or post. this country be happy in many other sort of fruit tree as orange tree, citron tree, leamon tree and other, always green, whereby the loss of that country where the frenchman have begin to inhabit be so much the more grievous unto they that love the welfare of france, for it be more than evident that the dwell be there more pleasant and delightful than the land of canada for the temperature of the air. true it be that the voyage thither be long as of four and five month, and that in perform of they sometime want must be endure, as may be see by the, the benefit of take the season of the year, voyage make thither in the time of villegagnon, but to new france. where we be when one begin his voyage in due season. the voyage be but of three week or a month, which be but a small time if the sweetness and delicacy be not there, such as they be in perou. one must not say, therefore, that the country be nothing worth. it be much that one may live there inrest and joyful, without take care for superfluous thing. the covetousness of man have cause that no country be think good unless there be mine of gold in it. and sot as they be, they do not consider that the, the despise of gold and silver mine country of france, be now unfurnished of the same, and germany also, whereof tacitus say that he know not whether the god, in their anger or in their favour, have deny gold and silver to that province. they do not see that all the indian have not any use of silver and live more content then we. if we call they fool, they may say as much of we and peradventure with better reason. they know not that god promise to his people a happy land. he say that it shall be a land of corn, of barley, of vine, of figtree, of olive-tree and of honey, where they shall- deut 8 v 8 ^- eat their bread without scarcity, etc. and for all mettle he give they, but iron and copper. lest that gold and silver make they to lift up their heart and forget their god- and he will not- that when they shall have king they deut 17 v 17.. shall hoard up much gold or silver, they do not consider that mine be the churchyard of man, that the spaniard have consume therein above ten million of poor indian savage, instead of instruct they in the christian faith that there be mine in italy but that the plin l 33.. c 4. ancient will not give leave to work in they for the preservation of the people. that in the mine be a thick air, gross and infernal, where one never know when it be day or night. that to do such thing be to seek to dispossess the devil of his kingdom. that it be a thing unworthy to a man to bury himself in the entrails of the earth, to seek out for hell and miserable, to abase himself under all unclean creature. he to who god have give a upright form and his face, look upward for to behold the heaven and to sing praise unto he. that in country where mine be, the land be barren, that we do not eat neither gold nor silver and that the same of itself do not keep we warm in winter. that he which have corn in his barn, wine in his seller, cattle in his meadow and afterward codde-fish and bever be more assure to have gold and silver than he which have mine, mine in new france, to find victual, and nevertheless there be mine in new france, as we have mention elsewhere. but that be not the first thing that one must seek, for man do not live with opinion only, and this consist, but in opinion, nor the precious stone neither which be fool babble wherein one be most often deceive so well. art can counterfeit nature. witness he that do sell some five or six year since vessel for fine emerald and have make himself rich by the folly of other. if he can have play his part, aright fruit to be hope for in new france. now, without make show of any mine, profit may be make in new france of diverse fur that be there, which i find be not to be despise. see that we see so much envy against a privilege that the king do grant to mont for to help to establish and settle there. the like may be to england, from virginia some french colony. but there may be draw a general commodity to france that, in the scarcity of victual, one province may succour the other, which may be. do now, if the country be well inhabit. see that since we have be there, the season have always be good in it, and in these our part, rough to the poor which do die for hunger and live but in want and penury, in stead that there many may live at their ease, who it be better to preserve then to suffer to perish beside fish be make in new france. the new-found-land-ship shall, good consideration, have nothing to do but to lade arrive thither in stead that they be force to tarry three month there and shall be able to make. three voyage for one of exquisite wood. i know none there but the cedar and the sassafras. but good profit may be draw from the fir and pruse-tree, because they will yield abundance of gum and they die very often thorough over much liquor. this gum be very fair, like the turpentine of venice, and very sovereign for medicine. i have give some to some church of paris for frankincense, which have be find very good. one may, moreover, furnish the city of paris and other place of france with soap-ash, soap ash which at this present be all bare and without wood. they who find themselves afflict may have there a pleasant place to retire themselves into, rather than to yield themselves subject to the spaniard as. many do. so many family as be in france, overcharge with child, may divide themselves and take there their portion with those small good and movable as they have. then time will discover some thing a new, and one must help all the world if it be possible. but the chief good one must aim at be the establishment of christian religion in a country where god be not know, and the conversion of these poor people who damnation, cry, vengeance against they that may and aught to employ themselves thereto and to contribute at least with their name to that effect. see that they gather up the fat of the earth and be constitute steward of the thing of this world. chap 25 of their war of. possess of land, come war, and when one have establish himself in new-france, some greedy fellow peradventure will come to take away the labour of honest, painful man. this be that which many do say. but the state of france, be god be praise, too well settle for to be afraid of such trick. we be not now, in the time of league and partialty, there be none that will begin with our king, nor make adventuturous enterprise for a small purchase. and though any one will do it, i believe that the remedy have be think upon already, and, moreover, this action be for religion and not to take away another good. this be so. faith make one to march bold, with assurance, and to pass through. all difficulty. for behold what the almighty say by his prophet isaiah to they who he take in his tuition, and to the frenchman, and by consequent, to the englishman of virginia, of new-france: hearken unto i, you that follow justice and that seek after the lord. behold the rock out of which you be cut and to the deep of the cistern from whence you have be draw, that be to say, consider that you be frenchman. look to abraham, your father, and to sara, who have bring you forth how i have call he. he be all alone and have. bless and multiply. he therefore assure the lord will comfort zion, etc. to what end? the savage do make war, our savage do not ground their. war upon the possession of the land. we do not see that they encroatch one upon another for that respect. they have land enough for to live and for to walk. their ambition be limit within their bound. they make war, as alexander the great do make it that they may say: i have beat you. or else for revenge, in remembrance of some injury receive, which be the great vice that i find in they, because they never forget injury wherein they be so much the more excusable because they do nothing but that which ourselves do. also. they follow nature and if we refrain any thing of that instinct, it be the commandment of god which make we to do it. whereunto many do stop their eye, therefore, when they will make war, the sagamo who have most credit among they, make they to know the cause, why. the rendezvous and time of the assembly, the savage oration be arrive. he make long oration unto they upon the occasion which be offer and for to encourage they at every proposition, he demand their advice and if they give consent, they all make a exclamation, say haver. if not, some sagamo will begin to speak and, surprise of the savage, say what he think good of it be both the one and the other. well hear their war be make, but by surprise, in the dark of the night, or by moonshine, by ambushment or subtlety which be general throughout all those indies. for we have see in the first book in what fashion the floridian do make war and the brasilian do no otherwise. and the surprise be, do they come to handy, blow and do fight, very often by day, the manner to foretell or presage the event of the war. but before they go from home we, i mean the souriquois, have this custom to make a fort within which all the yongue man of the army do put themselves. where be the woman come to compass they about and to keep they as besiege, see themselves so environ. they make saily for to shun and deliver themselves out of prison the woman that keep watch. do repulse, they do arrest, they do their best endeavour to take they, and if they be take they lay load at, they do beat, they, strip they, and by such a success they take a good presage of the war they go to make, if they escape, it be a evil sign. they have also another custom concern some one particular man who bring a enemy head. they make great feast dance and song for many day, and while these thing be in do they strip the conqueror and give he but some bad rag to cover himself withal. but at the end of eight day or there, about after the feast, every one do present himself with some thing to honour: he for his valour succession of captain. the captain among they take their degree by succession as the regality in these, our part, which be to be understand if the son of a sagamo imitate the virtue of his father, for otherwise they do, as in the old time, when that first the people do choose king, whereof john de meung, author of the roman de la rose, speak. he say that they choose the tall that have the big body and big bone among they and make he their prince and lord. but this sagamo, have not a absolute authority among they, but, such as tacitus report of the ancient german king, the power of their king say he be not free nor infinite, but they conduct the people rather by example, then by commandment. in virginia and in florida, they be more honour then among the natural virginian. do honour their king, the savage arm, the souriquois, but in brasill, he that have take and kill more prisoner they will take he for captain, and yet his child may not inherit that dignity. their arm be the first which be in use after the creation of the world club bow arrow. for as for sling and crossbow, they have none, nor any weapon of iron or steel much less. those that human wit have invent since two hundred year to counterfeit the thunder, nor ram or other ancient engine of battery. heretofore the first book, chap 15.. they be very skilful in shoot a arrow, and let that be for a example which be recite heretofore, of one that be kill by the armouchiquois. have a little dog pierce together with he with a arrow, shoot a far off. yet i will not give they the praise due to many nation of this hither world which have be famous for that exercise, as the scythian, getes, sarmates, goth, scot, parthian and all the people of the east, of who a great number be so skilful that they have hit a hair which the holy scripture witness of. many of god people, namely of the beniamite, who go to war. judge ch 10. vers 15.. eccellent archer against israel. of all this, people say the scripture: there be seven huudred. choose man, be left-handed, all these can fling a stone at a hair breadth and not fail. in crete, there be a alcon so skilful a archer that a dragon carry away his son, he pursue after he and kill he without hurt his child. one may read of the emperor domitian that he can direct his arrow far of between his two finger. be spread abroad. the writing of the ancient make mention of many who shoot bird through fly in the air and of other wonder which our savage will admire at. but notwithstanding. they be gallant man and good warrior, who will go through every place, be back by some number of frenchman, and which be the second thing next unto courage. they can endure hardness in the war, lie in the snow and on the ice, suffer hunger and, by intermission, feed themselves with smoke, as we have say in the former chapter, for war be call militia. not from whence come this word, malice or militia. ulpian l 1. @ ult d mil mat 6. v 34. out of the word mollitia, as ulpian, the lawyer and other will have it by a antiphrasticall manner of speak, but of which be as much to say as kakia, or of which the greek do call kakosis. and so it be. take in saint matthew where it be, say that the day have enough of his own grief. kakia that be to ^^y his affliction, his pain, his labour, his hardness, as saint jerome do expound it very well. and the word in s paul kakopatheson: hierom opi 247. amand have not be ill. translate: dura that be: suffer affliction as a good soldier of jesus christ, instead of harden thyself with patience, as it be in virgil durate and and in another place he call the to signify brave and excellent captain. which hardness and malice of war tertullian do expound, imbonit, as in the book that he have write to the martyr for to exhort they to suffer affliction manful for the name of jesus christ a. soldier say he can come to the war with pleasure, and he go, not to the fight, come forth from his chamber but out, oftent and pavilion, stretch out and tie to stalk and fork as and as where, no pleasure be now, although the war which be make come forth out of tent and pavilion, be hard yet, notwithstanding the life of our savage be yet hard and may be call a true, that be to say malice, which i take for hardness. and after this manner do they travel over great country, through the wood, for to surprise their enemy and to assail subject of the savage fear, he on the sudden, this be that which keep they in perpetual fear for at the least noise. in the world, as of a ellan which pass among branch and leaf, they heretofore cha 17.. take a alarm, they that have town after the manner that i have describe heretofore, be somewhat more assure, for have well, bar the come in, they may ask who go there and prepare themselves to the combat. by such surprise, the iroquois be in number. eight thousand man have heretofore exterminate the algumequin. they of hochelaga and other border upon the great river. nevertheless, when our savage, under the conduct of membertou, go to the war against the armouchiquois, they embark themselves in shaloupe and canowes, but indeed they do not enter within the country but kill they on their frontieres, in the port of chouakoet. and for asmuch as this war, the cause thereof, the counsel, the execution and the end of it have be describe by i in french verse which i have annex unto my poem entitle the muse of new france, i refer the reader to have recourse to it, because i will not write one thing twice. i will only say that be at the river saint john the sagamo chkoudun, a christian and frenchman in will and courage, make a young man of retel, call leseure and myself, to see how they go to the war. and after their feast they come forth, some fourscore out of his town have lay down their mantle of fur, that be to say stark, naked bear, every one a shield which cover all their body over, after the fashion of the ancient gaulois who pass into greece under the captain brennus, of who they that can not wade the river do lay themselves on their buckler, their manner of march to the war, a martialldance which serve they for boat, as pausanias say. beside these shield they have, every one, his wooden mace, their quiver on their back and their bow in hand. march as it be in dance wise. i do not think, for all that, that when they come near to the enemy for to fight, that they be so orderly as the ancient lacedaemonian who, from the age of five year, be accustom to a certain manner of dance which they use: go to fight, that be to say with a mild and grave measure, to the sound of flute to the end, to come to blow with a cool and settle sense and not to trouble their mind, to be able also to discern they that be courageous from they that be fearful, as plutarch say, but rather they go furious plutar in the treaty of the refrain of cboler and in the apophth, with great clamour and fearful howl to the end to. astonish the enemy and to give to themselves mutual assurance, which be do among all the westerly indian. in this muster, our savage go to make a turn about a hill and as their return be somewhat slow, we take our way towards our bark, where our man be in fear lest some wrong have be do unto we. how the savage do use with the victory. in the victory, they kill all that may make resistance, but they pardon the woman and child. the brasilian, contrariwise, do take prisoner as many as they can and reserve they for to be fatned, to kill and to eat. they, in the first assembly they shall make, which be a kind of sacrifice among those people that have some form. of religion from who those man have take this inhuman custom for ancient. they that be overcome be sacrifice to the god who be think to be author of the victory whereof it come that they be call victim because that they be overcome. they be also call hosty host because they be enemy. they that do set forth the name of supplice, do it, almost upon the same occasion, cause supplication to be make to the god of the good of they who they condemn to death. such have be the custom among many nation, to sacrifice the enemy to the false god, and it be also practise in perou in the time that the spaniard come thither first. 1. samuel 15. vers 33. we read in the holy scripture that the prophet samuel cut in piece agag, king of the amalekite, before the lord in gilgal, which may be find strange. see that there be nothing, so mild as this holy prophet be, but one must consider here that it be by a special motion of the spirit of god which stir samuel to make himself executioner of the, the divine justice, against a enemy of the people of israel, in steed of saul, who have neglect the commandment of god which be enjoin to smite hamaleke and to put all to the edge of the sword, without spare any live soul, which he do not. and therefore, be he forsake of god. samuel, then do that which saul shall have. do he cut in piece a man who be condemn of god, who have make many widow in israel and just do receive the like payment to the end, also to fulfil the prophecy of balaam, num 24. v 7. who have foretell long before that the king of the israelite shall be raise up above agag and his kingdom shall be exalt. now this action of samuel be not without example for when they be to appease exod. 32. v 27.. 1. king 18. vers 40. act 5. v 5. the wrath of god, moses say: put every man his sword by his side and slay every man his brother and every man his companion and every man his neighbour. so, elijah, make the prophet of baal. to be kill. so at saint peter word, ananias and saphira fall down dead at his foot. now to return to our purpose, our savage as they have no religion. so make they no sacrifice and beside, be more human than the brasilian, forasmuch as they eat no man flesh, content themselves to destroy they. that do annoy they, but they have such a generosity in they that they have rather die then to fall into the hand of their enemy. and when de poutrincourt take revenge of the armouchiquois which murder some of our man, there be some who suffer themselves rather to be. hew in piece, then that they will be carry away prisoner, or if by main force they be carry away, they will starve. or kill themselves. yea also, they will not suffer the dead body of their people to remain in the possession of their enemy and in the peril of their own life. they take they and carry they away, which tacitus do also testify of the ancient german. and it have be a usual thing with all generous nation, the victory be get of one side or other. the victorious cut off the head of the enemy, slay how great soever the number of they be, which be divide among the captain. but they leave there the carcase, content themselves with the skin, which they cause to be dry, or do tan it and do make trophy with it in their cabin, take therein all their contentment and some solemn feast happen among they- i call feast whensoever. they make tabagie, they take they and dance with. they have they hang about their neck, at their arm or at their girdle, and with very rage they sometime bite at they, which be a great proof of this disordinate appetite of revenge whereof we have sometime speak. 6. book biblios, tit live 1 decade. 10. book: our ancient gaullois do make no less trophy with the head of their enemy than our savage, for if diodorus and titus livius may be. believe, have cut they, they bring they back from the field, hang at the petrall of their horse and do tie or nail they solemn with song and praise of the vanquisher, according to their custom, at their gate, as one will do a wild boar. as for the head of the noble strabo, lib 4. geogr, they do embalm they and keep they careful within case for to make show of they to those that come to see they, and for nothing in the world they will restore they, neither to kinsman nor any other. the boian which be the bourbonnois do, lib 3. decad 3 more, for after they have take out the brain, they do give the skull to goldsmith for to garnish they with gold and to make vessel of they to drink, in which they use in sacred thing and holy solemnity. if any man think this strange, he must yet find more strange that which be report of the hungarian by viginere upon titus livius, of who he say that in the year 1566.. be near javarin, they do lick the blood of the turk head which they bring to the emperor maximilian. which go beyond the barbarousness that may be object to our savage, yea, i must tell you that they have more humanity than many christian who, within these hundred year, have commit in diverse occurrence upon woman and child cruelty more than brutish, whereof the history be full, and our savage do extend their mercy to these two sort of creature. chap 26 of their funeral. the war be end, humanity, do invite we to bewail for the dead and to bury they. it be a work whole of piety and more meritorious than any other, for he that give succour to a man whilst he be a life may hope for some service of he or a reciprocal kindness. but from a dead creature we can expect nothing more. this be that which make that holy man, toby, to be acceptable to god, and for that good office they that employ themselves in the bury of our saviour. be praise in the gospel. as for tear and mourn, eccles 38., ve 16. 17. behold what say the wise son of sirach, my son, power, forth, tear over the dead and begin to mourn as if thou have suffer great harm thyself, and then cover his body according to his appointment and neglect not his burial. make a grievous lamentation and be earnest in mourn and use lamentation as he be worthy, and that a day or two, lest thou be evil, speak off this lesson be come. whether it be by some tradition or by the instinct of nature. as far as to our savage, they have yet at this day that common with the nation of these part to weep for the dead and to keep the body of they after their decease, as it be do in the time of the holy patriarch abraham, isaac and jacob and since. but they make strange clamour many day together, as we see in port royal, some month after our arrival into that country, to wit in november, where they make the funeral ceremony for one of they name panonic, who have take some merchandise out of mont, his store house, and go to truck with the armouchiquois. this panoniac be kill and the body bring. back into the cabin of the river saint croix, where our savage do both weep for he and enbalm he. of what kind this balm be, i can not know, not be able to inquire of it upon the place. i believe they iagge the dead corpse and make they to dry, certain it be that they preserve they from rottenness, which thing they do almost throughout all these indies. he that have write the history of virginia, say that they, virginia, draw out their entrails from the body, flay the dead, take away the skin, cut all the flesh off from the bone, dry it at the sun, then lay it, enclose in mat at the foot of the dead. that do they give he his own. skin again and cover therewith the bone, tie together with leather, fashion it even so as if the flesh have remain at it. it be a thing well know that the ancient egyptian do embalm the dead body and keep they careful. which, beside the profane author, be see in the holy scripture, where it be say that joseph do command his servant and physician to embalm the body of jacob genes, 50. v 5, his father, which he do according to the custom of the country, but the israelite do the like, as it be see in the 2. paralip, 16, v 14. and 21. vers 19 holy chronicle, where it be speak of the death of the king asa and joram from the river of saint. croix, the say decease panoniac be bring into port royal, where again he be weep for, but because they be accustom to make their lamentation for a long continuance of day, as during a month, fear to offend we by their cry, for as much as their cabin be. but some five hundred pass off from our fort membertou come to entreat de poutrincourt not to dislike that they shall mourn after their wont manner and that they will be but eight day in perform of it which he easy grant they. and then afterward they begin the next day. follow at the break of day their weep and cry, which we do hear from our say fort. take some intermission on the midst of the day and they mourn by intermission, every cabin his day and every person his turn. it be a thing worthy marvel that nation so far distant do agree in those ceremony with many of the hither world. for in ancient time the persian, as we read in many place of herodotus and q curtius, do make such lamentation, do rend their garment, do cover their head, do clothe themselves with a mourn garment which the holy scripture do call sackcloth, and also they shave themselves and their horse and mule, as the learned drusius have note in ester 4. v. drus obseru. 12. cap 6. his observation allege for this purpose both herodote and plutarch. the egyptian do as much, and peradventure more in that which concern lamentation, for after the death of the holy i fatriarke jacob, all the ancient man of calling and the counsellor of the house of pharaoh and of the country of egypt, go up in great multitude, even as far as to the corn floor of atad in canaan, and do weep for he with great and grievous complaint, in such sort that the canaanite see it, do say this mourn, be grievous to the egyptian and for the greatness and novelty of the same mourn, they call the say floor abel misraim, that be to say the mourn of the egyptian, the roman. have hire woman to weep for the dead and to relate their praise by long mournful complaint. and those woman be call as it be because that they do begin the motion when it be needful to lament and to relate the praise of the dead. say lucilius by the report of nonius. sometime the very trumpet be not neglect at it, as virgil testify in these word, it clamour. i will not here make a collection of all the custom of other nation, for it will never be at a end. but in france every one know that the woman of picardy do lament their dead with great clamour. accord, among other thing by he collect. recite of one who make her funeral complaint that she say to her decease husband: good god, my poor husband thou have. give we a pitiful farewell. o what farewell it be for ever. o what long congee the woman of bearn. be yet more pleasant, for they recount, during the time of a whole day, the whole life of their husband, lamiamou amou, lo balen, lo m'esburbat, and such like thing. that be to say my love, my love, smile, countenance, bright eye, nimble leg and good dancer, my own valiant, i own valiant, early up and late a bed, etc. john de leri recite that which follow of the gascoin woman: year year o bet o bet qu'here that. be to say: o the brave swaggeren, o what a fair player he be. and thereupon he report that the woman of brasill do howl and bawl with such clamour that it seem that it be some assembly of dog and wolf, he be dead. will some woman say: draw their voice. he be so valiant, and who have make we to eat of so many prisoner. other make a choir apart will say: oh, what a good hunter and what the tovoupinambaoult be enemy to the portuge. a excellent fisher he be. oh, what a brave knocker down of portuges and of margaias he be of who he have so well avenge we. and at the pause of every complaint they will say: he be dead, he. be dead. for who we do now mourn? whereunto the man do answer, say, alas, it be true, we shall see he no more until we see he behind the brasilian, believe the resurre ction, the mountain where we shall dance with he, and other such thing. but the most part of these people do end their mourn in one day or some. what more? as for the indian of florida, when any of their paraoustis die, they weep three day and three night, continual, and without eat, and all the paraoustis that be his ally and friend do the like mourn, cut half their hair as well, man as woman, in token of love. and that do there be some woman ordain who, during the time of six moon, do lament the death of their paraousti three time a day, cry with a loud voice in the morning, at noon and at night, which be the fashion of the roman praefice, of who we have not long since speak. for that which be of the mourn apparel, our souriquois do paint their face all with black, which make they to seem very hideous, but the hebrew be more reprovable, who do scotch their face in the time of mourn, jerem 41. v 3. and do shave their hair, as say the prophet jeremy, which be usual among they, of great antiquity, by reason whereof the same be forbid, they by the levit. 19 v. 27. 28. law of god in you shall not cut round the corner of your hair, neither mar the tuft of your beard, and you shall not cut your flesh for the dead, nor make any print of a deut 14.. 1. mark upon you: i be the lord, and in deuteronomie you be the child of the lord, your god. you shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eye for the dead, which be also forbid by the roman. in the law of the twelve table, herodotus and diodorus do say that the egyptian chief in their king funeral, do rend their garment and besmear their face, yea all their head, and assemble themselves twice a day. do march in round sing. the virtue of their king, do abstain from sodden meat, from live creature, from wine and from all dainty fare during the space of 70. day, without any wash, nor lie on any bed, much less to have the company of their wife. always lament the ancient mourn of our queen of france, for, as for our king, they wear no mourn apparel, be in white colour, and therefore, after the death of their husband, they keep the name of roine blanch, white queen, but the common mourn of other be at this day in black. for all these mourn be but deceit, and of a hundred there be not one, but be glad of such a weed. this be the cause that the ancient solin cap 17.. valer li 2.. c 1 thracian, be more wise, who do celebrate the birth of man with tear and their funeral with joy. show that by death we be deliver from all calamity, wherewith we be bear and be in rest. speak of the locrois. say that they make not any mourn for the dead, but rather bancket and great rejoice. and the wise solon know the foresay abuse. do abolish all those rent of clothes of those weep fellow, and will not that so many clamour shall be make over the dead, as plutarch say in his life. the christian, yet more wise, do in ancient time sing alleluia at their burial, and this verse of the psalm, psal 11^, v 7, and now my soul sith. thou be safe. return unto thy rest, for large lo the lord to thou his bounty have express notwithstanding, because that we be man, subject to joy, to grief and to other motion and perturbation of mind which, at the first motion, be not in our power. as say the philosopher, weep be not a thing to be blame, whether it be in consider our frail condition and subject to so many harm, be it for the loss of that which we do love and hold dear. holy personage have be touch with those passion and our saviour himself weep over the sepulchre of lazarus, brother to the holy magdalein. but one must not suffer himself to be carry away with sorrow, nor make ostentation of clamour, wherewith, very often the heart be never a whit touch, whereupon the wise son of sirach do give ecel 22.. v 11, we, a advertisement, say weep for the dead, for he have lose the light of this life, but make small weep because he be in rest. the savage do burn the movable good of the decease. after that, our savage have weep for panoniac. they go to the place where his cabin be whilst he do live, and there they do burn all that he have, leave his bow, arrow, quiver, his bever, skin, his tobacco without which they can live, his dog and other, his small movable to. the end that no body shall quarrel for his succession. the same show how little a fair lesson for the covetous they care for the good of this world. give thereby a goodly lesson to they who, by right or wrong, do run after this silver devil and very often do break their neck or, if they catch what they desire it be in, make bankrupt with god and spoil the poor, whether it be with open war or under colour of justice. a fair lesson, i say, to those covetous, unsatiable tantalusses who take so much pain and murder so many creature to seek out hell in the depth of the earth, that be to say the luk 16.. 9 hierom, epist 2.. add nepotian treasure, which our saviour do call the riches of iniquity. a fair lesson also for they of who saint jerome speak. treat of the life of clerk there be, some say he who do give a little thing for a alme, to the end to have it again with great usury and under colour of give some thing. they seek after riches which be rather a hunt than a alm. so be beast, bird and fish take a small bait, be put to a hook to the end to catch at it. silly woman purse. and in the epitaph of nepotian to heliodore, some say he do heap money upon money and make their purse to burst out by certain kind of service they catch at. a the richesse of good matron and become rich being monk than they be, be secular. and for this covetousness the regular and secular have be by imperial edict, exclude from legacy, whereof the same do complain, not for the thing, but for that the cause thereof have be give. let we come again to our burn of good. the first people that have not yet covetousness root in their heart do the same as our savage do for the phrygian or troyian. do bring to the latin the use of burn, not only of movable but also of the dead body. make high pile of wood for that effect, as aeneas do in the funeral of misenus, virgil 6. aeneid, and then the body be wash and anoint, they do cast all his garment upon the pile of wood, frankincense meat, and they pour on it oil, wine, honey, leaf, flower, violet rose ointment of good smell and other thing, as may be see by ancient history and inscription. and for to continue that which i have say of misenus virgil, do add etc. aeneid 1^ and speak of the funeral of pallas, a young lord, friend to aeneas, tum aeneas, and and underneath and sue in: 1. samuel, last chap in the holy scripture, i find but the body of saul and of his son to have be burn after their overthrow, but it be not say that any of their movable be cast into the. fire, the old gaullois and germains do burn with the dead body all that which he have love, even to the very beast paper of account and obligation, as if by that mean they will either have pay or demand their caesar in the 6. book of the war of the gaullois, debt in such sort that a little before that caesar come thither, there be some that do cast themselves upon the pile where the body be burn, in hope to live else where, with their kindred, lord and friend concern, the german tacitus say the same of they. in those term, these fashion have be common, ancient to many nation. but our savage be not so foolish as that, for they take good heed from put. themselves into the fire, know that it be to hot. they content themselves, then, in burn the dead man, his good, and as for the body, they put, he honourable, in the grave, this panoniac, of who we have speak, be keep in the cabin of his father and of neguioadetch, his mother, until the spring time, when that the assembly of the savage be make for to go to revenge his death, in which assembly he be yet weep for, and before they go to the war, they make a end of his funeral and carry he, according to their custom, into a desolate island, towards cap de sable, some five and twenty or thirty league distant from port royal, those isle which do serve, they for. churchyard be secret among they, for fear some enemy shall seek to torment the bone of their dead. plin l 7.. ^ 56. pliny and many other have esteem that it be foolishness to keep dead body under a vain opinion that after this life one be something. but one may apply unto he that which portius festus, governor of caesarea, do foolish, say to the apostle saint paul: thou be beside act 26. v 34. thyself much learning have. make thou mad. our savage be esteem very brutish, which they be not, but yet they have more wisdom. in that respect, then, such philosopher, we christian do common bury the dead body, that be to say we yield they to the earth. call from whence come the? word a man from which they be take, and so do the ancient roman, before the custom of burn. they which, among the west indian, the brasilian do, who put their dead into pit, dig after the form of a ton almost upright sometime in their own house, like to the first roman, according as servius, the commentor of virgil, do say: but our savage, as far as perou, do not so, but rather do keep they whole in sepulchre, which be in many place as scaffold of nine and ten foot height, the roof whereof be all cover with mat whereuponthey stretch out their dead rank according to the order of their decease. so, almost our savage, do save that their sepulchre be lesser and low, make. after the form of cage which they cover very proper, and there they lay their dead, which we call to bury and not to inter. see they be not within the earth. now, although that many nation have think good to keep the dead body. yet it be better to follow that which nature require, which be to render to the earth that which belong unto she which, as lucrece, say tul in the 2 book of the law, which xenophon allege also this be the ancient fashion of bury, say cicero, and that great cirus, king of the persian, will not be otherwise. serve after his death then to be restore to the earth. o my dear child, say he before he die, when i have end. my life. do not put my body neither in gold, nor in silver, nor in any other sepulchre, but render it forthwith to the earth. for what may be more happy and more to be. desire then to join himself with she that produce and nourish all good and fair thing. so do he esteem for vanity all the pomp and excessive expense of the pyramid of egypt, of the mausolee and other monument, make after that imitation, as the same of augustus, the great and magnifical mass of adrian, the septizone of severus and other yet lesser, not esteem himself after death more than the mean of his subject. the roman do leave the entomb of the body, have perceive that the long war do bring disorder. unto it and that the dead corpse be unbury, which arnob, lib 8.. by the law of the twelve table, it be behooveful to bury out of the town, like as they do in athens, whereupon arnobius speak against the gentile. we do not fear, say he, as you think, the ransack of our grave, but we keep the most ancient and best custom of bury pausanias, who blame the gaullois as much as he can say in his phocique that they have no care to bury their dead. but we have show the contrary heretofore. and though it be so, he speak of the overthrow of the army of brennus. the same may have be say of the nabateen who, according to strabo, do that which pausanias. do object to the gaullois and bury the body of their king in dunghill, our savage. be more kind than so and have all that which the office of humanity may desire, yea, even more. for after they have bring the dead to his rest, every one make he a present of the best thing he have. some do cover, he with many, skin of bever, of otter and other beast. other present, he with bow, arrow, quiver, knife, matachiaz and other thing which they have in common not only with they of florida who, for want of fur, do set upon the sepulchre the cup wherein the decease be accustom to drink. and all about they. they plant great number of arrow item. they of brasill, who do bury with their dead thing, make of feather and carcanet, and they of perou who, before the come of the the spaniard, do fill their tomb with treasure, but also with many nation of these, our part, which do the same even from the first time after the flood, as may be conjecture by the writing, though deceitful, of the sepulchre of semiramis, queen of babylon, contain that he of her successor that have need of money shall make it to be open and that he shall find there even as much as he will have whereof darius, willing to make trial, find in it nothing else but other letter. speak in this sort, unless thou be a wicked man and unsatiable thou. will not have through covetousness so trouble the quiet of the dead and break down their sepulchre. i will think this custom to have be only among the heathen, be it not that i find in josephus his history that ioseph 7. book 12, the of the antiquity of the jew solomon do put in the sepulchre of david his father above three million of gold which be rifle. thirteen hundred year after this custom to put gold into the sepulchre be come even to the roman, be forbid by the twelve table. also, the excessive expense that many do make in water, the body with precious liquor and other mystery that we have recite heretofore and notwithstanding many simple and foolish man and woman do ordain by. will and testament that one shall bury with their body their ornament, ring and jewel, which the greek do call as there be a form, see of l medico, d arg, etc. leg, l, d leg 1. l and d relig and sump fun. it report by the lawyer scaevola in the book of the digest, which be reprove by and ulpian, likewise civil lawyer, in such sort that for the abuse thereof the roman be constrain to cause, that the censor of the woman ornament do condemn as simple and effeminate they that do such thing as pluturch say, in the life of solon and sylla. therefore, the best course be to keep the modesty of the ancient patriarch and even of king cyrus, who we have. mention before on who tomb be this inscription report by arrian. thou that pass by, whosoever thou be and from what part soever thou come, for i be sure that thou will come. i be that cyrus who get the dominion to the persian. i pray thou envy not this little parcel of ground which cover my poor body. so then, our savage be not excusable in put all the best ornament they have into the sepulchre of the dead. see, they may reap commodity by they, but one may answer for they that they have this custom even from their father beginning, for we see that almost from the very time of the flood. the like have be do in this hither world and give to their dead their fur, matachias, bowes, arrow and quiver they be, thing that they have no need of. and notwithstanding this, do not clear the spaniard from blame who have rob the sepulchre of the indian of perou and cast the bone on the dunghill, nor our own man that have do the like in take away the bever skin in our new-france, as i have say heretofore, heretofore. 1.. book ch 17.. i, epist 146.. for, as isodorus say of damiette in a epistle, it be the part of enemy void of all humanity to rob the body of the dead which can defend themselves. nature itself have give this to many, that hatred do cease after death and do reconcile themselves with the decease. but riches make the covetous to become enemy to the dead, against who they have nothing to say, who torment their bone with reproach and injury and therefore not without cause. have the ancient emperor make law and ordain rigorous pain against the spoiler and destroyer of sepulchre. all praise be give to god.