news of sr walter rauleigh. in these queasy and most dangerous time, wherein truth be manacle, by opinion and imagination, every man make his own thought, a comment upon other man labour, and by screw or wrest wind every design to that which best suit with their fancy, i can not choose but borrow so much time from the necessity of my occasion as to acquaint you with some particular passage in our voyage which, though in the value it may be much short, both of what yourself and other expect, because at this time our design be but a embryo conceive, and far from that happy perfection to which i doubt not the divine will assist we, but we shall, to the comfort of our noble and good friend and the honour of our nation with all prosperity of fortune bring to pass. yet, in as much as i know, the malice of many envious and evil, dispose people against backbiter, who build the groundwork of their own honour upon other man disgrace and with the venom of their aspersion, seek, as much as in their malice lie, to poison the worthy labour of the most noble attempter, to which our voyage be most hopeful to our friend and most dreadful to our contrary, be infinite subject. and that such rancour do await and follow we, as the great leviathan of the sea pursue the bonittos. i doubt not, but my present relation shall give you who virtue. i seek only to satisfy that assurance of good hope in our attempt, as shall arm you against whatsoever slander or imputation shall be able, in misty, thick fog of disdain, to throw before you and albeit to the judgement of every virtuous good man. there need no other apology for the hope of our success than the wisdom, experience and undefatigable labour in the like design of our general, who now set all christendom, nay almost the whole world, at gaze upon. he, if he shall not to such beholder give a renown satisfaction, it be against all rule of worth and policy to imagine. yet, above all, this, i think, shall satisfy every reasonable soul and make envy feed only upon his own serpent, when not alone the entire wisdom of our land, but the suffrage and allowance of our sovereign, who be the very soul of that wisdom, do both give way to our action. who, goodness, what man will be so ingrateful to abuse? or what folly can be so strong in any sensible soul as to seek to go invisible before god? but, sir, these argument be needless against a slander of such weakness. nor will i trouble your ear with a confutation of they who stand already confound in all good man opinion. suffice it that hitherto our success be answerable to our hope, and our hope as strong as any that have pass from our kingdom since the first discovery. and no doubt but the end will bring forth as worthy, if not a much better, issue, in as much as we have have both the clear light of all other man experience and the approve knowledge of a great part of our design in our general, noble and personal trial. beside, we know that the top of high scale mountain or pyramid be not to be attain unto by leap or jump at, but by flow degree and by secure and safe step, even as the parrot climb with both beak and foot. for if we look into the course of all the most excellent man of our nation, which have make it as famous for sea-action as any nation in the world, we shall find how, even by little and little, as hannibal with vinegar, waste the alps and make a passage where never any before be discern for not himself alone but a whole army to pass over. so our famous and excellent attempter have, by degree, man after man add, step unto step, make such a way over the whole world that, except the very heart of all which, as in the anatomy of man body, it be not to be find out or touch till a man, have pass through first both all the exterior and interior. member and so, likewise, of the brain, nature as it be, defend all her most excellent work from every ordinary assault and invasion. so there be, at this day, not leave any climate unsearched or undiscovered, but only this which, as for its site and place, be the middle of the world and also, for the excellency of it, may well be style, the heart of the world, as the most principal and renown part of it at which, if it be our fortune to arrive, the work will be worthy the doer and a fair jewel for his crown. who be the royal author and comforter of so great a attempt by so many king and prince attempt and yet unachive, and that we may walk up. this scale with as much ease and safety as all mortal hope can allow. we let we turn back our eye and look into the action of most of the most famous and noble gentleman which have go before we and make those most fair and large path through which we daily walk. we shall see that m william haukins, m william haukins, his travel, the father of sir john haukins, a man of infinite virtue and great action, make his first discovery. but to the southern land, call the grand canaria, and find there great trade and great commodity which for the benefit may well have take up the rest of any man mind who end have be wealth and no other but the gentleman have a. more worthy aim though, then, in the winter and last quarter of his age, from thence discover some part of the small land which belong to the west indies, learn intelligence of the main and out of his judgement see what be fit both for traffic and other more material discovery. this, not able to furnish himself, he impart to his most worthy son, sir john haukins. sr john haukins travel and make he rich with his knowledge, so arm he for the enterprise that in the year 1562. he make a voyage thither with three small ship and but 100 man and make discovery of the island of and the land of caicos, where, by way of traffic, he make such merchandise that he not only lade. all his own ship but diverse other hulk which he there hyre and so return home with more wealth and honour then ever any have do before his time. yet since he have go not a step high than his father have do before he and make the scale no large nor easy for other. that shall pursue he, out of the excellency of his disposition and love to his country, in the year 1564. he betake himself to the sea again, sr john, second voyage, and with a fleet of four ship and 170. man go again to the west indies and in his way do discover the island sambula and other part of africa. thence to the island call dominica, so to margarita, thence to tortuga. after, to then to the land of curasao, ranchario, rio de la h^cha and other, thence to cape sr anthony, and so to the sandy land, and last by florida, where he show that excellency of good nature and rare humanity to certain distress frenchman, that the remembrance will live whilst there live any record of goodness or any thankfulness in france. and thus he return home the second time, lade, with as much wealth and honour as ever any have do before he. and to his brave, heroical scale of discovery have now add diverse, noble and spacious stair which, albeit, may have very well deter he from any more trouble and vexation. both consider the good and goodness he have get and the honourable place with the favour of his dear sovereign. yet all this not value with the debt he owe his country, sir john three voyage. he go again the three time to sea with a fleet of six fair ship and trade in all such place as he have trade in before and moreover, discover carthagena and diverse other land about it. after go to sr john vllua and other part border upon mexico where he make himself master of twelve ship in value worth two hundred thousand pound and seize the island, but out of his noble nature. consider the amity at that time betwixt, spain and england restore all again which have his end tend. as much to lucre as his enemy do to perfidy and treachery. he may not only have bring home that, but six million of treasure more, all which be at his commandment. thence he search the whole bay of mexico and thence go to ponte vedra and so return home. in this discovery he get great perfection of knowledge, touch the wonderful wealth and riches of those southern part, and though he have do more than any english man before his time, yet he see there be a supper, excellence, remain as it be hide and possible to be find out at which, with all his endeavour, he aim most earnest. only he find that a great strength and a great industry. then either he be yet master. of or have occasion to use, must be employ in the same and therefore the four time. he return unto the sea with 27 tall ship, sir john, four voyage and 2500. man. but it please god, the design shall be preserve either for some other man or some other time, so that sir john haukins fall sick, die at sr john de puertorico and by that mean the great end of the journey fail. yet do he leave behind he such brave example for imitation and so fair a scale for other to ascend, by that many become his scholar and howsoever their renown, win to themselves particular name of particular eminence, yet they arrive not beyond he or get a skill that be to he unacquainted. only that most famous and worthy knight, sir francis drake. sir francis drake travel, who have, as it be report, take from he the most and great part of his breed, be, as some man say, for a long time his ordinary household servant and one that have attend he, in the success of some of his voyage, see and aquaint himself with the happy rule of such a happy master, betake himself to the sea in the year of our lord 1572.. and discover most of the hithermost part of the small land of america, and return home with more knowledge than substance, and yet with more substance than may defray the charge of three time such a voyage, by the strength of which success he make. himself fit for the sea the second time, sir francis, second voyage in the year 1577.. in which voyage he make himself more familiar with all the rich part of the west indies and with some part of the main body of the same, and so return home with a competent substance, yet far inferior to the largeness of his mind, because these two first attempt, still open to his judgement, matter of much great hope and renown. consequence, so that the three time again, he put to sea, in the year of our lord, 1585.. with a full resolution to do something answerable to the greatness of his heart, sir francis 3 voyage and the honour of the nation he challenge, and in this voyage he go. about the circumference of the whole world and return home with his ship lade with gold and treasure of that infinite and inestimable value that never any man before he attain to any small degree in his comparison. and yet, in this unspeakable journey for infinite wealth and infinite labour, not any mortal man have former do the like, the experience he gain do so far precede his riches that he make it of no value and know that there yet remain that undiscovered at least out of christian commandment which will make all he know pitiful, poor and of no reckon. and therefore, to achieve this, or true philosopher, stone be indeed the mother of all mine and perfect treasure, he again betake himself to the sca. in the year of our lord 1595.. with a very goodly navy and many most noble and worthy personage, admirable well experience both in land and sea service. but it be not the pleasure of the everliving god that by he the work shall be finish and therefore in this voyage he sicken and in the west indies die, so that the end of the journey be by a twofold way, defeyt as by his death, and the take of a certain surgeon which belong to a ship call the solomon, as also by the take of another ship call the francis, and by they the whole voyage discover to the enemy. the rest of the fleet be enforce to return home, altogether unsatisfied. now, whilst these gentleman be thus search the south and south-west part of the world and have almost bring their hope within a step or two of the high scale, sir hugh willoughby, travel to the north. a honourable emulation. raise up diverse other gentleman of like virtue and fitness for action to search into the north and northwest sea for the find out of the easy, most safe way into the east indies, a place esteem for riches, equal with the former, but in merchandise by much, far beyond it. and in this discovery sir hugh willoughby be exceed, well deserve, who make diverse fair step to the scale. and though he perish and die in the action, yet he leave such excellent hope behind he that many become pursuer of his project. among who none be more remarkable and exquisite than that famous, worthy gentleman, sir martin forbisher, knight sir martin forbisher to china, who by many experience and intelligence of the state, condition, climate and height of china, know that if a way may by any industry be find out from the northwest to lead unto the same, that then it must needs be most short, most easy and most safe, and that doubtless the wealth which will arise by rich merchandise from thence will exceed the whole trade of the world, beside, nay, that the mine which be hopeful there to be find may. go near to countervail the great hope which be build on the south-west, if not exceed it, and thereupon have all those experience which sir hugh willoughby have leave behind, together with his own knowledge. he betake himself to the sea in the year 1576 with two good ship and have past the fair island and swinborne in scotland, he come to fowlay in friesland, thence to labrador, so to the land. gabriels and bourchers, where he see and confer with many people of that island be a savage people much like unto the tartar, with broad face, flat nose and long black hair below their shoulder. their attire only seal skin. nor be there between the man and woman any difference, more than a few blue streak. down their cheek and about their eye. these he see on the water, not on the land, in certain small boat which be make of seal skin, be sharp at each end and broad in the bottom, with small wooden keel, make of broad splinter and in shape or proportion not much unlike unto the spanish shallop. with these people who he entice to come to, he by all fair and gentle mean, and by give they certain three point and other toy in which they infinite delight, he have very much conference. both touch the nature of those sea and other occurrent meet for his discovery, by who he understand that the year time be then spend and the ice in those place infinite increase it be. at that time, impossible to attempt further without most assure loss which according he find by his own experience, and therefore return homeward by trumpet island and other place which, both for victual and fresh water, he find of great consequence for the further of this discovery hereafter. now have thus erect these few step to this much wish for scale and find great hope likely to ensue upon the attempt. he betake himself again to the sea, sir martins second voyage to cataya, in the year of our lord 1577. and take a better advantage of the year time pass all the former place which before he have discover, and from thence hold his course even unto the main of cataia, though with many danger and interruption. for not any man that seek way unknown but must of necessity many time err. neither can the judgement be satisfy by the first superficial sight of the eye, but by a more serious time to contemplate and meditate upon the same discourse. ever crown all action with perfection, and hence it come that make a long stay upon this coast, then before he imagine any necessity will have, draw he the year time. so pass on that he can by no possible mean proceed further in the discovery, but be force to approve what particular profit he can find in that place to recompense his travel. find by the climate and all other good likelihood, that of force, there must be something of great valuation. whereupon, after some curious search of many well experience man in mineral business, gold mynes in cataya which at that time attend upon he, he find at length certain strange mine which yield a kind of black shine ore, both massy and wealthy, which they call the black stone, and by such small trial as that place, with the accommodation of their ship, can afford they, they find it a very rich gold over, so that not be able to stay there to refine any great quantity thereof as well, for the necessity of the year time as the want of other most necessary provision, he present lade all. his ship with that oar be one tall ship and two small bark, and then take a man, a woman and a child of that country into his ship also. he return with they home into england, to the much contentment of the queen majesty, his sovereign, and all other adventurer which have then share in his fortune. and still he find a increase of his hope and make his way large and large, so that the three time he put forth to the sea in the year of our lord 1588.. st martin three voyage. but it please god that he can not perfect his intent, only return home with much wealth and a great deal of knowledge which have since be pursue by diverse worthy adventurer. and though not perfect in that exquisite height and perfection which the greatness of their mind and wish aim at, yet still it give that lustre and strong hope of success in the action that a very noble and worthy gentleman, mr thomas cavendish, lead. as well by their former attempt and experience, mr thomas cavendish travel, as also by his own knowledge, draw from certain approve, assurance and intelligence, touch the wonderful and almost unexpressible wealth of china. with great judgement and advice of many most excellent seaman, engage himself into this worthy discovery and find many hard difficulty in the northwest passage, by good advice resolve to try the contrary, which be the south-west. know that of necessity those line must in the end meet in. one period, and therefore, with all good accommodation, he betake himself to the sea in the year of our lord 1586. and pass the grand canary, come to cape verde and thence to the tropic line, discover all the hithermost part of the east indies and from thence attain the very main and body of china, where he fraught his ship with that wealth as cloth of gold, tissue, velvet, satin damask and a world of other commodity of no less value. that it be think, except drake, not any englishman ever return with the like wealth, insomuch that it set a world of noble heart on fire to enter into the like action. but he have compass a end of his profit but not of his experience. refuse to return back again by one and the same way, but keep his course forward, go round about the whole circumference of the earth and in the end come into england without any abatement of the great substance he have former attain to the infinite joy of all, his friend, the great honour of the kingdom and the much admiration of all foreign nation. but do this experience give he a full satisfaction or show that end to his design that he may, with his honour or reputation, say, with no sure, but after a clean, contrary manner, open unto he such a fair way to great glory and renown that he account this neither worthy of his beast nor fit in any small degree to contain. the least part of his action be in comparison of those thing which he hear there relate and indeed not far remove from that continent. but poor base and beggarly, the glory of which famous action so entice he that the second time he go to the sea m cavendish, his second voyage in the year of our lord 1591.. so accommodate, with all necessary provision, both of man, munition and victual, that not any gentleman ever go forth in his own particular, better or more brave provide. but it please god, who be the strength and guide of these action, not to mark he out for this great work, for in this voyage he sicken and die. who great direction live, enclose in his own breast the voyage quell and his ship return home again for england. but the infinite profit which have spring his example may be behold in our east indian trade. the like whereof i think no nation in the world can boast, be of all other. the wealthy, the fruitful and the most certain afford we not only a nursery of merchant and seaman but such a invincible strength of ship and other warlike accoutrement that any nation under the sun may tremble to offend we. to these discovery i can. add the discovery of virginia by the ever memorable and valiant knight, sir richard grinuile. sr richard grinuile, his discovery of virginia and the plantation there, which doubtless promise and already restore much benefit to our kingdom, have continue there almost from the year 1585.. till this hour, and how, even in that discovery, he both hear and understand of the incomparable and not to be equal wealth which yet lie hide in the south part of america. but i fear i have trouble your ear already too much with my tedious digression, which be not altogether vain and impertinent, since by it you may see how, even from the infancy of our english travel, every man have have a noble ambition and most probable assurance of good. hope to attain a height of honour and wealth which yet rest unattain. sir walter rauleigh, at which, questionless, our general bend his aim be diverse way woo and induce thereunto, more than any englishman whatsoever, both in respect of his former experience at this day, not to be parallel his wisdom, learning and conference with the experience of place he have former hold, that it be impossible any thing of note shall be hide from he, therefore, to reconcile those thing already write with the relation i intend to pursue. you shall understand that whatsoever have be do former, by any of those already rehearse or by any other, whether english, spanish, dutch, french or any other nation of christendom, all their knowledge and experience have. liberal. be. bring to his remembrance love duty, his place of authority or the chance of war, tender the same unto he as a rent due to his noble mind and action. and above all, a english knight, sir robert dudley be a especial man that long since, both from his experience at sea, sir robert dudley have consume infinite wealth and much time in these discovery, as also by mean of certain letter which he have intercept from the spaniard and take in his travel, give our general a strong assurance that yet there remain out of the hand of all the king and prince in christendom, in the south part of america, the very magazine of all rich metal and such a empire as whosoever shall have. the fortune to conquer. it shall so darken all the action either of cortes or pescaro that nothing but poverty will appear in their deed. neither mexico nor peru be worthy to be compare with it. and what prince soever shall possess, it shall be lord of more gold, of a more beautiful empire and of more city and people. then, either the king of spain or the great turk at this questionless our hope, promise that his noble end do bend for, be full as great and have be much great than any man whatsoever of our nation that have follow the like course to. what shall his great heart look or what shall he dedicate to? so gracious and merciful a king as he enjoy, but the very ^oppe and garland of all heroical action. but in as much as yet, nothing be do worthy relation, because we be not yet arrive at the hithermost end of our design. all our success remain in hope, and lest my too much love may make i too saucy in prophecy, i will leave all to his holy will which govern all. only i will acquaint you with some particular touch, the general government of our fleet which, although other man, doubtless in their voyage have in some measure observe. yet, in all the great volume which have be write, touch, voyage, there be no precedent of so godly, severe and martial government which not only in itself be laudable and worthy imitation but also fit to be write and engrave in every man soul that covet to do honour to his king and country in these or the like attempt, the true copy of which law, article and especial commandment be these which here after follow and at this present we observe. order to be observe by the commander of the fleet and land company under the charge and conduct of sr walter rauleigh, knight bind for the south part of america, or else where give at plymouth, in devon, the three of may 1617.. first, because no action nor enterprise can prosper, be it by sea or land, without the favour and assistance of almighty god, the lord and strength of host and army. you shall not fail to cause divine service to be read in your ship morning and evening, in the morning before dinner and at night before supper, or at least if there be interruption by soul weather once the day. praise god every night with sing of a psalm at the set of the watch. second, you shall take especial care that god be not blaspheme in your ship, but that, after admonition give, if the offender do not refrain themselves, you shall cause they of the better sort to be fine out of their adventure. by which course, if no amendment be find, you shall acquaint i with all, for if it be threaten in the scripture that the curse shall not depart from the house of the swearer, much less from the ship of the swearer. three: no man shall refuse to obey his officer in all that he be command for the benefit of the journey. no man be in health refuse to wait his turn as he shall be direct the sailor by the master, and boatswain the landman. by their captain, lieutenant and other. you shall make in every ship two captain of the watch, who shall make choice of two soldier every night to search between the deck, that no fire nor candle light be carry about the ship after the watch set, nor that any candle be burn in any cabin without a lantern, and that neither but while they be to make themselves unready for there be no danger so inevitable as the ship fire, which may also as well happen by take of tobacco between the deck and therefore forbid to all man. but aloft the upper deck, you shall cause the land man to learn the name and place of the rope that they may assist the sailor in their labour. upon the deck, though they can go up to the top and yard. you shall train and instruct your sailor so many as shall be find fit, as you do your landman, and register their name in the list of your company, make no difference of profession. but that all be esteem, sailor and all soldier, for your troop will be very weak when you come to land without the assistance of your seafaring man. you shall not give chase or send aboard any ship, but by order from the general. and if you come near any ship in your course, if she be belong to any prince or state in league or amity with his majesty, you shall not take any thing from they by force upon. pain of punishment as a pirate, although in manifest extremity or want you may agree for the price. relieve yourselves with thing necessary, give bond for the same, provide that it be not to the disfurnish of any such ship whereby the owner or merchant be endanger for the ship or good. you shall every night fall a stern, the general ship, and follow his light, receive instruction in the morning what course to hold and if you shall at any time be separate by foul, wether you shall receive certain billet seal up, the first to be open on this side, the north cape, if there be cause, the second to be open at the south cape, the three after you shall pass 23.. degree and the four from the height of cape vert. if you discover any sail at sea, either to windward or to lee-ward of the admiral, or if any two or three of our fleet shall discover any such sail which the admiral can discern, if she be a great ship and but one, you shall strike your main topsail and hoist it again so often as you shall judge it to be 100 ton of burden, as if you judge she to be 200. ton, to strike and hoist twice, if 300. thrice, and so answerable to her greatness. if you discern a small ship, you shall do the like with your fore topsail, but if you discover many great ship, you shall not only strike your. main topsail often, but put out your ensign in the main top, and if such ship or fleet go large before the wind, you shall also, after your sign give, go large and stand as any of the fleet do. i mean no long than that you may judge. the admiral and the rest have see your sign and your so stand. and if you go large at the time of the discovery, you shall hale oft your sheat for a little time and then go large again. that the rest may know that you go large to show we that the ship or fleet discover. keep that course. so you shall do. if the ship or fleet discover, have their tack aboard, namely if you have also. your tack aboard at the time of the discovery, you shall bear up for a little time and after hale your sheet oft again to show we what course the ship or foot hold. if you discover any ship or fleet by night, if the ship or fleet be to windeward of you and you to windeward of the admiral, you shall present, bear up to give we knowledge. but if you think you may speak with she, than you shall keep your loof and shoot off a piece of ordnance to give we knowledge thereby. for a general rule, let no man presume to shoot off any piece of ordinance, but in discover a ship or fleet by night or by be in danger of the enemy. or in danger of fire or in danger of sink. it may be unto we all a most certain intelligence of some matter of importance, and you shall make we know the difference by this, for if you give chase and be near a ship, you shoot to make she strike. we shall see and know you shoot to that end. if it be by day, if by night, we shall then know that you have see a ship or fleet more than our own, and if you suspect we do not hear the first piece, than you may shoot a second, but not otherwise. and you must take almost a quarter of a hour between your two piece if you be in danger by a leak. i mean in present danger, you shall shoot two piece present, one after another, and if in danger of fire, three piece present, one after another. in foul weather, every man shall fit his sail to keep company with the rest of the fleet and not run so far a head by day, but that he may fall a stern, the admiral, before night, in case we shall be set upon by sea, the captain shall appoint sufficient company to assist the gunner, after which, if the fight require it, the cabens between the deck shall be take down, all bed and sack employ for bulwark. the musketeer of every ship shall be divide under captain or other officer, some for the forecastle, other for the waist. the rest for the poop where they shall abide if they be not otherwise direct. the gunner shall not shoot any great ordnance at other distance. then, point blank, a officer or two shall be appoint to take care that no loose powder be carry between the deck or near any linstock or match in hand. you shall see diverse hog head in two part and fill with water, set they aloft the deck. you shall divide your carpenter, some in the hold if any shoot come between wind and water, and the rest between the deck with plate of lead plug with all thing necessary lay by they. you shall also lay by your tub of water certain wet blanket to cast upon and choke any fire. the master and boatswain shall appoint a certain number of sailor to every sail and to every such company, a master mate, boatswaine mate or quarter master, so as when every man know his charge and place, thing may be do without noise or confusion and no man to speak but the officer. as for example, if the master or his mate bid heave out the main topsail, the master mate, boat-swain mate or quarter master which have charge of that sail shall, with his company, perform it without call out to other. and so for the foresail before topsail, spritsail and the rest, the boatswain himself, take no particular charge of any sail but overlook all and see every one do his duty. no man shall board. a ship of the enemy without order, because the loss of a ship to we be of more importance then of ten to the enemy, as also by one man board all our fleet may be engage. it be a great dishonour to lose the least of our fleet. every ship be under the lee of the enemy, shall labour to recover the wind. if the admiral endeavour it and we find a enemy to leeward of we, the whole fleet shall follow the admiral, vice-admiral or other lead ship within musket. shoot of the enemy. give so much liberty to the lead ship after her broad side discover she may stay and trim her sail. then be the second ship to give her side, and the three and four which do, they shall all take as the first ship and give the enemy the other side, shall keep he under a perpetual volley. thus must you do to the windermost ship of the enemy, which you shall batter in piece, or force she to bear up and entangle the rest, fall foul one of another to their great confusion. if the admiral give chase and be head-most man, the next ship shall take up his boat. if other order be not give, or if any other ship be appoint to give chase, the next ship, if the chase ship have a boat at her stern, shall take she up. if any make a. ship to strike, he shall not enter she till the admiral come up the musketeer divide into certain quarter of the ship shall not deliver their shot, but at such distance as their commander shall direct they. you shall take a special care for the keep of the ship clean, between the deck to have your ordnance in order and not cloy with trunk and chest. let those that have provision of victual deliver it to the steward, and every man put his apparel in canvas cloak-bag, except some few chest which do not pester the ship. every one that use any weapon of fire, be it musket or other piece, shall keep it clean and if he be not able to amend it, be out of order. he shall present acquaint his officer therewith who shall command the armourer to amend it. no man shall keep any feast or drink between meal, nor drink any health on the ship provision. every captain, by his purser, steward or other officer, shall take a weekly account how the victual waste. the steward shall not deliver any candle to any private man or to any private use. whosoever shall steal from his fellow either apparel or any thing else shall be punish as a thief. or if any one steal any victual, either by break into the hold or otherwise, he shall receive the punishment of a thief and the murderer of his fellow there be. no man shall strike any officer, be he captain, lieutenant, ensign, sergeant. corporal of the field, a quarter master, nor the master of any ship, master, mate, boatswain or quarter master. i say no man shall offer any violence to any of these, but the supreme officer to the inferior in time of service upon pain of death. no private man shall strike one another upon pain of receive such punishment as a martial court shall think he worthy of. no man shall play at card or dice, either for his apparill or arm, upon pain of be disarm and make a swabber. and whosoever shall show himself a coward, upon any land or otherwise, he shall be disarm and make a labourer and carrier of victual. for the rest, no man shall land any man in any foreign part. without order from the general, the sergeant, mayor or other chief officer, upon pain of death and wheresoever we shall have cause to land. no man shall force any woman, be she christian or heathen, upon pain of death, and you shall take especial care, when god shall suffer, we to land in the indies, not to eat any fruit unknown. such fruit as you do not find eat by bird on the tree or beast under the tree, you shall avoid. you shall not sleep on the ground nor eat any new flesh till it be salt two or three hour, which otherwise will breed a most dangerous flux. so will the eat of over fat hog or turkey. you shall also have a great care that you swim, not in any river but where you see the indian swim, because most of the river be full of alligator. you shall not take any thing from any indian by force, for from thenceforth we shall never be relieve, but you must use they with all courtesy, and for trade or exchange with they, it must be do by one or two of every ship, for all the rest and the price to be direct by the cape merchant, for otherwise all our commodity will be of small price and great to our hindrance. for other order on the land we will establish they when god shall send we thither by general consent. in the mean time, i will value every man, honour according to their degree and valour and take care for the service of god and prosperity of our enterprise. when the admiral shall hang out a flag or ensign on the missen shroud, you shall know it to be a flag of counsel to come aboard, a reference of the voyage to the direction. by these order and commandedement, you may see to what coast we be bind, and namely to the south part of america, and no doubt to the only best part thereof. for as all the spring and river in the world have but one head, namely the sea, so it be think, all the wealthy mine in the world have but one, sovereign, which. be a empire place in these part and that be the great empire of guiana of, and the wealth rule by the great emperor inga of the great wealth and riches whereof francisco lopez and other thus report. that all the vessel of the emperor, house, table and kitchen, be of silver and gold, and the very mean of all of silver and copper for the strength and hardness of the mettle. that in his wardrobe be hollow statue of gold which seem giant and figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast, bird, tree and herb that the earth bring forth, in pure gold also, and of all the fish that the sea and water of that empire breed. also there be rope, budget, chest and trough of gold and silver, great heap of billet of gold which seem wood mark out to burn. nay, that there be nothing in all that empire, the most flourish of the whole world, whereof there be not a counterfeit in pure gold. beside there be see in a certain island near the emperor court, a garden of pleasure in which be all kind of garden-hearb, flower and tree of gold and silver, as also in other place, diverse, great, infinits of gold and silver, unwrought, as in one place, to the value of fifty two thousand mark of pure silver and one million and three hundred twenty and six thousand and five hundred pesoe in gold. a very strange custom. now it be to be understand that all this wealth belong, but to one emperor. for the custom of the country, be that whosoever die, have all his treasure bury with he, so that even from the first ruler to the emperor now, live it be. think no less. treasure will be find in every monument which, how unspeakable it be. i leave to judgement martin his testimony. and first christian that see guyana, and this do also witness martin, a spaniard who live seven month in the great city, manoa, which he call el dorado, the place of gold, with the great emperor inga, and see with his eye what lopez have write. and further. he do affirm of himself that when he first enter into that city, which for building, state and popularity and all other outward excellency he think the goodly in the whole world, it be near noon, and then they uncover his face, for in his whole travel he be lead by the indian blindfold before, and he travel all that day till dark night and the next day from sunne-rise till sunset direct forward within the city, before he come to the emperor court, which express a mass of building far beyond our apprehension. but here it will be object by the curious, a curious objection, answer that without all question, if this be possible to be so that the conquest thereof have be attempt many. year ago, and that the spaniard, who have get peru and mexico, will not have sleep in a design of this great consequence. or if he have that, then these knowledge will have inflame all the great spirit of christendom to have join their force together in so worthy a conquest. and sure the objection be true. nor have either the spaniard or other prince be slothful in this attempt, though it have, please god, their labour have not hitherto take effect. for first, oreliano, the i attempter for guyana, the marquis of pescaro, employ oreliano about the discovery of this empire in the year 1542. and he be the first that find out the river of amazon but fail in his first purpose after he ordace, ordace. the attempter, who be knight of the order of st jago, do attempt the same design under who martin, before mention, be master of the munition, this ordace be slay by a mutiny upon the coast of guiana, with all such as likewise favour he, by reason whereof the attempt fail and few or none of the company return, be six hundred foot and thirty horse. after the death of ordace, pedro de osua, a knight, undertake the attempt. pedro de osua, the three attemptor, and have spend much time and search in the river amazon and weary his soldier, be also by a mutiny, stir up by one agiri, a man of mean quality put to the sword and with he all such as love. he then agiri, be chief, take on he the attempt, agiri the four attemptor, but not be able by that river to find any passage to guiana. he return back and commit diverse rebellious outrage, be in the end, overthrow in and find no way to escape. first, slay his child to save they from defamation, and after himself, after he succeed in this enterprise, jeronimo ortal de saragosa. jeronimo ortal de saragosa, the five attemptor, but fail of his entrance, be cast on a contrary coast, and so proceed no further. then follow don pedro siluas. don pedro siluas, the six attemptor, but he also enter by the river amazon. be by those warlike woman, defeat, and but seven of his company escape, whereof but two only. return. then come pedro hernandez de serpa. pedro hernandez, the seven attemptor, and undertake the action, but march by land to the river orenoque, be meet by a army of the indian and overthrow so that of his whole power. return, but eighteen person. this overthrow hear of the adalantado don gonzales cemenes de casada. undertake the action, gonzales cemenes, the eight attemptor, and seek his passage by the river which be call papamene. but he also sail in the true entrance, return with the loss of much labour and cost. this gonzales give his daughter in marriage to a very brave and stout spaniard but a little perfidious, call bereo. bind he by his oath and honour to pursue the action to his last substance or the. loss of his life which bereo undertake. anthonio bereo the nine attemptor, and all be it. he have the experience of all those which have go before and of diverse other, and be well persuade of their error and mistake. yet he fail as much as any other, nor ever can come to any true light thereof till he get conference with a ancient king of that country call carapana. this bereo be after. take prisoner by sir walter rauleigh bereo, take prisoner our noble general at trinidado, from who he exact much of that have be former write in the year of our lord, 1595.. at which time sir walter attempt the discovery of guiana, sr walter rauleigh, first discoverer of guiana, and proceed further therein be. but himself and one hundred follower of all sort, then, ever any man have do before he enter, by one of the main branch of orenoque, be nine in number, which fall out of the north side and seven out of the south, and pass the country of the tiuitiua, of the tiuitiua, which be people that in the summer dwell in house on the ground, but in the winter upon the top of tree of the river amana. thence he come into the goodly river of amana, on who border he see grow abundance of fruit, tree, good and pleasant to eat, which be a very great relief to his company when their victual be spend, and such strange plant and flower as be most wonderful. then he go to a town of the arwacas, of the arwacas, where he find relief of victual and other necessary and a most delicate and sweet country, and in less than fifteen day after he come, to descry the mountain of guiana. thence he go to the town of toparimaca, a indian casiquy, which town be call arwacas, and there feast, be refresh, and get a pilot to bring he to guiana, so that, thence he pass by the island assapano, the island assapano and other, and the island icoana, thence to the i will ocaywita, whence he send two guianian to tell the lord of that country of his come. so he pass by the plain of the samay, which reach to cumana and caracas. thence he go up to aromaia, which be the country of morequito, that be former slay by bereo, where in the port thereof he anchor and the king of aromaia. come a foot, sir, welter, conference with the king of aromaia unto he be. fourteen english mile and bring he all sort of provision with this king. be a man of a hundred and ten year old, sir walter, discourse in private and understand that country to be a part of guiana and withal. he learn from he the way and passage to manoa, the strength and government of the great empire and last, the nature and disposition of the people and what nation and country be adverse unto they. after this discourse, sir walter, give he leave to depart. the old man promise he, upon his return, all thing necessary that he shall want. thence, sir walter, go to view the famous river caroli, the great river caroli, and so to to the island caiama, thence to canuria, where he have conference with the cassique thereof, and from he learn also more of the state of guiana and of the great wealth and of certain silver mynes, discovery of silver mynes- which be then upon the border of that river, where he then anchor, and that also he be then very near, unto macureguarai, the first civil town of guiana. but now the time of the year be past and the river beginning to rise and break forth, he can ascend no further upward by water. yet he send diverse especial gentleman of good judgement over the land who discover a great part of that country and himself in person, diverse place of especial account also, among which he behold the wonderful, strange fall of water which fall from the river caroli, be about ten or twelve overfalls, every one high than another above the height of a ordinary church steeple, but touch the excellency of the country, the excellenc^ of those border country, the beauty, riches, sweet air and plenty of all thing necessary for pleasure, as dear foul fish and other commodity. no nation in the world can exceed it. and in this place he find diverse very precious stone and other mineral thing of great value. here also he see the great lake of cassipa, the great lake of cassipa, from which in the summer time be gather great abundance of grain of pure gold and take also a full survey of many other nation adjoin to both side of that river. but by this time the river grow to a extraordinary height above their bank, so as he be compel to proceed no further in the attempt at that time, but return back unto his ship by the easterly coast, discover all such nation as on that side they have not behold. and in this return he have conference with diverse king and cassique of those nation who, with his virtue, wisdom, clemency and noble cartiage he so wan unto he that they offer he all the aid and assistance to any attempt he shall take in hand that either their life or estate be able to accomplish withal. give he a account for the defect of other man, attempt upon that country and show he the safe and ready way how he may, here after make himself master of the same with diverse other caution of great consequence. and here also he get some store of gold, of gold oar and other jewel. hence he come into the country of the cassique putuma, who show he a wonderful great i of gold, in manner of a rock, or hard golden stone, of gold mine which, without especial strong engine, which they want be not to be pierce. hence he come into another branch of the river of orenoque, call winicapora, where he behold a mountain of crystal, of a mountain of crystal which to their eye appear like a white church tower of a most exceed height, where also he see and hear the great fall of water that any part of the world can produce. and in this place, he be assure, there be many rich diamond and other precious stone of inestimable value, which be to be behold a great way off. but the year time be spend, the over flow of water come and the way. much impassable at that time, he will not come near unto it. here he receive a great number of spleen, stone and other wealth, beside much provision of food and other necessary. here also he get further intelligence and further assurance of aid if he shall attempt any thing. hence he come back to assapano, and thence with much danger to trinidado, where he find his ship, the sight and joy whereof hardly any can express. that have not try the same hazard. and so thence return home for england. neither have this attempt be approve only by the spaniard and english, as be before rehearse, but have also be take in hand by diverse brave spirit of france. attempt by the french for guiana, as vislieres, and diverse other which be here very tedious to repeat, but they all likewise fail therein, for make their way by the river amazon, they be ever cross in their purpose and can find no certain entrance into that wealthy empire. yet notwithstanding, in that river and in the branch thereof they find great trade of gold, which come from the border of guiana and so ever return home very wealthy, together with other rich merchandise of great estimation. thus you may see this. el dorado or golden seat have be seek by many worthy spaniard, one noble englishman and diverse frenchman, yet none so successful as the english which make, i prophetique, suppose, hope of good hap that the glory of the action be reserve for we only and the kingdom, such a paragon and rich stone as shall adorn no crown but the crown of king james. the rest i leave to their judgement, which shall read what have be former write of it. or else these few protestation which do follow first sir walter rauleigh himself protest from his own sight and knowledge, sir welter, protestation touch the wealth of guyana that, upon this main river in which he sail, who branch do run and divide into diverse nation. and country. above two thousand mile to the east and west and eight hundred mile south and north, a man may see as many, several kingdom and province as may satisfy any industrious judgement whatsoever, and of they the most either rich in gold or in other merchandise. that in this place the soldier may fight for gold and pay himself in stead of penny with plate of gold a foot broad. that the commander which shoot at honour and abundance may find there more beautiful city, more temple adorn with golden image, more sepulchre fill with treasure, the either be find in mexico or peru, and that the shine glory of this conquest will eclipse all the beam of the spanish nation. also, he say there be. no country which yield more pleasure to the inhabitant, for the delight of hunt, hawk, fish, fowl and the rest, than these land which he see do. they have also so many plain, clear river abundance of pheasant, partridge, quail, rail, crane, heron and all other fowl, deer of all sort, pork, hare, lion, tiger, leopard and diverse other sort of beast, either for chase or food, that no nation of the world can exceed they. and to conclude, he say that both for health, good air, pleasure and riches, it be not to be equal by any region, either in the east or west, and that there be in it great store of brasill-wood and diverse berry which die a most perfect crimson and carnation. and for paint, not all france, italy, nor the east-indies yield any such, for the more the skin be wash, the fair the colour appear. also, there be great store of cotton, of silk, of balsamum and of those kind most excellent and never know in europe. there be all sort of gum, of indian pepper, beside what the country may afford inward, which he have not leisure to search, be yet unknown. also, the soil be so excellent and so full of river that it will bear sugar, ginger and all commodity that the west indies have. now for the easiness of the navigation, he say it may be sail in six week, thither ensign for navigation, and in six week back again. and, by the way, neither be shore enemy coast, rock nor sand all which other voyage be subject unto. also, he say the best time to sail from england thither be in july, because the summer in guiana be in october, november, december, january, february and march, and so ship may return from thence in april and arrive at home in england in june, and by that mean never be subject to winter weather, either come go or stay, which no doubt be a excellent comfort to all. man that shall undertake the action and thus much touch his worthy and noble relation, who, be a eyewitness, will not, for his honour and virtue sake, abuse his sovereign with untruth. now let we see what the spaniard say. of this rich kingdom. first, alonso, the testimony of the spaniard for the wealth of guina, a chief governor in the grand canaria. say that there be a land new discover, call nuevo dorado, in which be abundance of gold and wonderful riches above imagination, that the course to fall with it be fifty league to the windward, to the marguarita. again he say in another affirmation that in nueuo dorado, late find out, there be gold in that abundance as the like have never former be hear of, nor be any part of the world to be compare with it. and the like affirm domingo de vera, who be camp master and general for anthony bereo in this discovery, and no less say rodrigo de caranca register. for the sea and many other, so that, to conclude your trouble and the tediousness of my weary discourse, the conclusion: this empire, be that rich magazany which yet have her maidenhead, never sack, turn nor wrought. the face of the earth have not be turn, nor the virtue and salt of the soil spend by manurance. the grave have not be open for gold, the mine not break with the sledge or pickaxe, nor their image pull down out of their temple. it have never be enter by any army of strength and never conquer or possess by any christian prince. beside by the report of all former discoverer, especial our general, it be so defensible and easy to be keep from the assault of any invader. that if two fort be build in one of the province which he behold, and take especial note of the flood set in so near the bank, where the channel also lie, that no ship can pass up, but within a pike length of the artillery, first of the one and afterward of the other, which two fort, he suppose, will sufficient guard both to the empire of inga and to one hundred other, several kingdom all lie within the great river of orenoque, even to the city of quito in peru, of this empire, if it shall please god, to make the king our master sovereign, what honour and reward it will bring. he and his subject may easy be conjecture by what be before write and since it be or may be undertake by his own vassal, and one who be bind in extraordinary bond more than every common subject. to spend the uttermost of his life in the same, no doubt. but he will effect it with that wisdom, diligence and care which shall be suitable to the greatness of the action and the trust repose be thus far forth, further encourage by anthonio bereo, the spaniard, who, in great earnestness and upon his soul health, protest a strange prophecy that he have see among diverse, most ancient prophecy in peru, at such time as that empire be reduce to the spanish obedience, one that affirm that from inglatierra. which be to say england, those ingas shall be again in time to come, restore and deliver from the servitude of the former conqueror, and this he avow to have see in diverse, or their most principal and chief temple, preserve with great reverence and care and till this day believe of all the indian. now, a entrance in former year our general do make, as you have read, with that success that not any before or since have ever equal, and displant the first garrison. if then now he succeed and have fortune answerable to his rare wisdom, industry and direction, whether it be in this nor any other, to himself only conceal, there be no doubt. but god assist, he will with such honour and high. thought pass and go through the same that his nation shall have: praise, his friend, comfort and himself, the true advancement of his merit. but to give you a little taste of what have succeed in our present journey, you shall understand that we depart from plymouth to cork in ireland, where after some refreshment, we set sail out of the river of cork and thence sail more than three month before we come to the coast of guiana which, albeit general it be ever, run in seven or eight week. yet be the wind so strange, cross unto we a thing seldom see in that passage that in less time we can not effect our purpose, so that upon the seven day of november last pass 1617.. we discover the coast of guiana, during which time of our be at sea we have a great visitation of sickness, so that many be sick and some be dead, among which the most eminent person that die be these captain john pygot, our lieutenant general. worthy captain hastings, my lord of huntingdon, brother, a gentleman of so much forward hope and goodness. that he be cover with many tear and much mourn. also there die master talbot, scholar which have be long employ by our general m newhall, the master chirurgeon of our general ship, and other with which i will not trouble your ear. upon the discover of the coast, we come into the fair river of caltana, be, as it appear to i, a branch. of oerenoque, where my lord, our general, cast anchor and do purpose to refresh his sick man and to take in fresh water and other necessary provision of which that coast abound, and so to proceed in his enterprise, which, god in his mercy, prosper for our hope. every day. grow strong and strong. this part of guiana in which we now be, be to i a very paradise, and so excellent in all perfection and beauty that nature seem only here to have her temple. we have even now be the month of november, a much more delicate summer. then be in england at midsummer, the sun and air so wholesome and pleasant, without offence or scorch, the tree and ground so brave, flourish and every thing. in general, so absolute and full of fruitful promise that more can be by man desire. for my own part, i dare assure you that in my life time i never see or taste more strange, more delicate and more pleasant fruit than here we may, continual gather in most infinite abundance, be beside, so wondrous, wholesome and unoffensive that i have not hear any complain either of surfeit or other accidental sickness, as worm flux and such like which common follow the much eat of sweet and pleasant fruit. to enter into a description of the beautiful prospect of this country which we now see, although it be but the out-border and skirt of the empire, so near a neighbour to the main ocean that in reason it shall promise the least fertility. yet i say again to describe the goodliness thereof, the bravery of the hill and comeliness of the valley, both shadow and adorn with goodly tall green tree, the pleasantness and coolness of the river which run and mix themselves in the most convenient place, plentiful store with fish of several nature, the variety of rare colour bird which fly up and down in every place about we no colour almost under the sun, but be reveal in their feather, be to draw a. landscape of that excellent perfection which no art can better hardly imitate. for true, hitherto, to my eye, this country have appear a very earthly paradise and therefore doubtless be full of strong promise that our attempt can return without much honour and reward a rent hopeful due to every such noble action. but since it yet rest in hope, i will leave it to the will and direction of the great god of heaven, to who protection i refer you, with this assurance that, as our success shall happen and the action either decrease or diminish, so you shall, by write, more ample understand thereof from the river of caliana, on the coast of guiana, this seaventeenth of november 1617.. rm.