new english canaan or new canaan, the first book, contain the original of the native, their manner and custom, with their tractable nature and love towards the english chap i prove new england the principal part of all america and most commodious and fit for habitation. the wise creator of the universal globe, have place a golden means betwixt two extreme, i mean the temperate zone betwixt the hot and cold, and every creature that participate of heavens blessing with in the compass of that golden means, be make most apt and fit for man to use who likewise, by that wisdom, be ordain to be the lord of all this globe, may be his glass to teach he how to use moderation and discretion both in his action and intention. the wise man say: give i neither riches nor poverty, why riches may make he proud, like nebuchadnezar, and poverty despair, like job wife, but a mean between both, use of vegetative. so it be likewise in the use of vegetative, that which have too much heat or too much cold, be say to be so in the use of sensitive, all those animal of what or species soever they be, if they participate of heat or cold in the superlative be say to be fish poisonous about the isle of sall, as in some fish about the isle of sal and those island adjoin between the tropicke, their participatinge of heat and cold in the superlative be make most manifest, one of which poison a whole ship company that eat of it, and so it be in viper, toad and snake that have heat or cold in the superlative degree, therefore the creature that participate of heat and cold. in a mean, be best and wholesome, and so it be, in the choice of love, the middle zone between the two extreme be best and it be therefore call the golden mean and be in the golden means. and all those land lie under that zone most requisite and fit for habitation. in cosmography, the two extreme be call, the one lie between the tropicke, the other lie near the pole. all the land lie under either of these zone, by reason they do participate too much of heat or cold, be very inconvenient and be accompany with many evil. and although i be not of opinion with aristotle that the land under be altogether uninhabited, i myself have be so near the equinoctial line that i have have the sun for my zenith and see proof to the contrary. yet can i deny but that it be accompany with many inconvenience, as that fish and flesh both will taint in those part, notwithstanding the use of salt which can be want there ordain by nature. handeworke salt abound under the tropic and that be a great hindrance to the set forth and supply of navigation. the very sinew of a flourish commonwealth, then, barrenness cause through want of reins, for in most of those part of the world it be seldom accustom to rain until the time. of the tornathees, as the portugese phrase be, who live there, and then it will rain about 40. day together. rain 40. day about august, between cancer and the line which moisture serve to fructify the earth for all the year after, during which time be see no rain at all. the heat and cold and length of day and night be much alike, with little difference, and these reins be cause by the turn of the wind which else between the tropicke do blow trade. that be always one way for next the tropic of cancer, it be constant north-east, and next the tropic of capricorn, it be southwest, so that the wind come from the pole. do keep the air in those part cool and make it temperate and the part habitable, be it not for those and other inconvenience. this be good for grasshopper and for the ant and bee, but good for neither. as by lamentable experience of captain davis, fate be manifest who, in his inquest of the nortw passage for the east india trade be freeze to death, capt davis freeze to death. and therefore, for i agree with aristotle that it be unfit for habitation. and i know by the course of the celestial globe that in groeneland, many degree short of the pole, arctic groene land, too cold for habitation, the place be too cold by reason of the sun absence almost six month, and the land under the continual power of the frost, which thing many more navigator have prove with pitiful experience of their wintringe there, as appear by the history. i think they will not venture to winter there again for a india i, and as it be find by our nation under the pole arctic, so it be likewise to be find under the antarctic pole. yet what hazard will not a industrious mind and courageous spirit undergo, according to that of the poent, and all to get. and hoard up like the ant and the bee and yet, as solomon say, he can tell whether a fool or a wise man shall enjoy it. therefore, let we leave these two extreme with their inconvenience and endeavour to find out this golden means, so, free from any one of they. behold the secret wisdom of almighty god and love unto our solomon to raise a man of a large hart, full of worthy ability, to be the index or lodestar. that do point out unto the english nation, with ease and comfort, how to find it out. and this, the noble mind gentleman, sir ferdinando george knight, sir ferdinando gorges, the original cause of plant new england, zealous for the glory of god, the honour of. his majesty and the benefit of the weal public, have do a great work for the good of his country. and herein this, the wondrous wisdom and love of god be show by send to the place his minister to sweep away by heap the savage, the savage die of the plague, and also give he length of day to see the same perform after his enterprise be begin for the propagation of the church of christ. this judicious gentleman have find this golden means to be situate about the middle of those two extreme, and for direction you may prove it thus: count the space between the line and either of the pole. in true proportion, you shall find it to be 90. degree. then must we? find the mean to be near unto the centre of 90. and that be about 45. degree, and then incline unto the southern side of that centre proper for the benefit of heat. remember that, and then keep we on that fame side and see what land be to be find there, and we shall easy discern that new england be on the south side of that centre. for that country do begin her bound at 40. degree of northern latitude, new engl be place in the golden means and end at 45. degree of the same latitude, and do participate of heat and cold indifferent, but be oppress with neither, and therefore may be true say to be within the compass of that golden means most apt. and fit for habitation and generation, be place by almighty god, the great creator, under that zone call, and be therefore most fit for the generation and habitation of our english nation, of all other who be more near neighbour to the northern pole, who land lie between 50. and 54.. degree of the selfsame latitude, now this new england, though it be near to the line than that old england by 10.. degree of latitude, new england: 10. degree near the line, then old england. yet do not this exceed that other in heat or cold by reason of the situation of it, for as the coast lie, be circular, north-east and southwest, opposite, towards the sun rise, which make his course over the ocean, it can have little or no reflect heat of the sunbeam by reason of the continual motion of the water. make the air there the cool and the constant, so that for the temperature of the climent, sweetness of the air, fertility of the soil and small number of the savage which may seem a rub in the way off a effeminate mind, this country of new england be by all judicious man account the principal part of all america for habitation and the commodiousness of the sea. ship there, not be subject to worm as in and other place and not to be parallel in all christendom. the massachussets be the middle part thereof. the massachussets, in the middle of new engl be a very beautiful land, not mountany nor incline to mountany, lie in 42. degree and 30. minute and have as yet the great number of inhabitant and have a very large bay to it. divide by island into 4. great bay where ship may safe ride all wind and weather. the wind not so violent in new england. the wind in those part be not so violent as in england by many degree foe there be no shrubb see to lean from the wind as by the sea coast of england. i. have see. they lean and the groundage be a sandy sleech, free from rock to gall cable, but be good for anchorage. the rest of the planters be disperse among the coast between 41. and 44. degree of latitude and as yet have very little way into the island, the riches of which country i have set forth in this abstract, as in a landskipp for the better information of the traveller, which he may peruse and plain perceive by the demonstration of it that it be nothing inferior to canaan of israel, but a kind of parallel to it in all, point chap 2 of the original of the native, in the year since the incarnation of christ, 1622. it be my chance to be land in. the part of new england where i find two sort of people, the one christian, the other infidel. these i find most full of humanity and more friendly than the other, as shall hereafter be make apparent in dew-course by their several action from time to time while live among they. after my arrival in those part, i endeavour, by all the way and mean that i can, to find out from what people or nation the native of new england may be conjecture originl to proceed, and by continuance and conversation among they i attane to so much of their language as by all probable conjecture may make the same manifest. for it have be find by diverse and those of good judgement that the native of this country do use very many word both of greek and latin, to the same signification that the latin and greek have. do the native have a mix language? as when a indian express that he do any thing with a good will? and pascopan signify gredygut, pasco pan, greedy gut, this be the name of a indian, that be so call of a child through the greediness of his mind and much. eat for. pasco in latin signify to feed, and pan in greek signify all and pasco half starve or not eat as yet. mona, a island, set it upright. mona be a island, in their language, monon that be. alone for a island be a piece or plot of ground stand alone and divide from the mane land by force of water. cos a whetstone. cos be a whetstone with they hame, a instrument to take fish. many place do retain the name of pan as pantneket and matta pan, so that it may be think that these people heretofore have have the name of pan in great reverence and estimation, pan the shepherd god, and it may be have worship pan the great god of the heathen, howsoever. they do use no manner of worship at all now, and it be most likely that the native of this country be descend from people breed upon that part of the world which be towards the tropic of. cancer, for they do still retain the memory of some of the star one, that part of celestial globe as the north-star, which with they be call mask for mask, in their language signify a bear, and they do divide the wind into eight part and it seem original, have have some literature among they which time have cancel and wear, cut of use and where, as it have be the opinion of some man which shall be nameless, that the native of new-england may proceed from the race of the tartar and come from tartary into those part over the freeze sea, not to proceed from the tartar. i see no probality for any such conjecture, for as much as a people once settle must be remoove. by compulsion, or else tempt thereunto, in hope of better fortune, upon commendation of the place unto which they shall be draw to remove. and if it may be think that these people come over the freeze sea, then will it be by compulsion? if so, then by who? or when? or what part of this mane continent may be think to border upon the country of the tartar? it be yet unknown. no part of america know to be near tartary, and it be not like that. a people well enough at ease will, of their one accord, undertake to travail over a sea of ice. consider how many difficulty they shall encounter with, as first, whether there be any land at the end of their unknown. way no land be in view, then want of food to sustane life in the mean time upon that sea of ice? or how shall they do for fuel to keep they at night from freeze to death, which will not be have in such a place. but it may perhaps be grant that the native of this country may original come of the scatter trojan. for after that, brutus, who be the forth from aneas, leave latium upon the conflict have with the latin where, although he give they a great overthrow, why brutus leave latium to the slaughter of their grand captain and many other of the hero of latium? yet he hold it more safety to depart unto some other place and people then by stay to run the hazard of a unquiet life or doubtful conquest which, as history make mention, he perform this. people be disperse, there be no question. but the people that live with he, by reason of their conversation with the grecian and latin, have a mix language that participate of both whatsoever, be that which be proper to their own nation at first. i know not for this be common, see where: 2. nation traffic together, the one endeavour to understand the other, meaning make they both many time, speak a mix language. two: nation meet, make a mix language as be approve by the native of new england through the covetous desire they have to commerce with our nation and we with they. and when brutus do depart from latium, we do not find that his whole number go with he at once, or arrive at one place and be put to sea, may encounter with a storm that will carry they out of sight of land, and then they may sail, god know whether, and so may be put upon this coast as well as any other. daedalus the first that use sail. compass, i bele have none in those day. sail they may have, which daedalus, the first inventor thereof, leave to after age. have teach his son icarus, the use of it who, to his cost, find how dangerous it be. icarus, the second that use sail for a son not to observe the precept of a wise father, so that the icarian sea now retain the memory of it to this day, and victual. they may have good store and many other thing fit oar without all question they will store themselves with in such a case. but for the use of compass there be no mention make of it at that time, which be much about sauls time, the first that be make king of israel, troy destroy about sauls time. yet it be think, and that not without good reason for it, that the use of the loadstone, the loadstone in salomons time and compass be know in salomons time for as much as he send ship to fetch of the gold of ophir to adorn and beautify that magnificent temple of jerusalem by he build for the glory of almighty god and by his special appointment, and it be hold by cosmographer to be 3. year voyage from jerusalem to ophir. and it be conceive that such a voyage can not have be perform without the help of the loadstone and compass. and why shall any man think the native of new england to be the glean of all nation? only because, by the pronunciation and termination, their word seem to trench upon several language. when time have not, furnish he, with the interpretation thereof, the thing that must induce a man of reasonabe capacity to any manner of conjecture of their original must, by the sense and signification of the word principal, to frame this argument by when he shall draw to any conclusion thereupon. otherwise, he shall but run round about a maze, as some of the fantastical tribe use to do about the tithe of muit. and come therefore, since i have have the approbation of sir christopher gardener, knight, a able gentl that live among they, and of david tompson, a scottish gentl that likewise be conversant with those people, both scholar and traveller. that be diligent in take notice of these thing as man of good judgement, and that have be in those part any time beside other of less. now i be bold to conclude that the original of the native of new england may be well conjecture to be from the scatter trojan after such time as brutus depart from latium, chap 3 of a great mortality that happen among the native of new england near about the time that the english come there to plant it fortune some few year before the english come to inhabit at new plymouth in new england that upon some distaste give in the massachussets bay by frenchman then trade there with the native for beaver. they set upon the man at such advantage that they kill many of they, burn their ship then ride at anchor by a island there now call peddocks island in memory of leonard peddock, that land there where many wild ancky haunt that time, which he think have be tame, distribute they unto 5.. sachems, which be lord of the several territory adjoin they do, keep they so long as they live, only to sport themselves at they five frenchman, keep by the savage and make these five frenchman fetch they wood and water which be the general work that they require of a servant. one of these five man out live the rest. have learn so much of their language as to rebuke they for their bloody. deed, say that god will be angry with they for it and that he will, in his displeasure, destroy they. but the savage, it seem, boast of their strength, reply and say that they be so many that god can not kill they. the plague fall on the indian, but, contrary, wise, in short time after the hand of god fall heavy upon they with such a mortal stroke that they die on heap as they lie in their house, and the live that be able to shift for themselves will run away and let they die, and let there carkases above the ground without burial, for in a place where many inhabit, there have be but one leave a live to tell what become of the rest. the live being, as it seem, not able to bury the dead. the live not able to bury the dead, they be leave for crow, kite and vermin to pray upon, and the bone and skull upon the several place of their habitation make such a spectacle after my come into those part that as i travail in that forest- never the massachussets, it seem to i a new find golgatha, but otherwise it be the custom of those indian people to bury their dead, ceremonious and careful, and then to abandon that place because they have no desire. the place shall put they in mind of mortality. and this mortality be not end when the brownist of new plymouth be settle at patuxet in new england and by all likelihood the sickness that these indian die of be the plague. as by conference with they since my arrival and habitation in those part, i have learn, and by this mean there be as yet but a small number of savage in new england to that which have be in former time, and the place be make so much the more fit. 2. sam 24. for the english nation to inhabit in and erect in it temple to the glory of god, chap 4 of their house and habitation the native of new england be accustom to build. they house much like the wild irish. they. gather pole in the wood and put the great end of they in the ground, place they in form of a circle or circumference and bend the top of they in form of a arch. they bound they together with the bark of walnut tree which be wondrous tough so that they make the same round on the top for the smoke of their fire to assend and pass through these. they cover with mat, some make of reed and some of long flag or sedge. fine sow together with needle. make of the splinter bone of a crane leg with thread. make of their indian hemp which their grove natural. leave several place for door, which be cover with mat which may be roll up and let down again at their pleasure. make use of the several door according as the wind sit the fire be always make in the midst of the house, with wind fall common. yet some time they fall a tree that grow near the the house and by in the end thereof. maintain the fire on both side. burn the tree by degree, short and short, until it be all consume for it. burn night and day. their lodging be make in three place of the house. about the fire. they lie upon plank, common about a foot or 18. inch above the ground, raise upon rail, that be bear up upon fork. they lay mat under they and coat of dee skin, otter, beaver, racowne and of bear hide, all which they have dress and convert into good leather with the hair on for their cover and in this manner they lie as warm as they desire. in the night they take their rest in the day time. either the kettle be on with fish or flesh by no allowance, or else the fire be employ in roast of fish which they delight in. the air do beget good stomach. and they feed continual and be no niggard of their victual, for they be willing that any one shall eat with they. nay, if any one that shall come into their house and there fall a sleep, when they see he dispose to lie down, they will spread a mat for he of their own accord and lay a roll of skin for a bolster and let he lie. if he sleep until their meat be dish up, they will set a wooden bowl of meat by he that sleep and wake. he say: cattup, keen, meckin that be. if you be hungry, there be meat for you where, if you will eat you may. such be their humanity. likewise, when they be mind to remove, they carry. away the mat with they other. the place adjoin will yield. they use not to winter and summer in one place, for that will be a reason to make fuel scarce, but after the manner of the gentry of civilise native, remove for their pleasure some time to their hunt place, where they remain, keep good hospitality for that season, and sometime to their fish place where they abide for that season. likewise, and at the spring, when fish come in plentiful, they have meeting from several place where they exercise themselves in gaminge and play of juglinge, trick and all manner of revel which they be deligted in that it be admirable to behold what pastime they use, of several kind. every one strive to surpass each. other. after this manner they spend their time. chap v of their religion. it have be a common receive opinion from cicero that there be no people so barbarous but have some worship or other. in this particular i be not of opinion, rherein with tully and sure, if he have be among those people so long as i have be and converse so much with they touch this matter of religion, he will have change his opinion. neither shall we have find this error among the rest by the help of that wooden prospect, if it have not be so unadvised build upon such high land as that coast. all man judgement in general do not yield, have he, but take the judicial council of sir william. alexander, that set this thing forth in a exact and conclusive sentence. if he be not too obstinate, he will grant that worthy writer. that these people be- and he have- exemplify this thing by a familiar demonstration which i have, by long experience, observe to be true, and i think it be absurd to say they have a kind of worship and not be able to demonstrate who or what it be they be accustom to worship. for my part, i be more willing to believe that the elephant, which be report to be the most in telligible of all beast, do worship the moon, for the reason give by the author of this report, as mr thomas, may the minion of the muse do recite it. in his contimation of lucan historical poem, rather than this man. to that i must be constrain to conclude against he and cicero, that the native of new england have no worship nor religion at all, and i be sure it have be. so observe by those that need not the help of a wooden prospect for the matter. chap 5 of the indian apparel. the indian in these part do make their apparel of the skin of several sort of beast and common of those that do frequent those part where they do live. yet some of they, for variety, will have the skin of such beast that frequent the part of their neighbour which they purchase of they by commerce and trade. the indian make good. leather. these skin they couvert into very good leather, make the same plume and soft. some of these skin they dress with the hair on and some with the hair off the hairy side in winter time they wear next their body and in warm weather they wear the hair outward. they make likewise some coat of the feather of turkey which they weave together with twine of their own, make very pretty. these garment they wear like mantle, knit over their shoulder and put under their arm. they have likewise another sort of mantle make of mose skinnne, which beast be a great, large deer, so big as a horse. these skin they common dress bare and make they wondrous, white and stripe they with size round. about the border in form like lace set on by a tailor and some they stripe with size. indian ingenious workman for their garment in work of several fashion, very curious according to the several fantasy of the workman, wherein they strive to excel one another. and mantle make of bear skin be a usual wear among the native that live where the bear do haunt. they make shoe of mose skin, which be the principal leather use to that purpose, and for want of such leather, which be the strong, they make shoe of deer skin, very handsome and commodious. and of such deer skin. as they dress bare, they make stocking that come within their shoe like a stirrup stockinge and be fasten above at their belt, which be about their middle. every male, after he attain unto the age which they call, wear a belt about his middle and a broad piece of leather that go between his leg and be tuck up both before and behind under that belt, the modesty of the indian man. and this they wear to hide their secreat of nature, which by no mean they will suffer to be see so much modesty they use in that particular those garment they always put on when they go a hunt to keep their skin from t^^. brush of the shrubbs, and when they have rheir apparel, one, they look like irish in their trouser, the stocking join. so to their breech a good well grow dear skin. be of great account with they, and it must have the tale on, or else they account it deface the tale, be three time as long as the tale of our english deer, yea, four time so long this, when they travel, be rape round about their body and with a girdle of their make bind round about their middle, to which girdle be fasten, a bag in which his instrument be with which he can strike fire upon any occasion. indian travail with material to strike fire at all time. thus, with their bow in their left hand and their quiver of arrow at their back, hang one their left shoulder with the low end of it in their right hand, they will run away a dog trot until they come to their journey end. and in this kind of ornament they do seem to i to be handsome than when they be in english apparel. their gesture be answerable to their one habit and not unto we. their woman have shoe and stocking to wear likewise when they please, such as the man have. but the mantle they use to cover their nakedness with be much long than that which the man use for. as the man have one deer skinn, the woman have two soe together. at the full length and it be so large that it trail after they like a great lady trane, and in time i think they may have their page to bear they up. and where the man use but one bear skinn for a mantle. the woman have two soe together and if any of their woman will at any time shift one, they take that which they intend to make use of and cast it over. they round before they shift away the other, for modesty. the indian, ashamed of their nakedness, be unwilling to be see to discover their nakedness and the one be so cast over, they slip the other from under they in a decent manner which be to be note in people uncivilized. tberein. they seem to have as much modesty as civilise people and deserve to be applaud for it. chap 7 of their child-bearing and delivery, and what manner of person they be. the woman of this country be not suffer to be use for procreation until the ripeness of their age, at which time they wear a red cap, make of leather in form like to our flat cap, and this they wear for the space of 12. month, for all man to take notice of they that have any mind to a wife, and than it be the custom of some of their sachems or lord of the territory to have the first say or maidenhead of the female, very apt they be to be with child. and very laborious when they bear child yea, when they be as great as they can be the woman, big with child, very laborious, yet in that case they neither forbear labour nor travail. i have see they in that plight, with burden at their back enough to load a horse, yet do they not miscarry but have a fair delivery and a quick. their woman be very good midwife and the woman, very lusty after delivery and in a day or two will travel or trudge about their infant, be bear with hair on their head and be of complexion, white as our nation. but their mother in their infancy. make a bath of wallnut, leave child bathe to stain the skin, husk of walnut and such thing as will stain their skin for ever, wherein they dip and wash they to make they tawny, the colour of their hair be black and their eye black. these infant be carry at their mother back by the help of a cradle, make of a board forket at both end, whereon the child be fast, bind and wrap in fur, his knee thrust up towards his belly, because they may be the more useful for they when he sit, which be as a dog do, on his bum, and this cradle sure preserve they better than the cradle of our nation, for as much. as we find they well propertion. not any of they crooked back or wry legged and to give their character in a word, they be as proper man and woman for feature and limb as can be find for flesh and blood, as active, long hand they be. i never see a clunchfisted salvadg among they all in my time. the colour of their eye be so general black, make a savage that have a young infant who eye be gray, show he to we and say they be english man eye. i tell the father that his son be nan, which be a bastard. he reply titta, cheshetue squaa, which be. he can not tell his wife may play the whore. and this child the father desire. may have a english name because of the likeness of his eye which his father have in admiration because of novelty among their nation, chap 8, of their reverence and respect to age. it be a thing to be admire and indeed make a precedent that a nation yet uncivilizy shall more respect age. then some nation civilise age honour among the indian, since there be so many precept both of divine and human writer extant toinstruct more civil nation. in that particular wherein they excel, the young be always obedient unto the elder people and at their command in every respect, without grummble, in all counsel, as therein they be circumspect to do their by advise and counsel and not rash or inconsiderate the young man opinion. shall be hear. but the old man, opinion and council embrace and follow beside. as the elder feed and provide for the young in infancy, so do the young after be grow to year of manhood, provide for those that be age and in distribution of accre, the elder man be first, serve by their and their counsel, especial if they be powah, be esteem as oracle among the young native. the consideration of these thing, i think, shall reduce some of our irregular young people of civilise nation, when this story shall come to their knowledge to better manner and make they ashamed of their former error in this kind and to become hereafter more dutiful, which i as a friend, by observation have find have herein. record for that purpose, chap 9 of their pretty comure trick. if we do not judge amiss of these savage in account, they witch. yet out of all question, we may be bold to conclude they to be but weak witch, such of they as we call by the name of powah. some correspondency they have with the devil, out of all doubt, as by some of their action in which they glory be manifest. papasiquineo that sachem or sagamore be a powah of great estimation among all kind of savage, there he be at their revel, which be the time when a great company of savage meet from several part of the country in amity with their neighbour, have advance his honour in his feat or juggle. trick as i may right term they, to the admiration of the spectator who he endeavour to persuade that he will go under water, to the further side of a river, to broad for any man to undertake with a breath, which thing he perform by, swim over and delude the company with, cast a mist before their eye that see he enter in and come out, but no part of the way he have be see. likewise by our english, in the heat of all summer, to make ice appear in a bowl of fair water, first have the water set before he he have begin his incantation, according to their usual accustom, and before the same have be end a thick cloud have darken the air. and on a sudden a thunder clap have be hear that have amaze the native. in a instant he have show a firm piece of ice to float in the midst of the bowl in the presence of the vulgar people which doubtless be do by the agility of satan, his consort. and by mean of these sleight and such like trivial thing as these, they gain such estimation among the rest of the savage that it be think a very impious matter for any man to derogate from the word of these powah, in so much as he that shall slight they be think to commit a crime no less heinous among they as sacrilege be with we. as may appear by this one passage which i will set forth for a instance. a neighbour of i that have entertain a savage into his service. a savage entertain a factor to be his factor for the beaver trade among his countryman. deliver unto he diverse parcel of commodity fit for they to trade with among the rest there be. one coat of more esteem than any of the other and with this his new entertain merchant man, travel among his countryman to truck they away for beaver, as our custom have be the savage, go up into the country among his neighbour for beaver and return with some, but not enough, answerable to his masteer expectation but be call to a account and especial for that one coat, of special note. make answer that he have, give that coat to tantoquineo, a powah, to which his master, in a rage, cry: what have i to do with tantoquineo? the savage, very angry at the matter, cry: what you speak. you be not a very good man, will you not give a coat? what be this? as if. he have offer tantoquineo the great indignity that can be devise. so great be the estimation and reverence that these people have of these ingle powah who, be usual, send for, when any person be sick and ill, at ease to recover, they for which they receive reward, as do our chirgeon and physician, and they do make a trade of it. a english man cure of a swell and boast of their skill where they come. one among the rest do undertake to cure a englishman of a swell of his hand for a parcel of biscuit, which be deliver he. he take the party grieve into the wood, aside from company, and with the help of the devil, as may be conjecture, quick recover he of. that swell and send he about his work again. chap x of their duel and the honourable estimation of victory obtain thereby. these savage be not apt to quarrel one with another. yet such have be the occasion that a difference have happen which have grow to that height how the savage perform their duel that it have not be reconcile otherwise, then, by combat, which have be perform in this manner, the two champion prepare for the fight. with their bow in hand and a quiver full of arrow at their back, they have enter into the field. the challenger and challenge have choose two tree stand with in a little distance of each other. they have cast lot for the chief of the tree than either. champion set himself behind his tree watch a advantage to let fly his shaft and to gall his enemy. there they continue shoot at each other. if by chance they espy any part open, they endeavour to gall the combatant in that part and use much agility in the performance of the task they have in hand. resolute they be in the execution of their vengeance when, once they have begin and will in no wise be daunt or seem to shrink, though they do catch a clap with a arrow but fight it out in this manner until one or both be slay, i have be show the place where such duel have be, perform tree mark, where they perform a duel and have the tree mark. for a memorial of the combat where that champion have stand that have the hap to be slay in the duel and they count it the great honour that can be to the servive cumbatant to show the scare of the wound receive in this kind of conflict. and if it happen to be on the arm, as those part be most in danger in these case, they will always wear a bracelet upon that place of the arm as a trophy of honour to their die day. chap 11 of the maintain of their reputation. reputation be such a thing that it keep many man in awe, even among civilise nation, and be very much stand upon it. be as one have very well note the awe. of great man and of king, and since i have observe it to be maintain among savage people, i can choose but give a instance thereof in this treatise to confirm the common receive opinion thereof. the sachem or sagamore of sagus make choice when he come to man estate of a lady of noble descent, daughter to papasiquineo, the sachem or sagamore of the territory near merrimack river, a man of the best note and estimation in all those part and, as my countryman mr wood declare in his prospect, a great necromancer. a marriage: this lady, the young sachem, with the consent and good like of her father, marry and take for his wife great entertainment he and his receive in those part at her father. hand, where they wear feast in the best manner that may be expect, according to the custom of their nation, with revel and such other solemnity as be usual among they. the solemnity be end. papasiquineo cause a select number of his man to wait upon his daughter home into those part that do proper belong to her lord and husband, where the attendant have entertainment by the sachem of sagus and his countryman. the solemnity be end. the attendant be gratify. not long after the new marry lady have a great desire to see her father and her native country, from whence she come, her lord, willing to pleasure she and not deny her request among they think to be reasonable command a select number of his. own man to conduct his lady to her father, wherewith great respect they bring she and have feast there a while, return to their own country again, leave the lady to continue there at she own pleasure, among her friend and old acquaintance, where she pass away the time for a while and in the end desire to return to her lord again. her father, the old papasiquineo, have notice of her intent. a ambassage send from papasiquineo to his soon in law a sachem. send some of his man on ambassage to the young sachem, his son in law, to let he understand that his daughter be not willing to absent herself from his company any long and therefore, as the messenger have in charge, desire the young lord to send a convoy for she, but he stand upon term of honour and the maintain of his reputation, return to his father in law. this answer that when she depart from he, he cause his man to wait upon she to her father territory, as it do become he, but now she have a intend to return. it do become her father to send she back with a convoy of his own people, and that it stand not with his reputation to make himself or his man so servile to fetch she again. the old sachem papasiquineo have this message: return, be enrage to think that his young son in law do not esteem he at a high rate. then to capitulate with he about the matter and return he this sharp reply that his daughter, blood and birth deserve no more respect. then, to be so slight and therefore, if he will have her company, he be best to send or come for she. the young sachem not willing to under value himself and be a man of a stout spirit, do not stick to say that he shall either send she by his own convey or keep she, for he be not determine to stoop so low, so much. these two sachems stand upon term of reputation with each other. the one will not send she and the other will not send for she, lest it shall be any diminish of honour on his part. that shall seem to comply that the lady, when i come out of the country, remain still with her father, which be a thing. worth the note that savage people shall seek to maintain their reputation so much as they do. chap 12 of their traffic and trade one with another. although these people have not the use of navigation whereby they may traffic as other nation that be civilise use to do, yet do they barter for such commodity as they have and have a kind of bead, bead in stead of money, in steed of money to buy withal such thing as they want, which they call wampampeak, and it be of two sort: the one be white, the other be of a violet colour. these be make of the shell of fish, the white with they be as silver with we, the other as our gold. and for these bead they buy and sell not only among themselves but even with we, the name of their bead, wampampeak. we have use to sell they any of our commodity for this wampampeak, because we know we can have beaver again of they for it. and these bead be currant in all the part of new england, from one end of the coast to the other. and although some have endeavour by example, to have the like make of the same kind of shell, yet none have ever as yet, attain to any perfection in the composure of they, but that the savage have find a great difference to be in the one and the other and have know the counterfeit bead from those of their own make and have and do slight they the skin of beast be, sell and barter to such people as have none of the same kind in the part where they live. likewise, they have earthen pot of diverse size, from a quart to a gallon, 2. or 3. to boil their victual in, very strong though they be thin like our iron pot, they have dainty wooden. bowl of maple of high price among they, and these be disperse by barter one with the other and be but in certain part of the country, make, where the several trade be appropriate to the inhabitant of those part, only so. likewise, at the season of the year, the savage that live by the sea side for trade with the inlander, for fresh water reles, curious silver reles, which be buy up of such as have they not frequent in other place, chestnut and such like useful thing as one place afford be sell to the inhabitant of another where they be a novelty account among the native of the land and there be no such thing to barter withal as be their whampampeake. chap 13 of their magazine or storehowse these people be not without providence, though they be uncivilized, but be careful to preserve, foed in store, against winter, which be the corn that they labour and dress in the summer. what care they take to lay up corn for winter, and although they eat free of it while it be grow, yet have they a care to keep a convenient portion thereof to relieve they in the dead of winter, like to the ant and the bee which they put under ground, their barn be hole make in the earth that will hold a hogshead of corn, a piece in they in these, when their corn be out of the husk and well dry, they lay their store in. great basket which they make of spark, with mat under, about the side and on the top, and put it into the place, make for it. they cover it with earth and in this manner it be preserve from destruction or putrefaction, to be use in case of necessity and not else. and i be persuade that if they know the benefit of salt as they may in time and the mean to make salt meat fresh again, they will endeaver to preserve fish for winter as well as corn, and that if any thing bring they to civility, it will be the use of salt to have food in store which be a chief benefit in a civilise commonwealth. these people have begin already to incline to the use of salt. they beg salt of the english. many of they will beg salt of i for to carry home with they that have frequent our house and have be acquaint with our salt meat. and salt i willing give they- although i sell they all thing else- only because they shall be delight with the use there of and think it a commodity of no value in itself, although the benefit be great that may be have by the use of it. chap 14 of their subtilety. these people be not, as some have think, a dull of slender, witted people, but very ingenious and very subtle. i can give main instance to maintain my opinion of they in this, but i will only relate one which be a passage worthy to be observe in the massachussets bay. live cheecatawback, the sachem or sagamore of those territory, who have large dominion which he do appropriate to himself. into those part come a great company of savage from the territory of narohiganset, to the number of 100 person, and in this sachems dominion they intend to winter when they go a hunt for turkey. they spread over such a great scope of ground that a turkey can hardy escape. they dear, they kill up in great abundance and feast their body very plentiful. they trade away beaver skin for corn. beavers they kill by no allowance. the skin of those they trade away at with my neighbour for corn and such other commodity as they have need of, and my neighbour have a wonderful, great benefit by their be in those part. yea, sometime, like genius fellow, they will present their merchant with a fat beaver skin, a beaver skin with his tail on, of great estimaeion always. the tail be not diminish but present full and whole, although the tail be a present for a sachem and be of such masculaine virtue that if some of our lady know the benefit thereof they will desire to have ship send of purpose to trade for the tail alone. it be such a rarity as be not more esteem of than reason do require. but the sachem cheecatawback on who possession they usurp and convert the commodity thereof to their own use, contrary to his like, not be of power to resist. they practise to do it by a subtle stratagem and to that end give it out among we, a subtle plot of a sachem, that the cause why these other savage of the narohiganset come into these part be to see what strength we be of and to watch a opportunity to cut we off and take that which they find in our custody useful for they and add further, they will burn our house and that they have catch one of his man name meshebro and compel he to discover to they where their barn, magazine or storehowse be. and have take away his corn and seem to be in a pitiful perplexity about the matter, and the more to add reputation to this tale, desire that his wife and child may be harber in one of our house. this be grant. and my neighbour put on corslet headpiece and weapon, defensive and offensive, this thing be know to cheecatawback. he cause some of this man to bring the narohiganset to trade. that they may see the preparation, the savage that be a stranger to the plot. simple: come to trade and find his merchant look like lobster, all clad in harness. be in a maze to think what will be the end of it haste he make to trade away his fur and take any thing. for they wish himself well rid of they and of the company in the house. a savage scare. but as the manner have be, he must eat some furmety before he go down. he sit and eat and withal, have a eye on every side and now and then see a sword or a dagger lay, a thwart, a headpiece, which he wonder at and ask his guide whether the company be not angry. the guide, that be privy to his lord plot, answer in his language that he can not tell. but the harmless savage, before he have half fill his belly, start upon a sudden and run out of the house in such haste that he leave his furmety there and stay not to look behind. he who come after, glad he be that he have escape. so, the subtle sachem, he play the tragedian and feign a fear of be surprise and send to see whether the enemy, as the messenger term they be not in the house and come in a by way with his wife and child and stopp the chink of the out house for fear the fire may be, see in the night and be a mean to direct his enemy where to find they. and in the mean time he prepare for his ambassador to his enemy, a savage that have live 12. month in england to the end. it may add reputation to his ambassage. a savage that have live 12. month in england. send for a. ambassador, this man he send to those intrude narohiganset to tell they that they do very great injury to his lord, to trench upon his prerogative and advise they to put up their pipe and begone in time. if they will not, that his lord will come upon they and in his aid his friend the english, who be up in arm already, to take his part and compel they by force to be go if they refuse to depart by fair mean. this message come on the neck of that which doubtless the fearful savage have before relate of his escape: a good opportunity of of traffic lose by the subtlety of a sachem and what he have observe cause all those hundred narohiganset that mean we. no hurt to be go with bag and baggage and my neighbour be gull by the subtilety of this sachem and lose the best trade of beaver that ever they have for the time and in the end find their error in this kind of credulity when it be too late. chap 15 of their admirable perfection in the use of the sense. this be a thing not only observe by i and diverse of the savage of new england, but also by the french man in nova francia, and therefore i be the more encourage to publish in this treatise my observation of they in the use of their sense, which be a thing that i shall not easy have be induce to believe if i myself. have not be a eye witness of what i shall relate. the savage have the sense of see better than the english. i have observe that the savage have the sense of see so far beyond any of our nation that one will almost believe they have intelligence of the devil sometime when they have tell we of a ship at sea which they have see soener by one hour, yea two hour sail than any english man that stand by of purpose to look out. their sight be so excellent, their eye indeed be black as jet, and that collar be account the strong for sight. and as they excel we in this particular, so much note. so i think they excel we in all the rest. this, i be sure. i have well observe that in the sense of smell they have very great perfection, which be confirm by the opinion of the french that be plant about canada, who have make relation that they be so perfect in the use of that sense that they will distinguish between a spaniard and a frenchman by the send of the hand. only savage that will distinguish a spaniard from a french man by the smell of the hand. and i be persuade that the author of this relation have see very probable reason that have iuduce he to be of that opinion, and i be the more willing to give credit thereunto because i have observe in they so much as that come to. i have see a dear pass by i upon a neck of land and a savage that have. pursue he, by the view i have, accompany he in this pursuit, and the savage princk the dear come where he find. the view of two dare together lead several way: one he be sure be fresh, but which by the sense of see he can not judge. a dear, pursue by the view of the foot he be find and kill. therefore, with his knife he dig up the earth of one and by smell, say that be not of the fresh dear, the dig he up the other and view and smell to that conclude it to be the view of the fresh dear which he have pursue. and thereby follow the chase and kill that dear, and i do eat part of it with he. such be their perfection in these two sense. chap 16 of their acknowledgement of the creation and immortality of the soul. although these savage be find to be without religion, law and king, as sir william alexander have well observe, yet be they not altogether without the knowledge of god. historical, for they have it among they by tradition, that god make one man and one woman and bid they live together and get child, kill dear beast, bird, fish and foul and what they will at their pleasure, and that their posterity be full of evil and make god so angry that he let in the sea upon they. and drown the great part of they that be naughty man, the lord, destroy so the belief of the savage and they go to who feed upon. they point to the centre of the earth, where they imagine be the habitation of the devil. the other, which be not destroy, increase the world and when they die because they be good, go to the house of kytan, point to the set of the son, where they eat all manner of dainty and never take pain, as now, to provide it. the son call kytan. kytan, make provision, they say, and save they that labour and there they shall live with he forever void of care. and they be persuade that kytan be he that make corn grow tree. grow and all manner of fruit, and that we that use the book of common prayer do it to declare to they that can read what kytan have command we, and that we do pray to he with the help of that book and do make so much account of it that a savage who have live in my house before he have take a wife by who he have child make this request to. i know that i always use he with much more respect than other- a savage desire to have his son bring up to learn the book of common prayer. that i will let his son be bring up in my house that he may be teach to read in that book. which request? of his, i grant, and he be a very joyful man to think that his son shall thereby, as he say, become a englishman, and then he will be a good man. i ask he who be a good man? his answer: be he that will not lie nor steal these with. they be all the capital crime that can be. imagine all other be nothing in respect of those. and he that be free from these must live with kytan for ever in all manner of pleasure. chap 17 of their annal and funeral. these people that have, by tradition, some touch of the immortality of the soul, have likewise a custom to make some monument over the place where the corpse be inter, their custom in burryinge. but they put a great difference between person of noble and of ignoble or obscure or inferior descent. for indeed, in the grave of the more noble, they put a plank in the bottom for the corpse to be lay upon, and on each side a plank, and a plank upon the top in form of a chest, before they cover the place with earth. this do their manner of monument. they erect some thing over the grave in form of a hearse cloth, as be that of cheekatawbacks mother, which the plymouth planter. deface because they account it a act of superstition which do breed a brawl, as have be before relate for they hold impious and inhuman to deface the monument of the dead they themselves esteem of it as and have a custom among they to keep their annal and come at certain time to lament at burrial, they black their face and bewail the loss of their friend and use to black their face which they so wear in stead of a mourn ornament, for a long or a short time according to the dignity of the person. so be their annal, keep and observe with their accustom solemnity. afterward they absolute abandon the place because they suppose the sight thereof will but renew their sorrow. it be a thing very offensive to they at our first come into those part to ask of they for any one that have be dead. but of late time it be not so offensive take to renew the memory of any disease person because by our example, which they be apt to follow, it be make more familiar unto they and they marvel to see no monument over our dead and therefore think no great sachem be yet come into those part or not as yet dead because they see the grave all alike. chap 18 of their custom in burn the country and the reason thereof: the savage be accustom to set fire of the country in all place where they come and to burn it. twize a year, vixe at the spring and the fall of the leaf. the reason that move they to do so, the savage fire the country twice a year be because it will other wise be so overgrow with underweede that it will be all a coppice wood and the people will not be able in any wise to pass through the country out of a beat path. the mean that they do it with be with certain mineral stone that they carry about. they in bag, make for that purpose of the skin of little beast which they convert into good leather, carry in the same a piece of touch wood, very excellent for that purpose of their own. make these mineral stone they have from the piquenteene, which be to the southward of all the plantation in new england, by trade and traffic with those people. the burn of the grass destroy the underwoods and so scorch the elder tree that it shrink they and hinder their growth very much so that he that will look to find large tree and good timber must not depend upon the help of a wooden prospect to find they on the upland ground but must seek for they, as i and other have do, in the low ground, where the ground be wet, when the country be fire by reason of the snow water that remain there for a time until the sun, by continuance of that, have exhale. the vapour of the earth and dry up those place where the fire, by reason of the moisture, can have no power to do they any hurt. and if he will endevoure to find out any goodly cedar, he must not seek for they on the high ground but make his inquest for they in the valley, for the savage by this custom of they have spoil all the rest, for this custom have be continue from the begin, and lest their fire of the country in this manner shall be a occasion of damnify we and indainger our habitation. we ourselves have use careful about the same time to observe the wind and fire the ground about our own habitation to prevent the damage that may happen. by any neglect thereof, if the fire shall come near those house in our absence, for when the fire be once kindle, it dilate and spread itself as well against, as with the wind, burn continual night and day until a shower of rain fall to quench it. and this custom of fire, the country be the mean to make it passable, and by that mean the tree grow here and there, as in our park, and make the country very beautiful and commodious. chap 19 of their inclination to drunkenness, although drunkenness be just term, a vice which the savage be ignorant of. yet the benefit be very great that come to the planter by the sale of strong liquor to the savage who be much take. with the delight of it, for they will pawn their wit to purchase the acquaintance of it. yet in all the commerce that i have with they, i never proffer they any such thing. nay, i will hardly let any of they have a dram unless he be a sachem or a winnaytue, that be a rich man or a man of estimation next in degree to a sachem or sagamore. i always tell they it be among. we the sachems drink, but they say if i come to the northern part of the country i shall have no trade. if i will not supply they lusty with liquor, it be the life of the trade in all those for part. it so happen that thus a savage, desperate kill himself when he be drink a gun, be charge and the cock up he set the mouth to his breast and put back the trick with his foot, shoot himself dead. chap 20, that the savage live a contend life. a gentleman and a traveller that have be in the part of new england for a time, when he return again in his discourse of the country, wonder, as he say, that the native of the land live so poor in so rich a country like to our beggar in england. sure that gentleman have not time or leisure while he be there, true, to inform himself of the state of that country and the happy life the savage will lead, wear they once bring to christianity. the savage want the art of navigation, i must confess. they want the use and benefit of navigation, which be the very of a flourish commonwealth. yet be they supply with all manner of needful thing for the maintenance of life. and lifelyhood, food and raiment be the chief of all that we make true use of and of their they find no want but have and may have they in a most plentiful manner. if our beggar of england shall, with so much ease as they, furnish themselves with food at all season, there will not be so many starve in the street, neither will so many gaole be stuff or gallows furnish with poor wretch as i have see they. but they of this sort of our own nation that be fit to go to this canaan, be not able to transport themselves and most of they, unwilling to go from the good ale tap, which be the very loadstone of the land by which our english beggar steer their course, it be the northpole to which the flower-de-luce of the compass point, the more be the pity that the commonalty of our land be of such leaden capacity as to neglect so brave a country that do so plentiful feed, maine lusty, and a brave able man, woman and child that have not the mean that a civilise nation have to purchase food and raiment which that country with a little industry will yield a man in. a very comfortable measure, without overmuch cark, i can deny. but a civilise nation have the pre-eminence of a uncivilized, by mean of those instrument that be find to be common among civil people and the uncivile want the use of, to make themselves master of those ornament that make such a glorious show that will give a man occasion to cry. now, since it be but food and raiment that man that live need, though not all alike. why shall not the native of new england be say to live rich, have no want of either. clothes be the badge of sin, and the more variety of fashion be but the great abuse of the creature, the beast of the forest. there do serve to furnish they. at any time when they please. fish and flesh they have in great abundance, which they both roast and boil. they be indeed not serve in dish of plate with variety of sauce of procure appetite. that need not there. the rarity of the air beget by the medicinable quality of the sweet herb of the country always procure good stomach to the inhabitant. i must needs commend they in this particular that though they buy many commodity of our nation, yet they keep but few and those of special use. they love not to be cumber with many utensille, and although every proprietor know he own yet all thing, so long as they will last be use in common. among they, a biscuit cake give to one. that one break it equal into so many part as there be person in his company and distribute it plato commonwealth. be so much practise by these people. according to human reason, guide only by the light of nature, they lead a happy life. be void of care these people lead the more happy and free life. be void of care which torment the mind of so many christian. they be not delight in bauble but in useful thing. their natural drink be of the crystal fountain, and this they take up in their hand. by join they close together. they take up a great quantity at a time and drink at the wrist. it be the sight of such a feat which make diogenes hurl away his dish and, like one that will have this principal confirm: use a dish no more. i have observe that they will not be trouble with superfluous commodity, such thing as they find they be teach by necessity to make use of. they will make choice of and seek to purchase with industry so that, in respect that their life be so void of care, they make use of ordinary thing, one of another as common, and they be so love also that they make use of those thing they enjoy- the wife only, except as common good, and be therein so compassionate that rather than one shall starve through want, they will starve all. thus do they pass away they time merry, not regard our pomp, which they see daily before their face, but be better content with their own, which some man esteem so mean of. they may be rather account to live rich, want nothing that be needful and to be commend for, lead a content life. the young be rule by the elder and the elder rule by the powah, and the powah be rule by the devil, and then you may imagine what good rule be like to be among they. new english canaan or new canaan. the second book contain a description of the beauty of the country, with her natural indowement both in the land and sea, with the great lake of erocoise. chap i, the general survey of the country in the month of june 1622.. it be my chance to arrive in the part of new england with 30. servant and provision of all sort fit for a plantation, and while our house be building, i do endeavour to take a survey of the country. the more i look the more i like it, a famous country, and when i have more serious consider of the beauty of the place with all her fair endowment, i do not think that in all the know world it can be parallel for so many goodly grove of tree, dainty, fine, round rise hilluck. their fountain be as clear as crystal, delicate, fair, large, plain, sweet crystal fountain and clear run stream. that twine in fine meander through the mead, make so sweet a murmur noise to hear, as will even lull the sense with delight, a sleep so pleasant do they glide upon the pebble stone, jet most jocund, where they do meet, and hand in hand run down to neptune court to pay the yearly tribute which they owe to he as sovereign lord of all the spring. contain, within the volume of the land, great store of fowl, fish and turtle-dove. fowl in abundance, fish in multitude, and discover beside million of turtledove one, the green bough which sit peck of the full, ripe, pleasant grape that be support by the lusty tree who, fruitful load do cause the arm to bend, which here and there disperse. you may see, lily, and of the daphnean-tree, which make the land, to i seem, paradise, for in my eye it be nature masterpiece, her chief magazine of all. where live her store? if this land be not rich, then be the whole world poor. what i have resolve on, i have real perform, and i have endeavour to use this abstract as a instrument, to be the mean to communicate the knowledge which i have gather by my many year residence in those part unto my countryman, to the end that they may the better perceive their error. who can imagine that there be any country in the universal world which may be compare unto our native soil? i will now discover unto they a country who endowment be by learned man, allow to stand in a parallel with the israelite canaan, which none will deny to be a land far more excellent than old england in her proper nature. this i consider. i be bind in duty as become a christian man, to perform for the glory of god in the first place. next, according to cicero, to acknowledge that, for which cause i must approve of the indeavoure of my country man that have be studious to enlarge the territory of his majesty empire by plant coloine in america, and of all other, i must applaud the judgement of those that have make choice of this part whereof i now treat. be of all. other, most absolute, as i will make it appear hereafter by way of parallel. among those that have settle themselves in new england, some have go for their conscience sake, as they profess, and i wish that they may plant the gospel of jesus christ as become they sincere and without satisme or faction whatsoever, their former or present practice, be which i intend not to justify, howsoever they have deserve, in my opinion, some, in that they have furnish the country so commodious in so short a time, although it have be but for their own profit. yet posterity will taste the sweetness of it. and that very sudden, and since my task in this part of my abstract be to entreat of the natural endowment of the country, i will make a breise demostration of they, in order, several, according to their several quality, and show you what they be and what profitable use may be make of they by industry. chap 2: what tree be there and how commodious oak be there of two sort: 1. oak, white and red, excellent timber for the building both of house and ship, and they be find to be a timber that be more tough than the oak of england. they be excellent for pipe-stave and such like vessel and pipe-stave at the canary land be. a prime commodity. i have know they there at 35. p the 1000 and will purchase a freight of wine there before any commodity in england. their only wood be pine, of which they be enforce also to build ship of oacke there be great abundance in the part of new england and they may have a prime place in the catalogue of commodity. ashe, there be store and very good for staff. 2. ashe, oar or pike, and may have a place in the same catalogue. elem, 3. elm, of this sort of tree there be some but there have not as yet be find any quantity to speak of. beech, there be of two sort: 4. beech, red and white, very excellent for trencher or chair. and also for oar, and may be account for a commodity. wallnut: 5. wallnut- of this sort of wood there be infinite store and there be 4. sort it be a excellent wood for many use. approve the young tree, be employ for hoop and be the best for that imployement of all other stuff whatsoever. the nut serve, when they fall, to feed our swine, which make they the delicate bacon of all other food, and be therein a chief commodity. chestnutt 6. chestnut of this sort, there be very great plenty, the timber whereof be excellent for building and be a very good commodity, especial in respect of the fruit, both for man and beast. pine: 7. pine of this sort there be infinite store in. some part of the country i have travel 10. mile together, where be little or no other wood grow and of these may be make rosin, pitch and tar which be such useful commodity that if we have they not from other country in amity with england our navigation will decline. then how great the commodity of it will be to our nation to have it of our own. let any man judge cedar of this sort there be abundance, 8. cedar and this wood be such as solomon use for the build of that glorious temple at jerusalem and there be of these cedar, fir, tree and other material necessary for the build of many fair temple, if there be any salomon to be at the cost. of they. and if any man be desirous to find out in what part of the country the best cedar be, he must get into the bottom ground and in valley that be wet at the spring of the year, where the moisture preserve they from the fire in spring time and not in a wooden prospect. this wood cut red and be good for bedstead table and chest and may be place in the catalogue of commodity cypress. of this there be great plenty and vulgar this tree have be. take 9 cypress for another sort of cedar. but workman put a difference between this cypress and the cedar, especial in the colour, for this be white and that red white, and likewise in the fineness of the leaf and the smoothness of the barque. this wood be also sweet than cedar and, as it be in garret, herbal, a more beautiful tree, it be of all other, to my mind most beautiful and can be deny to pass for a commodity: spruce 10. spruce of these there be infinite store especial in the northern part of the country and they have be approve by workman in england to be more tough than those that they have out of the east country, from whence we have they for mast and yard of shipppe. the spruce of. this country be find to be 3. and 4. about. the spruce of this country be find to be 3. and 4. about and be repute, able, single to make mast for the big ship that sail on the main ocean without peese which be more than the east country can afford, and see that navigation be the very sinneus of a flourish commonwealth, it be fit to allow the spruce tree a principal place in the catalogue of commodity alder- 11. alder- of this sort there be plenty by river side. good for turner birch- 12. birch- of this there be plenty in diverse part of the country. of the bark. of these the savage of the northern part make they delicate canowes, so light that two man will transport one of they over land, whether they listen, and yet one of they will transport ten or twelffe savage by water at a time. mayple 13. maple, of those tree there be great abundance and these be very excellent for bowl. the indian use of it to that purpose and be, to be account, a good commodity. eldern, there be plenty in that country, of this the savage make their arrow 14. eldern, and it have no strong unsavery sentlike our eldern in england. hawthorne, of this there be two sort, 15. hawthrone, one of this which bear a well taste berry as big as one. thumb and look like little queen apple. vine of this kind of tree. 16. vine: there be that bear grape of three colour, that be to say white, black and red. the country be so apt for vine that but for the fire at the spring of the year. the vine will so over spread the land that one shall not be able to pass for they, the fruit, be as big of some as a musket bullet and be excellent in taste. plumtree- of this kind there be many. 1. plum, some that bear fruit as big as our ordinary. other there be that do bear fruit much big than pear plum, their colour red and their stone flat, very delicious in taste. cheritree. 17. cherry there be abundance, but the fruit be as small as our sloe. but if any of they be replant and graft in a orchard they will soon be raise by mean of such and the like fruit. there be great abundance of musk rose in diverse place, 19 rose. the water distil, excel our rose-water of england. there be abundance of sassafras and sarsaperilla: 20. sassafras and 21. sarsaperilla grow in diverse place of the land. who bud at the spring do perfume the air. other tree there be not great material to be recite in this abstract as goose berry, rasbery and other berry. there be hemp that natural grow fine than our hemp of england, chap 3, potthearbe and other herb for salad the country. there natural afford very good potherbe and salad herb and those of a more maskuline virtue than any of the same species in england: potmarioram time alexander angellica, pursland violet and anniseed as potmarioram time alexander angellica, pursland violet and anniseed in very great abundance and forth pot i gather in summer, dry and crumble into a bag to preserve for winter. store hunnisuckle and balm. hunnisuckle, balm and diverse other good herb be there that grow without the industry of man, that be use when occasion serve very commodious. chap 4 of bird and feather fowl. now that i have brief show the commodity of the tree herb and fruit, i will show you a description of the fowl of the air as most proper in ordinary. course, and first of the swan swan, because she be the big of all the fowl of that country. there be of they in merrimack river and in other part of the country, great store at the seaon of the year. the flesh be not much desire of the inhabitant but the skin may be account, a commodity fit for diverse use, both for feather and quile goose, pied, white and gray. there be goose of three sort: advise: brant goose which be pied, and white goose which be big, and gray goose which be as big and big than the tame goose of england, with black leg, black bill head and neck black, the flesh far more excellent than the goose of england, wild or tame. yet the purity of the air be such that the big be account but a indifferent meal for a couple of man, there be of they great abundance. i have have often 1000 before the mouth of my gun. i never see any in england. for my part, so fat as i have, kill there in those part the feather of they make a bed soft than any down bed that i have lie on and be there a very good commodity feather. pay for powether and shot, the feather of the goose that i have kill in a short time. have pay for all the powther and shot i have spend in a year and i have feed my dog with as fat goose there as i have ever feed upon myself in england- duck, pied, gray and black duck. there be of three kind- pied duck, gray duck and black duck in great abundance. the most about my habitation be black duck and it be a note custom at my house to have every man duck upon a trencher and then you will think a man be not hardly use. they be big boddy than the tame duck of england, very fat and dainty flesh. the common dog fee be the giblett, unless they be boil now and than for to make broth teal, green and blue. teal there be of two sort: green wing and blow wing, but a dainty bird. i have be much delight with a roast of these for a second course. i have plenty in the river and pond about my house, widggens. there be widggens and abundance of other water foul, some such as i have see and such as i have not see else, where before i come into those part which be little regard simpe. simpe there be like our simpe in all respect with very little difference. i have shoot at they only to see what difference i can find between they and and those of my native country and more. i do not regard they sanderling be a dainty bird, sanderling more full boddy than a snipe and i be much delight to feed on they because they be fat and easy to come by, because i go but a step or to for they and i have kill between four and five dozen at a shoot which will load. i home their food, be at ebb water, on the sand of small seed that grow on weed there and be very good pastime in august crane there be great tear crane that ever more come there at s david day and not before that day. they never will miss these. sometime eat our corn and do pay for their presumption well enough, and serve there in powther. with turnip to supply the place of powthered beef and be a goodly bird in a dish and no discommodity turkey. there be turkey, which diverse time in great flock have sally by our door and then a gun be common in a readiness. salute they with such a courtesy as make they take a turn in the cook room. they dance by the door. so well of these there have be kill that have weigh forty eight pound a piece. they be by mainy degree sweet than the tame turkey of england. feed they how you can. i have a savage who have take out his boy in a morning and they have bring home their load about noon. i have ask they what number they find. in the wood who have answer neent metawna, which be a thousand that day, the plenty of they be, such in those part they be easy kill at rooste because the one be kill, the other sit fast. nevertheless, and this be no bad commodity, there be a kind of fowl which be common call pheisant pheisant, but whether they be pheysant or no i will not take upon i to determine. they be in form like our pheisant hen of england, both the male and the female be alike, but they be rough foot and have stare feather about the head and neck. the body be as big as the pheysant hen of england and be excellent white flesh and delicate white meat. yet we seldom bestow. a shoot at. they partridge, big in body as those of england. partridge there be much like our partridge of england. they be of the same plume but big in body. they have not the sign of the horse-shoe on the breast as the partridge of england, nor be they colour about the head as those be. they sit on the tree, for i have see 40. in one tree at a time. yet at night they fall on the ground and sit until morning. so together and be dainty flesh quail, big body as those in england. there be quail also, but big than the quail in england. they take tree also, for i have number 60. upon a tree at a time. the cock do call. at the time of the year, but with a different note from the cock quail of england, the lark sing, not the lark there be like our lark of england in all respect, save that they do not it use to sing at all. there be owl of diverse kind owl, but i do never hear any of they whop as we do. the crow smell and taste of musk in summer but not in winter. there be crow kight and rook that do differ in some respect from those of england. the crow, which i have much admire, what shall be the cause? both smell and taste of musk in summer but not in winter. hawk of five sort. there be hawk in new england of 5.. sort and these of all other feather fowl i must not omit to speak of, nor need i to make any apology for myself, concern any trespass that i be like to make upon my judgement, concern the nature of. they have be breed in so genius a way that i have the common use of they in england and at my first arrival in those part practise to take a lannaret- a lanneret which i reclaim, train and make fly. in a fortnight the same be a passenger at michuelmas. i find that these be most excellent mettle, rank, wing, well condition and not tickleish foot and have whood, bell, luer and all thing fit. be desirous to make experiment of that kind of hawk before any. other, and i be persuade that nature have ordain they to be of a far better kind than any that have be use in england. they have neither dorre nor worm to feed upon, as in other part of the world the country afford none the use whereof, in other part, make the lannar there more bussardly than they be in new england. there be likewise falcon, falcon and tassel gentle, admirable well shape bird, and they will tower up when they purpose to pray and on a sudden, when they esspie their game, they will make such a that one will admire to behold they. some there be more black than any that have be use in england, the tassel gent, but of the least size be. a ornament for a person of esimation among the indian to wear in the knot of his lock with the train upright, the body dry and stretch out. they take a great pride in the wear of such a ornament and give to one of we that shall kill they one for that purpose, so much beaver as be worth three pound sterling, very willing. these do we, but little trespass because they pray on such bird as be by the sea side and not on our chicken goshawkes there be, and tassel goshawkes well shape. the tassel be short, truss bussard, but the goshawkes be well shape. but they be small, some of white male and some red male. i have see one with 8. bar in. the train. these fall on our big poultry, the lesser chicken i think they scorn to make their prey of for common the cock go to wrack. of these i have see many and if they come to trespass i i lay the law to they with the gun and take they damage pheasant marlins, small and great. there be very many marlins, some very small and some so large as be the barbary tassel. i have often behold these pretty bird how they have scour after the black bird, which be a small size choffe that eat the indian maisze sparhawk. there be also sparhawk, the fair and best shape bird that i have ever behold, of that kind, those that be little, no use be make. of any of they, neither be they regard. i only try conclusion with a lannaret at first come, and when i find what be in that bird i turn he go. but for so much as i have observe of those bird they may be a fit present for a prince and for goodness too, be prefer before the barbary or any other use in christendom and especial the lannar and lannaret. a hun bird be as small as a beetle, his bill as sharp as a needle point and his feather like silk. there be a curious bird to see, to call a hun bird, no big than a great beetle that out of question live upon the bee which he eat and catch among flower for. it be his custom to frequent those place. flower he can feed upon by reason of his sharp bill, which be like the point of a spanish needle, but short. his feather have a glass like silk and as he stir they show to be of a chaingable colour and have be and be admire for shape, colour and size. chap v of the beast of the forest. now that i have make a rehearsal of the bird and feather fowl which participate most of air, i will give you a description of the beast and show you what beast be breed in those part and what my experience have gather by observation of their kind and nature. i begin with the most useful and most beneficial beast. which be breed in those part which be the dear, dear of 3. kind. there be in this country three kind of dear of which there be great plenty and those be very useful: mose or red dear. first, therefore, i will speak of the elk which savage call a mose. it be a very large dear with a very fair head and a broad palm like the palm of a fallow dee horn, but much big and be 6. footewide between the tipp which grow curb downward. he be of the bigness of a great horse. mose or dear great than a horse, the height of they 18. hand full there have be of. they see that have be 18. handful high. he have a bunch of. hair under his jaw. he be not swift but strong and large in body and long legged insomuch that he do use to kneel when he feed on grass. they bring forth three faun at one time. he bring forth three faun, or young one at a time and be make tame will be good for draught and more useful, by reason of their strength, than the elk of raushea. these be find very frequent in the northern part of new england. their flesh be very good food and much better than our red dear of england. they make good leather of the hide of dear. their hid be by the salyage convert into very good leather and dress as white as milk of this leather. the savage. make the best shoe and use to barter away the skin to other savage that have none of that kind of best in the part where they live. very good buff may be make of the hid. i have see a hide as large as any horse hide that can be find. there be such abundance of they that the savage at hunt time have kill of they so many that they have bestow six or seven at a time upon one english man who they have bear affection to, the middling dear or fallow dear. there be a second sort of dear, less than the red dear of england but much big than the english fallow dear. swift of foot but of a more dark colour with some griseld hair when his coat be full, grow in the summer season. his horn grow curve with a crooked beam. resemble our red dear, not with a palm like the fallow dear these bring. 3. fawn at a time spot like our fallow deer. fawn the savage say four. i speak of what i know to be true, for i have kill in february a do with three fawn in her belly. all hear and ready to fall for these dear. fall their fawn. 2. month soon then the fallow dear of england there be. such abundance of they that a hundred have be find at the spring of the year within the compass of a mile. trap to catch the dear the savage take these in trap, make of their natural hemp which they place in the earth where they fall, a tree for browse. and when he round the tree for the browse, if he tread on the trapp he be horse up by the leg by mean of a pole that start up and catch he their hide. the saluage use for clothing and will give for one hide kill in season 2., 3. or 4. beaver skin which will yield pound a piece in that country. so much be the deer hide prise with they above the beaver i. have make good merchandise of these. the flesh be far sweet than the venison of england and he feed fat and lean together as a swine or mutton where, as our dear of england feed fat on the out side they do not croak at rut time nor spendle shaft, nor be their flesh discolour at rut. he that will impale ground fit may be, bring once in the year, wherewith bat and man he may take so many to put into that park as the hide will pay the charge of impaleinge. if all these thing be well, consider the dear as well. as the mose may have a principal place in the catalogue of commodity, the humble be the dog fee. i, for my part, may be bold to tell you that my house be not without the flesh of this sort of dear winter nor summer. the humble be ever my dog fee, which by the weasel be hang on the bar in in the chimney for his diet only for he have bring to my stand a brace in a morning, one after the other before sun rise, which i have kill. there be likewise a three sort of dear, less than the other, roe, buck or rain dear, which be a kind of rain dear to the southward of all the english plantation. they be excellent good flesh, and these also bring three fawn at a time, and in this particular the dear of those part. excel all the know, dear of the whole world wolf pray upon. dear on all these the wolf do pray continual the best mean they have to escape the wolf, be by swim to island or neck of land whereby they escape, for the wolf will not presume to follow they until they see they over a river, then be land, they wait on the shore, undertake the water and so follow with fresh suit. the next, in my opinion fit to be speak of, beaver: be the beaver, which be a beast, ordain for land and water both, and have before foot like a coney, her hinder, foot like a go, mouth like a coney, but short ear like a fish in summer and wood in winter. which he convey to his house, build on the water wherein he sit with his tail, hang in the water which else will over heat and rot off. the beaver cut down tree with his foretooth. he cut the body of tree down with his foretooth, which be so long as a boar tusk, and with the help of other beaver which hold by each other tail like a team of horse, the hind most with the leg on his shoulder, stay by one of his fore foot against his head. they draw the log to the habitation appoint, place the log in a square and so by pyl, one upon another, they build up a house which, with boghe be cover very strong and place in some pond to which they make a dam of brush wood like a hedge so strong that i have go, on the top of it, cross the current of that pond. the flesh of this beast be excellent food, the fleece be a very choice fur which, before the savage have commerce with christian, they burn of the tail. this beast be of a masculine virtue for the advancement of priapus and be preserve for a dish for the sachems or sagamore, who be the prince of the people but not king. as be fond. suppose beaver at 10. shill a pound, the skin be the best merchantable commodity that can be find to cause ready money to be bring into the land now that they be raise to 10. shilling a pound in 5 year one man, get together 1000 p in good gold. a servant of i in 5. year be think to have a 1000 p in ready gold. get by beaver when he die, whasoever become of it and this beast may challenge pre-eminence in the catalogue. the otter in winter have a fur as black as jet. the otter of those part in winter season have a fur so black as jet and be a fur of very high price. a good black skin be. worth 3.. of 4.. angel of gold. the flesh be eat by the savage. but how good it be i can show, because it be not eat by our nation. yet be this a beast that aught to be place in the number among the commodity of the country. the luseran, or luseret, be a beast like a cat but so big as a great hound. the luseran, as big as a hound, with a tail short than a cat. his claw be like a cat. he will make a pray of the dear. his flesh be dainty meat like a lamb. his hide be achoise fur and account a good commodity. the martin be a beast about the bigness of a fox. his fur be chestnutt colour. the martin. be about the bigness of a fox and of those there be great store in the northern part of the country and be a good commodity. the racowne be a beast as big, full out as a fox. racowne with a bushtayle, his flesh excellent food, his oil precious for the, his fur course. but the skin serve the savage for coat. and be with those people of more esteem than a coat of beaver because of the tail that hang round in their order. do adorn the garment and be therefore so much esteem of they. his fore foot be like the foot of a ape and by the print thereof in the time of snow he be follow to his hole, which be common. in a hollow tree, from whence he be fire out and saot ken. the fox, red and gray. the fox be of two colour, the one red, the other gray. these feed on fish and be good fur. they do not stink as the fox of england, but their condition for their prey be, as the fox of england, the wolf of diverse colour. the wolf be of diverse colour, some sandy colour, some grisel and some black. their food be fish which they catch when they pass up the river into the pond to spawn at the spring time. the dear be also their prey and at summer, when they have whelp, the bitch will fetch a puppy dog from our door to feed their whelp with. they be fearful cur and will run away from a man that meet they by chance at bank end as fast as any fearful dog. these pray upon the dear very much. the skin be use by the savage especial, the skin of the black wolf, which be esteem a present for a prince there. the skin of a black wolf a present for a prince. when there arise any difference between prince and prince, the prince that desire to be reconcile to his neighbour prince do endeavour to purchase it by send he a black wolf skin for a present. and the acceptance of such a present be a assurance of reconciliation between they. and the savage will willing give 40. beaver skin for the purchase of one of these black wolf skin. and although the beast himself be a discommodity which other country of christendom be subject unto, yet be the skin of the black wolf worthy the title of a commodity. in that respect, that have be declare the bear afraid of a man. if i shall not speak something of the bear, i may happy leave a scruple in the mind of some effeminate person who conceive of more danger in they than there be cause, therefore, to encourage they against all fear and fortify their mind against needle danger. i will relate what experience have teach i concern they. they be beast that do no harm in those part. they feed upon hurtleburies, nut and fish, especial shellfish. the bear be a tyrant at a lobster and at low water will down to the rock and grope after they, with great diligence. the savage see a bear, chase he like a dog and kill he. he will run away from a man as fast as a little dog if a couple of savage chance to espy he at his banquet, his run a way will not serve his turn, for they will coat he and chase he between they home to their house where they kill he to save a labour in carry he far his flesh. be esteem venision and of a better taste than beef. his hide be use by the savage for garment and be more commodious than discommodious and may pass with some allowance with the rest, the musk wash, muske-washe- be a beast that frequent the pond. what he eat. i can find he be but a small beast, less than a coney, and be indeed in those part no other than a water rat, for i have see the sucker of they dig out of a bank and at that age they neither differ in shape, colour nor size from one of our great rat. when he be old, he be of the beaver colour and have pass in wait with our chapman for beaver the male of. they have stone which the savage in unacustomated case of they leave to the skin which be a most delicate perfume and may compare with any perfume that i know. for goodness, then may not this be exclude the catalogue. this country, in the north part thereof, have many porcupine, but i do not find porcupine the beast any way useful or hurtful. there be in those northern part many hedge-hogg, hedghogg of the like nature to our english hedghogg, coney of several sort. here be great store of coney in those part, of diverse colour, some white, some black and some gray. those towards the southern part be very small but those to the north be as big as the english coney. their ear be very short. for meat the small rabbit be as good as any that i have eat of. else where squirrel of three sort. there be squirrel of three sort very different in shape and condition and be gray and he be as big as the lesser coney and keep the wood feed upon nut. another be red and he haunt our house and will rob we of our corn. but the cat, many time pay he the price of his presumption. a fly squirill, the three. be a little fly squirill with bat like wing, which he spread when he jump from tree to tree and do no harm. now, because i be upon a treaty of the beast snake, i will place this creature, the snake, among the beast. have my warrant from the holy bible who, though his posture in his passage be so different from all other, be of a more subtle and aidry nature that he can make his way without foot and lift himself above the superficies of the earth as he glid along. yet may he not be rank with any, but, the beast notwithstanding, he frequent the water as well as the land. there be of snake, diverse and of several kind, as be with we in england, but that country have not so many as in england have be know the general savage name of they be ascowke, the rattle snake. there be one creep beast, or long cripple as the name be, in devonshire that have a rattle at his tail that do discover his age for so many year as he have live so many joint be in that rattle which sound when it be in motion like pease in a bladder. and this beast be call a rattle snake, but the savage give he the name of sesick, which some take to be the adder. and it may well be so for the savage be in their denomination of any thing and be no less hurtful than the adder of england. nor no more i have have my dog venom with trouble one of these and so swell that i have think it will have be. his death, but with one saucer of salet oil pour down his throat he have recover and the swell assuage by the next day. the like experiment have be make upon a boy that have by chance trod upon one of these, and the boy never the worse. therefore, it be simplicity in any one that shall tell a bugbear tale of horrible or terrible serpent that be in that land. miso, there be good store miso and my lady wood-bee, black gray malkin, may have pastime enough there. but for rat the country by nature be troubble, with none. lion, always in ho climate, not in cold. lion, there be none in new england. it be contrary to the nature of the beast to frequent place accustom. to snow, be like the cat that will hazard the burn of her tail rather than abide from the fire. chap 5 of stone and mineral. now for as much as i have, in a brief abstract, show you the creature who, specifical nature, do sympathize with the element of fire and air. i will come to speak of the creature that participate of earth more than the other two, which be stone, and first of the marble for building. marble, whereof there be much in those part, in so much as there be one bay in the land that bear the name of marble harbour, because of the plenty of marble there, and these be useful for build of sumptuous palace, and because limestone no good building. can be make permanent or durable without lime. i will let you understand that there be good limestone near to the river of monatoquinte, at uttaquatockto. my knowledge and we hope other place too that i have not take so much notice of may have the like or better, and those stone be very convenient for building chalk stone. there be near squantos chapel, show i, by a savage chalk. there be abundance of excellent slate in diverse place of the country, slate and the best that ever i behold for cover of house, and the inhabitanr have make good use of these material for building. there be a very useful stone in the land and as yet there be find out but one place where they may. be have whetstone in the whole country, old woodman that be choke at plymouth after he have play the unhappy mark man when he be pursue by a careless fellow that be new, come into the land, they say labour ro, get a patent of it to himself. he be belove of many and have many son that have a mind to engross that commodity, and i can spy any mention make of it in the wooden prospect. therefore i begin to suspect his aim that it be for himself and therefore will i not discover it. it be the stone so much commend by ovid, because love delight to make his habitation in a build of those material where he advise those that seek for love to do it duris. in this stone the savage do call cos, and of these on the north end of richmond hand be store and those be very excellent, good for edge tool. i envy not his happiness. i have be there, view the place like the commodity but will not plant so northerly for that nor any other commodity that be there to be. have there be loadestones also in the northern part of the land, lodestone and those which be find be very good and be a commodity worth the note. iron stone: there be abundance. ironstones and several sort of they know lead over. be there likewise lead and have be find by the break of earth which the frost have make mellow, black lead. i have likewise find very good black lead which the savage use to paint their face with red lead. be there likewise, in great abundance read lead. there be very excellent boll, ammoniac boll. there be most excellent vermilion. all these thing the savage make some little use of, and do find they on the circumference of the earth. brimstone mine, there be likewise brimstone mine of tin. tin be likewise know to be in those part which will in short time be make use of, and this can be account a mean commodity, copper mine be there. find likewise that will enrich the inhabitant copper. but until their young cattle be grow hardy labourer in the yoke that the plough and the wheat may be see more plentiful. it be a work must be forbear. they say there be a silver and a gold. i find by captain littleworth silver. if he get a patent of it to himself he will sure change his name. chap 7 of the fish and what commodity they prove among fish. first i will begin with the codd, because it be the most commodious of all fish, as may appear by the use which be make of they in foreign part. the codd fish be much use in america codd, whereof new england be apart in so much as 300.. sail of ship from diverse part have use to be employ yearly in that trade 15. ship at one time for codd i have see in one harbour next richmond i land 15. sail of ship at one time that have take in they driy cod for spain and the straits and it have be find that the sailor have make 15.18.20.22 p share for a common man. the coast abound with such multitude of codd that the inhabitant of new england do dung their ground with codd, and it be a commodity better than the golden mine of the spanish indies, for without dry codd the spaniard, portugal and italian will not be able to vittel of a ship for the sea and i be sure at the canary it be the principal commodity. which place lie near new england yery convenient for the vend of this commodity? one hundred of these be at the price of 300.. of new find land, cod, great store of train oil, be maid of the liver of the codd, oil maid of the liver of the codd, and be a commodity that without question will enrich the inhabitant. of new england quick and be therefore a principal commodity. the be a excellent fish, both fresh and salt. one hundred whereof salt at a market have yield 5. p. a 100 sell for 5. p. they be so large the head of one will give a good eater, a dinner, and for daintiness of diet they excel the marybone of beef. there be such multitude that i have see stop into the river close adjoin to my house with a sand at one tide so many as will load a ship of a 100 ton. other place have great quantity in so much as wager have be lay that one shall not throw a stone in the water but that he shall hit a fish. i myself, at the turn of the tide, have see such multitude pass out of a pound that it seem to i that one may go over their back drishod. these follow the bait up the river and sometime be follw for bait and chase into the bay and shallow water by the grand pisa. and these may have also a prime place in the catalogue of commodity: the mackarel be the bait for the, and these have be chase into the shallow water, mackerell be bait for where so many thousand have shoot themselves a shore with the surfe of the sea that whole hogshead have be take upon the sand. and for length they excel any of other part. they have be measure 18. and 19. inch in length and seven in breadth and be take with a drayle as boat use to pass to and fro at sea on business in yery great quantity all along the coast. the fish be good salt for store against the winter as well as fresh and to be account, a good commodity. this sturgeon in england be. every man in new england may catch what he will. there be multitude of they sturgeon, and they be much fat than those that be bring into england from other part, in so much as by reason of their fatness they do not look white but yellow, which make a cook presume they be not so good as they of roushea. silly fellow that can not understand that it. be the nature of fish, salt or pickel, the fat, the yellow being best to preserve for the taste. i have warrant of lady of worth with choice palate for the commendation, who like the taste so well that they esteem it beyond the sturgeon, of other part, and say they be deceive in the look. therefore, let the sturgeon pass for a commodity. of salmon, there be great abundance, and these may be allow for a commodity, saimon, and place in the catallogue of herring. herring, there be great store, fat and fair and, to my mind, as good as any i have see, and these may be preserve and make a good commodity at the canary. of eel. there be abundance both in the salt-water and in the fresh and the fresh water eel there, if i may take the judgement of a london fishmonger, be the best that he have find in his life time. i have with jieele pot find my house hold great plenty of eel, be nine person beside dog with. they. take they every tide for 4. month space and preserve of they for winter store and these may prove a good commodity of smelt. there be such abundance, smelt that the savage do take they up in the river with basket like sives, shadd or allize take to dung ground. there be a fish, by some call shadd, by some allize, that at the spring of the year pass up the river to spawn in the pond and be take in such multitude in every river that have a pond at the end that the inhabitant dung their ground with they. you may see in one towneship a hundred acre together set with these fish every acre. take 1000 of they, and a acre thus dress will produce and yield so much corn as 3. acre without fish. and lest any man will infer hereupon that the ground of new england be barren because they use no fish in set their corn, i desire they to be remember the cause be plain in: they have it not to set, but this practice be only for the indian maize which must be set by hand, not for english grain, and this be therefore a commodity there. there be a large size fish, call halibut turbut or halibut or turbut. some be take so big that two man have much a do to hale they into the boat, but there be such plenty that the fi^her man only eat the head and fin and throw away the body. such in paris will yield 5. or 6. crown a. piece and this be no discommodity. there be excellent plaice and easy, take they at flow water, do almost come ashore plaice so that one may step but half a foot deep and prick they up on the sand and this may pass with some allowance. hake be a dainty white fish hake and excellent victual fresh and may pass with other commodity because there be multitude. there be great store of pilcher pilcher at michaelmas. in many place i have see the cormorant in length, 3. mile feed upon the sent lobster be there, infinite in store in all the part of the land lobster and very excellent. the most use that i make of they in 5. year after i come there be but to bait. my hook for to catch. i have be so cloy with they the first day i go a shore, this be know. they shall pass for a commodity to the inhabitant. for the savage will meet 500 or 1000 at a place where lobster come in with the tide to eat and save dry for store. abide in that place, feast and sport a month or 6. week together. there be great store of oyster in the entrance of all river. oyster they be not round as those of england but excellent fat and all good. i have see a oyster bank a mile at length. muzzle. there be infinite store muzzle. i have often go to where be excellent muzzle to eat for variety, the fish be. so fat and large claim be a shellfish claim which i have see sell in westminster for 12. pe the score. these our swine feed upon and of they there be no. want every shore be full. it make the swine prove exceed. they will not fail at low water to be with they. the savage be much. take with the delight of this fish and be not cloy. notwithstanding the plenty for our swine we find it a good commodity. razor fish: there be razor fish, freele. there be cockle and scallope freele and diverse other sort of shellfishe. very good food. now that i have show you what commodity be there to be have in the sea for a market, i will show what be in. the land, also for the comfort of the inhabitant wherein it do abound. and because my task be a abstract, i will discover to they the commodity thereof: fresh fish, trout, carp, breame, pike, roche, perch, tenche and eel. there be in the river and pond. very excellent trout, carp, breame, pike, roche, perch, tenche, eel and other fish such as england do afford and as good for variety yea, many of they much better. and the native of the inland part do buy hook of we to catch they with. and i have know the time that a trout hook have yield a beaver skin which have be a good commodity to those that have barter they away. these thing i offer to your consideration, courteous reader. and require you to show i the like in any part of the know world, if you can. chap 8 of the goodness of the country and the water. now, since it be a country so infinite, blessed with food, food and fire, and fire to roast or boil our flesh and fish, why shall any man fear for cold there, in a country warm in the winter than some part of france, and near the sun, unless he be one of those that solomon bid go to the ant and the bee? there be no boggy ground, know, in all the country, no boggs from whence the sun may exhale unwholesome vapour, but there be diverse arematicall herb and plant perfume, air with sweet herb as sassafras. musk, rose, violet balm, laurel, hunnisuckle and the like that with their vapour perfume the air. and it have be a thing much observe that ship have come from where there have be scarce five man able to hale a rope until they have come within 40. degree of latitude and smell the sweet air of the shore, where they have sudden recover. and for the water therein it excel canaan by much of water for the land be so apt for fountain a man can dig amiss. therefore, if the abraham and lot of our time come thither, there needs be no contention, for well, beside there be water of most excellent virtue, worthy admiration: the cure of mellancolly at ma remount, at ma-re mount, there be. a water by i discover that be most excellent for the cure of melancholy, the cure of barrenness, at weenasemute be a water the virtue whereof be to cure barrenness. the place take his name of that fountain, which signify quick spring or quicken spring water procure a dead sleep. near squantos chapel, a place so by we call be a fountain that cause a dead sleep for 48. hour to those that drink 24. ounce at a draught. and so proportionable the savage that be powah at set time, use it- new engl excel canaan in fountain and reveal strange thing to the vulgar people by mean of it, so that in the delicacy of water and the conveniency or they, canaan come not near this country. milk and honey supply. as for the milk and honey which that canaan flow with, it be supply by the plenty of bird, beast and fish whereof canaan can not boast her self yet. never thelesse, since the milk come by the industry of the first inhabitant, a plain parallel to canaan. let the cattle be cheresh, that be at this time in new england and forbear but a little. i will ask no long time, no more. but until the brethren have convert one savage and make he a good christian, and i may be bold to say butter and cheese will be cheap there then. ever it be in canaan, it be cheap there then in old england at this present, for there be store of. cow. consider the people which, as my intelligence give, be 12000.. person, and, in god name, let the people have their desire who write to their friend, to come out of sodom to the land of canaan, a land that flow with milk and hony the request for the nomination of new canaan, and i appeal to any man of judgement whether it be not a land that, for her excellent endowment of nature, may pass for a plain parallel to canaan of israel, be in a more temporat climate, this be in 40. degree and that in 30.. chap 9: a perspective to view the country by. as for the soil, i may be bold to commend the fertility thereof and prefer it before the soil of england, the soil our native country, and ineede not to produce more than one argument for proof thereof, because it be so infallible the growth of hemp. hemp be a thing by husband, man in general agree upon to prosper best in the most fertile soil, and experience have teach this rule that hempseed prosper so well in new england that it shewt up to be ten foot high and ten foot and a half, which be twice so high as the ground in old england, produce it, which argue new england the more fertile of the two. as for the air, the air, i will produce but one proof for the maintenance of the excellency thereof, which be so general, as i assure my self, it will suffice. no cold, cough or murr. no man live there, be ever know to be trouble with a cold, a cough or a murr. but many man come sick out of to new canaan, have instant recover with the help of the purity of that air. no man ever surfeit himself, either by eat or drink. as for the plenty of that land, it be well know that no part of asia, africa or europe, the plenty of the land, afford dear that do bring forth any more than one single faun. and in new canaan the dear be accustom to bring forth 2. and 3 faun at a time. beside there be such infinite flock of fowl and multitude of fish, both in the fresh water and also on the coast, that the like have not else where be discover by any traveller. the wind there be not so violent as in england, wind which be prove by the tree that grow in the face of the wind, by the sea coast, for there they do not lean from the wind as they do in england, as we have hear before, the rain be there more moderate than in england raine, which thing i have note in all the time of my residence to be so the coast be. low land and not high land, the coast, and he be of a weak capacity that conceave otherwise of it, because it can be deny. but that boat may come a ground in all place along the coast, and especial within the compass of the massachusets patent, where the prospect be fix the harboure be not to be better harboure for safety and goodness of ground for ancorage and which be worthy observation ship, will not there be fur, neither be they subject to worm as in and other place. let the situation also of the country be consider, together with the rest situation which be discover in the front of this abstract, and then i hope no man will hold this land unworthy to be entitle by. the name of the second canaan and since the separatist the nomination, be desirous to have the denomination thereof. i be become a humble suitor on their behalf, for your consent, courteous reader to it, before i do show you what revel they have keep in new canaan, chap x of the great lake of erocoise in new england and the commodity thereof, westward from the massachussets bay which lie in 42. degree and 30. minute of northern latitude, be situate a very spacious lake, call of the native, the lake of erocoise, which be far more excellent than the lake of genezereth in the country of palestina, both in respect of the greatness and property thereof and likewise of the manifold commodity it yield, the circumference of. which lake be repute to be 240. mile at the least and it be distant from the massachussets bay, 300. mile or there abouts, wherein be very many fair island, where innumerable flock of several sort of fowl do breed, foul innumerable swan goose, duck, widgine, teal and other water fowle. there be also more abundance of beaver, dear and turkey breed about the part of that lake, then in any place in all the country of new england, and also such multitude of fish which be a great part of the food that the beaver live upon, multitude of fish that it be a thing to be admire at, so that about this lake be the principallst place for a plantation in all new canaan, the prime. place of new canaan, both for pleasure and profit. here may very many brave town and city be erect, which may have intercourse one with another by water very commodious, and it be of many man of good judgement account, the prime seat for the metropolis of new canaan. from this lake northwards be derive the famous river of canada, so name of cane, a french lord. canada, so name of cane. that first plant, a colony of french in america, there call francia, from whence captain kerke of late by, take that plantation, bring home in one ship as a seaman of his company, report in my hear, 25000. beaver skin. and from this lake southwards trend, that goodly river call of the native patomack- patomack which dischardge herself in the part of, from whence it be navigable by ship of great burden up to the fall, which lie in 41. degree and a half of north latitude, and from the lake down to the fall by a fair current. this river be navigable for vessel of good burden. and thus much have often be relate by the native and be of late find to be certain great herd of beast as big as cowes. they have also make description of great herd of well grow beast that live about the part of this lake, such as the christian world, until this discovery have not be make acquaint with. these beast be of the bigness of a cow, their flesh be very good food, their hide good leather, their fleece very useful, be a kind of wool as fine almost as the wool of the beaver, and the savage do make garment thereof. it be ten year since first the relation of these thing come to the ear of the english, at which time we be but slender proficients in the language of the native, and they which now have attain to more perfection of english can not then make we right apprehend their meaning. we suppose when they speak of beast, thereabouts as high as man, they have make report of man all over, hairy like beaver, in so much as we question they whether they eat of the beaver, to which they reply: matta, no, say they be almost beavers, brother. this relation, at that time we conclude to be fruitless, which, since time, have make more apparent about the part of this lake may be make a very great commodity by the trade of fur to enrich those that shall plant there. a more complete discovery of those part be, to my knowledge, undertake by henry joseline esquire, son of sir thomas joseline of kent, knight, by the approbation and appointment of that heroic and very good common wealth man. captain john mason esquire, a true foster father and lover of virtue, henry joseline, employ for discovery who, at his own charge, have fit master joseline and employ he to that purpose, who no doubt will perform as much as be expect if the dutch by get into those part before he do not frustrate his so hopeful and laudable design. it be well know, they aim at that place and have a possibility to attain unto the end of their desire therein by mean, if the river of mohegan, which of the english be name hudsons river, where the dutch have settle to well, fortify plantation already, if that river be derive from the lake, as our country man, in his prospect, affirm it to be, and if they get and fortify this place also, they will glean away the best of the beaver both from the french and english who have hitherto live whole by it, and very many old planter have gain good estate out of small beginning by mean thereof, and it be well know to some of our nation that have live in the dutch plantation. the dutch have a great trade of beaver in hudsons river that the dutch have gain by beaver 20000. pound a year. the savage make report of 3. great river that issue out, or this lake, 2. of which be to? we know the one to be patomack, the other canada, and why may not the three be find there likewise, which they describe to trend westward, which be conceive to discharge herself into the south sea. the savage affirm that they have see ship in this lake with 4. mast which have take from thence for their lade earth that be conjecture to be some mineral stuff. there be probability enough for this and it may well be think that so great a confluxe of. water as be there gather together, must be vent by some great river, the passage to the east-indies, and that, if the three river which th^^ have make mention of prove to be true, as the other two have do, there be no doubt but that the passage to the east india may be obtain without any such daingerous and fruitless inquest by the northwest, as hitherto have be endeavour, and there be no traveller of any reasonable capacity but will grant that about this lake must be innumerable spring, and by that mean many fruitful and pleasant pasture all about it. it have be observe that the inland part, witness neepnet, be more pleasant and fertile than the border of the sea coast and the country about erocoise be not without good cause. compare to delta, the most fertile part in all egypt, the country of erocois as fertile as delta in egypt that abound with river and rivalet derive from nilus fruitful channel like vein from the liver. so, in each respect, be this famous lake of erocoise, therefore, it will be adjudge a irreparable oversight to protract time and suffer the dutch who be but intruder upon his majesty, most hopeful country of new england, to possess themselves of that so pleasant and commodious country of erocoise before we be, as appear, the principal part of all. new canaan for plantation and not elsewhere, to be parallele in all the know world. new canaan. genius thou that be by fate, degree or providence ordain to see nature wonder her rich store ne'e discover before. the admire lake of erocoise and fertile border. now rejoice, see what multitude of fish shee present to fit thy dish, if rich fur thou do adore, and of beaver fleece store. see the lake where they abound. and what pleasure else be find there. chaste leda, free from fire, do enjoy her heart desire among the flowery bank at ease. live the sport najade, big lime druid who brow bewtify with greenebowe. see the nymph how they do make fine meander from the lake, twining in and out as they. through the pleasant grove, make way weave by the shady tree, curious anastomase where the harmless turtle breed and such useful beast do feed as no traveller can tell else where. how to parallel colcos golden fleece. reject this deserve best respect. in sweet paean, let thy voice sing the praise of erocoise paean to advance her name. new canaan, everlasting fame, new english canaan or new canaan. the three book contain a description of the people that be plant there. what remarkable accident have happen there since they be settle. what tenant they hold, together with the practice of their church. chap i, of a great league make with the plymouth planters after their arrival by the sachem of those territory, the sachem of the territory where the planters of new england be settle, that be the first of the now inhabitant of new canaan not know what they be or whether they will be freindesor foe, and be desirous to purchase their friendship that he may have the better assurance of quiet tradinge with they, which he conceive will be very advantageous to he. be desirous to prepare a ambassador, a savage, send a ambassador to the english at their first come with commission to treat on his behalf to that purpose and have one that have. be in england, take by a worthless man out of other part and after leave there, by accident, this savage he instruct how to be, have himself in the treaty of peace, and the more to give he encouragement to adventure. his person among these new come inhabitant, which be a thing he dare not himself attempt without security or hostage. promise that savage freedom who have be detain there as their captive, which offer he accept and according. come to the planters, salutinge they with welcome in the english phrase which be of they admire to hear a savage there speak in their own language and use he, with great courtesy to who he declare the cause of his come and contrive the business so that he bring the sachem and the english together, between who be a firm league conclude, which yet continue. after which league, the sachem be in company with the other who he have free and suffer to live with the english espijnge a place where a hole have be make in the ground where be their store of powder lay to be preserve. from danger of fire under ground. demand of the savage what the english have hide there under ground. the sachem fear the plague. who answer the plague at which he startele because of the great mortality. late happen by mean of the plague as it be conceive, and the savage the more to increase his fear. tell the sachem if he shall give offence to the english party they will let out the plague to destroy the all which keep he in great awe. not long after, be at variance with another sachem border upon his territory. he come in solemn manner and entreat the governor that he will let out the plague to destroy the sachem and his man who be his enemy. promise that he himself. and all his posterity will be their everlasting friend, so great a opinion he have of the english chap 2 of the entertainment of mr westons people send to settle a plantation there. master thomas weston, a merchant of london, that have be at some cost to further the brethren of new plymouth in their design for these part ship a company of servant fit with provision of all sort for the undertake of a plantation to be settle there, with a intent to follow after they in parson, these servant at first arrive at new plymouth where they be entertain with court holy bread, court holy bread. at pimmouth by the brethren they be make very welcome in show, at least there these servant. good be land. with promise to be assist in the choice of a convenient place. and still the good cheer go forward and the strong liquor walk. in the mean time the brethren be in consultation, what be best for their advantage, sing the song. this plantation will hinder the present practice and future profit, and master weston, a able man, will want for no supply upon the return of beaver, and so may be a plantation that may keep they under who have a hope to be the great beside his people. be no choose separatist, but man make choice of at all adventure fit to have. serve for the furtherance of master westons undertakinge and that be as much as he need to care for ayminge at beaver principal. for the better effect of his purpose. now, when the plymouth man begin to find that master westons man store of provision, grow short with feast than they, haste they to a place, call wessaguscus in a weak case, and there leave they fast. chap 3 of a battle fight at the massachussets beweene the english and the indian. the planters of plymouth at their last be in those part have, deface the monument of the dead at by, take away the hearse clothe which be two great bear skin sow together at full length and prop up over the grave of chuatawbacks mother. the sachem of those territory be enrage at the same, stir up his man in his bee half to take revenge and have gather. his man together. he begin to make a oration in this manner, the sachems oration. when last the glorious light of all the skey be underneath this globe and bird grow silent, i begin to settle, as my custom be, to take repose. before my eye be fast close, i think i see a vision at which my spirit be much trouble. a spirit move the sachem to war and tremble at that doleful sight. a spirit cry aloud: behold my son, who i have cherish. see the pap that give thou, suck the hand that lappd thou, warm and feed thou oft. can thou forget to take revenge of those vild people that have my monument deface in despiteful manner, disdain our ancient antiquity and honourable custom? see now the sachems grave lie like unto the common people of ignoble race. deface thy mother, do complain. implore thy aid against this thievish people. new come hither. if this be, suffer, i shall not rest in quiet within my everlasting habitation. this say, the spirit vanish and i all in a sweat, not able, scarce, to speak. begin to get some strength and recollect my spirit, that be flee all which i think to let you understand, to have your council and your aid likewise, this be speak straight way. arise the grand captain and cry aloud: come let we to arm it. do concern we all the grand captain, make a speech, let we bid they battle, so to arm they. go and lay weight. for the plymouth boat and forceinge they to forsake their land place, they seek another best for their convenience. thither the savage repair, in hope to have the like success. but all in vain. for the english captain, wary, foresee the main battle and perceavinge their plot, know the better how to order his man fit for battle in that place. he, bold, lead his man on range about the field to and fro and take his best advantage. let we fly and make the savage give ground. the english follow they fierce on and make they take tree for their shelter, as their custom be. from whence their captain. let fly a main, yet no man be hurt. at last, lift up his right arm to draw. a fatal shaft as he then think to end this difference, the field win by the english, receive a shot upon his elbow and straight way flee by who example? all the army follow the same way and yield up the honour of the day to the english party who be such a terror to they. after that, the savage dare never make to a head against they any more. chap 4 of a parliament hold at wessaguscus and the act master westons plantation be settle at wessaguscus. his servant, some lazy people, many of they lazy person that will use no endeavour to take the benefit of the country. some of they fall sick and die. one among the rest, a able body, man that range the wood, a lusty fellow, to see what it will afford, light by accident on a indian barn and from thence do take a cap full of corn the savage owner of it find by the foot- some english have be there, come to the plantation and make complaint. after this manner, the chief commander of the company one this occasion call a parliament of all his people. but those that be sick and ill, at ease and wise now they must consult upon this huge complaint that a privy knife, a poor complaint, edward johnson, a chief judge, maid, a heinous fact or string of bead will well enough have. qualify, and edward johnson be a special judge of this business- the fact be there in repetition construction, make that it be felony and by the law of england punish with death. and this in execution must be put for a example. and likewise to appease the savage when straight way one arise, move as it be with some compassion and say he can not well gain, say the former sentence, yet he have conceive within the compass of his brain a embryo that be of special consequence to be deliver and cherish. he say that it will most apt serve to pacify the savage complaint and save the life of one that may, if need shall be, stand they in some good steed, be young and strong. fit for resistance against a enemy which may come expect for any thing. they know the oration make be like of every one, and he entreat to proceed to show the mean how this may be perform, say he. you all agree that one must die and one shall die. a fine device, this young man clothes, we will take of and put upon one that be old and impotent. a wise sentence to hang a sick-man in the other steed, a sickly person that can escape death, such be the disease. one he confirm that die. he must put the young man clothes on this man and let the sick person be hang in the other steed. amen, say one, and so say many more. and this have like to have, prove their final sentence and be there, confirm by act of parliament to after age for a precedent, but that one with a voice begin to croak and bellow for revenge and put by that conclusive motion, allege such deceit may be a mean hereafter to exasperate the mind of the complaininge savage, very fit justice, and that by his death the savage shall see their zeal to justice and therefore he shall die. this be conclude, yet nevertheless a scruple be make now to countermand this act do represent itself unto their mind, which be how they shall do to get the man good. will this be indeed a special obstacle, a dangerous attempt, for without that they all agree it. will be dangerous for any man to attempt the execution of it, lest mischief shall befall they. every man. he be a person that in his wrath do seem to be a second samson, able to beat out their brane with the jawbone of a ass. therefore, they call the man and by persuasion get he fast, bind in jest, jestinge, turn to earnest, and then hang he up hard by in good earnest who, with a weapon and at liberty, will have put all those wise judge of this parliament to a pitiful as it have be credible report and make the chief judge of they all buckell to he chap v of a massacre make upon the savage at wessaguscus after the end of that parliament. some of the plantation there. about three person go to live with checatawback and his company and have very good quarter for all the former quarrel, good quarter with the savage, with the plymouth planter they be not like will summer to take one for another there. they purpose to stay until master westons arrival. but the plymouth man intend no good to he, as appear by the consequence, come in the mean time to wessaguscus and there pretend to feast the savage. of those part a plot from plymouth, bring with they pork and thing for the purpose which they set before the savage, they eat thereof without suspicion of any mischief who be take upon a watchword give and with their own knife hang about their. neck be by the plymouth planter, stab and slay, savage kill with their one weapon, one of which be hang up there after the slaughter it. the mean time the sachem have knowledge of this accident by one that run to his countryman news, carry at the massachussets and give they intelligence of the news, after which time the savage there consult of the matter. in the night, when the other english, fearless of danger be a sleep, knock they all in the head, a revenge in revenge of the death of their countryman. but if the plymouth planters have real intend good to master weston or those man, why have they not keep the savage alive in custody until they have secure the other english who, by mean of this evil mannaginge of the business, lose their life and the whole plantation be dissolve thereupon as be likely, for fear of a revenge to follow as a relatione to this cruel antecedent. and when master weston come over, he find thing at a evil exigent by mean thereof, but can not tell how it be bring about the savage of the massachussets. that can not imagine from whence these man shall come or to what end see they perform such unexpected action. neither can tell by what name proper to distinguish. they do from that time afterward. call the english planters wotawquenange, which in their language signify stabber or cutthroate. the savage call the english out-throat, and this name be receive by those that come there after for good be then unacquainted with the signification of it for many year follow until, from a southerly indian that understand english well, i be by demonstration make to conceive the interpretation of it and rebuck these other that it be not forbear the other. call we by the name of wotoquansawge what that do signify. he say he be not able by any demonstrarion to express, and my neighbour dare no more in my hear. call we by the name former use for fear of my displeasure. chap 5 of the. surprizinge of a merchant ship in plymouth harbour. this merchant, a man of worth, arrivinge in the part of new canaan and find that his plantation be dissolve, some of his man slay the merchant with supply, some dead with sickness, and the rest at plymouth he be perplex in his mind about the matter. come as he do with supply and mean to have raze their fortune and his one exceed and see what have happen, resolve to make some stay in the plymouth harbour and this suit to their purpose, wherefore the brethren do congratulate with he at his safe arrival and their best of entertainment for a swetn cast, deplore the disaster of his plantation and gloss upon the text, a gloss upon the false. text allege the mischievous intent of the savage there, which by friendly intelligence of their neighbour be discover before it come to be full sum, so that they lose not all although they save not all. and this they pretend to proceed from the fountain of love and zeal to he and christianity and to chastise the insolency of the savage, of which that part have some dangerous person, and this as a article of the new creed of canaan will they have receive of every new comer there to inhabit. that the savage be a dangerous people, subtle, secret and mischievous, and that it be dangerous to live separate but rather together and so be under their lee. that none may trade for beaver, but at their pleasure, as none do or shall do there. nay, they will not be reduce to any other song yet of the savage to the southward of plymouth, because they will have none come there. say that he that will sit down there must come strong. but i have find the massachusset indian more full of humanity than the christian and have have much better quarter with they. yet i observe not their humour, but they i, although my great number, that i land be dissolve and my company as few as may be. where two nation meet, one must rule, the other must be rule or no quietness. for i know that this fall out infallible. where two nation meet, one must rule, the other be rule before a peace can be. hope for and for a christian to submit to the rule of a savage, you will say, be both shame and dishonour. at least it be my opinion and my practice be according. and i have, the better quarter by the mean thereof, the more savage, the better quarter, the more christian, the worse quarter, i find, as all the indifferent mind planters can testify. now, while the merchant be ruminatinge on this mishap, the plymouth planters perceivinge that he have furnish himself with excellent commodity, a machivell plot. fit for the merchandise of the country and hold it good to fish in trouble water and so get a snatch unseen, practise in secret with some other in the land who they think apt to embrace the benefit of such a cheat. the veil and it be conclude and resolve upon that all this ship and good shall be confiscate for business. do by he, the lord, know when or where a letter must be frame to they and hand unto it to be there warrant. this shall shadow they that be the first practice. they will infane a man and then pretend that justice must be. do they cause the merchant secure to come a shore and then take he in hold. show they be compel. unto it legal and enter straight aboard, peruse the cargazowne shipp and good confiscate and then deliver up the charge of she to their confederate. and how much less this be then piraty. let any practice in the admiralty be. judge the merchant, his ship and good confiscate, himself a prisoner and threaten so to be send and convey to england, there to receive the some of all that do belong to he. a malefactor and a great one. to this he good man endure with patience long time until the best of all his good be quite disperse and every actor his proportion. the merchant be enlarge. when every conspirator have his share, the ship deliver again. bond take not to prosecute. report, mr weston, be mad. in new england, his ship, a burden to the owner. now his undertakinge in these part be quite overthrow, be redeliver, and bond of he be take not to prosecute he be grieve hereat, betake he to drive a trade. between that and many year the brethren, sharp witted, have it spread by and by among his friend in england that the man be mad. so think his wife, so think his other friend that have it from a planter of the town. so be it. think of those that do not know. the brethren can dissemble why. thus they be all of they, honest man in their particular, honest man in particular. and every man be bind to seek another good shall in the general do the best he can to effect it, and so they may be. excuse, i think, chap 7 of thomas mortons, entertainment at plymouth and cast away upon a island. this man arrive in those part and hear news of a town that be much praise. he be desirous to go thither and see how thing stand where his entertainment be there best, i dare be bold to say. for although they have but 3. cow in all, brave entertainment in a wilderness, yet have they fresh butter. and a salad of egg in dainty wise, a dish not common in a wilderness there. he bestow some time in the survey of this plantation. his new come servant in the mean time be take to task to have their zeal appear and question what preacher be among their company and find none do seem to condole their estate, as if undo, because no man among they have the gift the mean to be in jonas stead, nor they the mean to keep they in that path so hard to keep. our master say. they read the bible and the word of god and use the book of common prayer, but this be not the mean. the answer be the mean. they cry, alas, poor soul where? be the mean. you seem as if betray to be. without the mean, how can you be, stay from fall headlong to perdition? the book of common prayer, say they. what poor thing be that for a man to read in a book. book, learn, despise. no, no, good sir, i will you be near. we you may receive comfort by instruction. give i a man, have the gift of the spirit, not a book in hand. i do profess, say one, to live without the mean be dangerous, the lord do know. by these insinuation, like the serpent, they do creep and wind into the good opinion of the illiterate multitude that be desirous to be free and go to they. no, which some of they after. confess, and little good be to be do one they, after this charm be, use now plot and faction ' how they may get loose. and here be some: 35.. stout knave, villainous plot of knave, and some plot how to steal master westons barque. other exasperate knavish to work will practice how to get their master to a island and there leave he, which he have notice of and fit he to try what will be do and step aboard his shallop bind for cape anne to the massachussets with a hogshead of wine sugar. he take along the sail, hoist up and one of the conspirator aboard to steer who in the mid way pretend foul weather at the harbour mouth and therefore for a time he will put in to a island near and make some stay where he think to tempt his master to walk the wood, and so be go, but their master to prevent. they prevent by discretion, cause the sale and oar to be bring a. shore to make a tilt if need shall be and kindle fire. broach that hogshead and cause they fill the can with lusty liquor, claret, sparklinge, neat, which be not suffer to grow pale and flat and discover in drink but tipple of with quick dexterity the master. make a show of keep round, but with close lip, do seem to make long draught and discover in drink. know the wine will make they protestant and so the plot be then at large, disclose and discover and they make drowsy and the inconstant wind shift at night, do force the kellecke home, the shallop billedge and billedge the boat that they be force to leave she so two man of the company cast away, swim to shore upon. tree and cut down tree that grow by the shore to make caffe. two of they go over by help of a fore sail almost a mile to the main. the other two stay five day after till the wind will serve to fill the sail. the first two go to cape ann by land and have foul enough and foul wether. by the way, the islander have fish, enough, shellfish and fire to roast and they can not perish for lack of food and wine. they have to be sure- and by this you see they be not- then in any want the wine and good, bring thence the boat, leave there so billedgd that it be not worth the labour to be mend. chap 8 of the banishment of master john layford and john oldam from plymouth. master layford be at the merchant charge, send to plymouth plantation to be their pastor. a minister require to renounce his call, but the brethren, before they will allow of it, will have. he first renounce his call to the office of the ministry, receive in england as heretical and papistical, so he confess. and then to receive a new call from they after their fantastical invention, which he refuse, allege and maintain that his call as it stand be lawful and that he will not renounce it. and so john oldam, his opinion be one, the affirmative, and both together do maintain the church of england to be a true church, although in some particular they say defective, concludinge so against the tenant there and by this mean cancel their good opinion among the number of the separatist that stay. they must not, lest they shall be spy and to fall foul. on this occasion the brethren think it will betray their cause and make it fall under censure. therefore, against master layford. they have find out some scandal to be lay on his former corpse of life, to blemish that, and so to conclude, he be a spot beast and not to be allow, where they ordain to have the passover. keep so zealous. as for john oldam, they can see he will be passionate and moody and prove himself a mad jack in his mood and as soon move to be moody. and this impatience will minister advantage to they to be ride of. he impatience confute by example hannibal when he have to do with fabius. be keep in awe more by the patience of that one enemy, then by the resolution of the whole army. a well temper enemy be a terrible enemy to encounter. they enjoin he to come to their needless watch house in person, new plymouth, press money and for refuse. give he a crack crown for press money and make the blood run down about his ear. a poor trick, yet a good veil though. luscus may see through it and for his further behaviour in the case, proceed to sentence he with banishment, the solemnity of banishment which be perform after a solemn invention. in this manner, a lane of musketeer be make and he compel in scorn to pass along between and to receive a bob upon the bum by every musketier and then a board a shallop, and so convey to wessaguscus shore and stay at massachussets to who john layford and some few more do resort, where master layford free, execute his office and preach every lord day and yet maintain his wife and child, four or five, upon his industry there, with the blessing of god and the plenty of the land, without the help of his auditory. in a honest and laudable manner till he be weary and make to leave the country. chap 9 of a barren do of grow fruithfull in new canaan. child and the fruit of the womb be, say in holy write, to be a inheritance that come of the lord, then they must be couple in god name first and not as this and some other have do. a great happiness come by propagation. they be as arrow in the hand of a giant and david be the man that have his quiver full of they and by that rule, happy be that land and bless to that be apt and fit for increase of child. i have show you before in the second part of the discourse how apt it be for the increase of mineral, vegetable and sensible creature. now i will show you how apt new canaan be likewise for the increase of the reasonable creature. child of all riches. be the principal, and i give you this for a instance: more child in new canaan in 7. year, then in in 27.. this country of new canaan in seven year time can show more child live that have be bear there. then in 27 year can be show in. yet here be but a handful of woman. land to that of the country do afford such plenty of lobster and other delicate shellfish and venus be say to be bear. of the sea, or else it be some salad herb proper to the climate or the fountain at weenaseemute, make she become teem here that have try a camp royal in other part where she have be and yet never the near till she come in to new canaan, shee be deliver in a voyage to about bussardes bay to west of cape cod. deliver near bussards bay dead and bury where she have a son bear but die without baptism and be bury and be a thing remarkable. have this epitaph follow, make of purpose to memorize the worth of the person. epitaph time that bring all thing to light. do hide this thing out of fight. yet fame have leave behind a story, a hopeful race. to show the glory, for underneath this heap of stone lie a parcel of small bone. what hope, at last, can such imp have that from the womb go to the grave. chap x of a man endue with many special gift, send over to be master of the ceremony. this be a man approve of the brethren, both for his zeal and gift yet, but a bubble, and at the public charge convey to new england, i think, to be master of the ceremony between the native and the planters, for he apply himself chief to pen the language down in stenography. stenography one gift, but there, for want of use, which he right understand, not all be loss of labour, something it be when next it. come to view. but what he can not tell this man, master bubble, be in the time of john oldam absence, make the house chaplain there. and every night he make use of his gift, oratory, another gift. who oratory? lull his auditory fast a sleep as mercury pipe do argus eye. for when he be in, they say he can not tell how to get out. nay, he will hardly out till he be fire out his zeal. be such one fire, they say, drive out another. he will become a great merchant, a great merchant, a three gift, and by any thing that be to be sell. so as he may have day and be trust, never so little time, the price, it seem, he stand. not much upon but the day for to his friend. he show commodity, so price as cause. he to blame the buyer till the man, this bubble, do declare that it be take up at day and do rejoice in the bargain, insistinge on the day. the day yea marry, quoth his friend. if you have doomsday for payment, you be then well to pass, but if he have not, it be as good he have, they be pay all alike. and now this bubble day be become a common proverb. he obtain house room at his day, make a common proverb and remoove thither because it stand, convenient for the beaver trade and the rather, because the owner of have no corn leave and this man seem a big bone man and therefore think to be a good labourer and to have store of corn, but, contrary wise, he have none at all. and hope upon this friend, his host, thithere be bring the trophy of this master bubble, honour trophy of honour, his water tankard and his porter basket, but no provision so that one gun do serve to help they both to meat. and now the time for fowl be almost past. this man and his host at dinner, bubble, begin to say grace, yea, and a long one to his long grace. make the meat cold till all the meat be cold. he will not give his host leave to say grace belike. he think my host past grace and further learn as many other scholar be. but in the usage and custom of this blind oratory his host take himself abuse and the while fall to and have half do before this man, bubble, will open his eye to see what stand afore he which make he more and learned that together, bubble and he go in the canaw to nut island for brant and there his host make a shot and break the wing of many bubble. in haste and single hand paddel out like a cow in a cage. his host call back to row two hand like to a pair of oar, and before this can be perform, the fowl have time to swim to other flock. and so to escape, the best part of the pray be lose. make his host to mutter at he and so to part for that time. discontend chap 11 of a composition make by the sachem for a theft commit by some of his man, show their honest meaning. the owner of to have the benefit of company, leave his habitation in the winter and repose at wessaguscus to his cost. mean time, in the depth of winter, the neighbour savage accustom to buy food, come. to the house for that intent perhaps, and peepinge in all the window, the savage betake the house and take the corne than unglase espy corn but no body to sell the same and have company and help at hand. do make a shift to get into the house and take out corn to serve, but for the present leave enough behind the sachem. have knowledge of the fact and be advertise likewise of the displeasure that have be conceive by the propriet thereof at this offence. prepare a messenger, the savage that have live in england and send he with commission for the trespass of his man who have ten skin. perpose for it to be pay by a day certain the sachem at the time appoint. bring the beaver to wessaguscus where the owner live, but just then be go abroad. mean time the skin be by the wessaguscus man, geld and the better half by they juggle away before the owner come, a dishonest trick and he by the actor persuade to be contend with the rest who not. so please do draw the sachem then to make a new agreement and so to pay his remnant leave in hand and ten skin more by a new day asign and then to bring they to. but the man go the day before to the savage with this: say that they be send to call upon he there for payment and receive ten skin and take a savage there to justify that at their house the owner stay the while he verify this because he see the man before at wessaguscus. the sachem do believe the tale and at that time deliver up ten skin on that behalf in full discharge of all demand against the trespass and the trespasser to they who consent to he and they to the owner and keep view to themselves a consent, trick the heathen more just than the christian and make the savage take the ten and give the owner all that yet be to be have. themselves confess their demand for he and that there be but only one as yet. prepare so that by this you may easy perceive the uncivilized people be more just than the civilise. chap 12 of a voyadge make by the master of the ceremony of new canaan to neepenett, from whence he come away and of the manifold danger he escape. this worthy member master bubble, a new master of the ceremony, have a conceit inhis head. two savage guide conduct, john to neepenett alone that he have hatch a new device for the purchase of beaver, beyond imagination, pack up a sack full of odd implement and without any company but a couple of indian for guide, and therefore you may, if you please, beeleive they. be so dangerous as the brethren of plymouth give it out. he betake, he to his progress into the inland for beaver, with his carriage on his shoulder, like milo, his guide and he, in process of time, come to the place appoint, which be about neepenett. thereabouts be more beaver to be have, then this milo can carry, and both his journey man, glad he be good man, and his guide be willing to pleasure he there. the savage stay. night come on. but before they be incline to sleep, this good man, master bubble, have a evation creep into his head by misapply. the savage action that he must needs be go in all haste, yea, and without his errand he purpose to do it so. cunninge that his flight shall not be suspect. he leave his shoe in the house with all his other implement and fly as he be on his way. to increase his fear, suggestinge himself that he be present by a company of indian and that there shaft be let fly as thick as hail at he. he put of his breech and put they one his head for to save he from the shaft that fly after he so thick that no man can perceive they and cry out: avoid satan, what have you to do with i. thus run one his way without his breech. he be pitiful, scratch with the brush of the underwoods as he wander up and down in unknown way. the savage in the mean time put up all his implement in the sack he leave behind and bring they to wessaguscus where they think to have find he. but understand he be not return, be fearful what to do and what will be conceive of the english. be become of this maze man the master of the ceremony and be in consultation of the matter. one of the savage be of opinion the english will suppose he to be. make a way, fearful he be, to come in sight. the other, better acquaint with the english, have live some time in england, be more confident and he persuade his fellow that the english will be satisfy with relation of the truth, as have have testimony of his. fidelity. so they bold adventure to show what they have bring and how the matter stand. they take a note of what be in the sack, the english when the sack be open, do take a note in write of all the particular that be in the sack and hear what be by the savage relate of the accident. but when his shoe be show, it be think he will not have depart without his shoe. and therefore they do conceive that master bubble be make away by some sinister practice of the savage who, unadvised, have be culpable of a crime which now they seek to excuse and straight. charge the savage to find he out again and bring he dead or alive, else their wife and child shall be destroy. mr bubble must be find again, or else they shall be destroy. the poor savage be in a pitiful perplexity. cause their countryman to seek out for this maze man who be in short time find, be bring to wessaguscus, where he make a discourse of his travel and of the perilous passage, which do seem to be no less dangerous than these, of that worthy knight errant don quixote, and how miraculous he have be, preserve and, in conclusion, lament the great loss of his good whereby he think himself undo the particular whereof being demand, it appear that the savage have not diminish any part of they, not any thing diminish, no, not so much as one bit of bread. the number be know and the fragment lay together. it appear, all the biscuit be preserve and not any diminish at all, whereby the master of the ceremony be overjoy and the whole company make themselves merry at his discourse of all his perilous adventure. and by this you may observe whether the savage people be not full of humanity or whether they be a dangerous people, as master bubble and the rest of his tribe will persuade you. chap 13 of a lamentable fit of mellancolly that the barrendoe fell into after the death of her infant, see herfelfe despise of her sweet hart whereof she be cure. whether this goodly creature of incontinency go to work upon even term like phillis or no, it do not appear by any indenture of covenant then extant whereby she may legal challenge the performance of any complete marriage at his hand that have be trade with she as demopheon here to fore have be with his. nevertheless, for his future advantage, she endeavour, like phillis, to gain this demopheon all to herself, who, as it seem, do mean nothing less, by leave she for the next comer that have any mind to cool his courage by that mean, the whip post, as it seem at that time not be in public use for such kind of coney katcher, but see herself reject she grow into such a passion. of mellancolly on a sudden that it be think she will exhibit a petition for redress to grim pluto who have set she a work. shee can, one the sudden, resolve which door to go in at and know that the house of fate have many entrance, she be puzzle to find the near way. shee can not resolve on a sudden, which door will soon bring she to his presence. handsome if she shall make way with a knife she think she may spoil. she drink in after age. if by poison she think it may prolong her passage thither. if by drown she think charon may come the while with his boat and waste she out of sight. if she shall tie up her complaint in a halter. she think the ropmaker will take exception against her good speed, and in this manner she debate with herself and demur upon the matter so that she do appear willing enough. but a woman of small resolution, which thing, when it be public know, make many, come to comfort, she one among the rest, be by. she request on her behalf to write to she late unkind demopheon, the gentleman be merry, dispose in steed of write a heroical epistle, compose this for a memorial of some mirth upon the circumstance of the matter, to be send unto she as follow: melpemene at who, mischeifous tove the screech owl voice be hear the mandrake grove, command my pen. in a jambick, vain to tell a dismal tale that may constrain the hart of he to bleed. that shall discern how much this foul amiss do he concern. allecto grim aleclo, light thy torch to thy belove sister. next, the porch that lead unto the mansion house of fate who farewell, make her friend more fortunate. a great squa sachem, can she point to go before grim minos. and yet no man know that knife and halter, pond and poisonous thing be always ready when the devil once bring such deadly sinner to a deep remorse of conscience. self accuse that will force they to despair like wicked kain while death stand ready with all these to stop their breath. the bear come by that oft have. bait be by many a satyres-whelpe, unless you can command your eye to drop huge millstone forth in lamentation of this loss on earth of she of who so much praise we may find. go when she will. she will leave none like behind. shee be too good for earth, too bad for heaven. why then for hell the match be somewhat? even after this, the water of the fountain at ma-re mount be think fit to be apply unto she for a remedy she willing use according to the quality thereof. and when this elegy come to be divulge, she be so conscious of her crime that she put up her pipe and with the next ship she pack away to her former habitation. quite cure of. her mellancolly, with the help of the water of the fountain at ma-re mount, chap 14 of the revel of new canaan. the inhabitant of have translate the name of their habitation from that ancient, savage name to ma-re mount and be resolve to have the new name confirm for a memorial to after age. do devise among themselves to have it perform in a solemn manner, with revel and merriment, after the old english custom, a maypole. prepare to set up a maypole upon the festival day of philip and jacob and therefore brew a barrel of excellent bear and provide a case of bottle to be spend with other good cheer for all comer of that day. and because they will have it in a complete form, they have prepare a song fit to the time and present occasion and upon may-day they bring the maypole to the place, appoint with drum, gun, pistol and other fit instrument for that purpose, and there erect it with the help of savage that come thither of purpose to see the manner of our revel. a goodly pine tree of 80. foot long, be rear up with a pear of buckshorn nail, one somewhat near unto the. top of it, where it stand as a fair sea mark for direction, how to find out the way to my host of ma-re mount, and because it shall more full appear to what end it be place there. they have a poem in readiness make, which be fix to the maypole to show the new name: confirm upon that plantation which, although it be make according to the occurrent of the time, it be enigmattical, compose, puzzle the separatist most pitiful to expound it, which, for the better information of the reader, i have here insert the poem: rise oedipeus, and if thou can unfold what mean charybdis underneath the mould, when scylla, solitary on the ground sit in form of niobe, be find till amphitrite darling. do acquaint grim neptune with the tenor of her plaint and cause. he send forth triton with the sound of trumpet, loud at which the sea be find so full of protean form that the bold shore present scylla a new parramore. the man who bring she over be name samson job, so strong as samson and so patient as job himself, direct thus by fate to comfort scylla. so unfortunate i do profosse by cupid, beauteous mother. here be scogans, choice for scylla and none other. though scylla be sick with gretfe, because no sign can there be find of virtue masculine. esculapius come, i know right. well, his laboure lose when you may ring her knell. the fatal sister doom none can withstand, nor cytharea power. who point to land with proclamation that the first of may at ma-re mount shall be keep holly day the maypole. call a idol the calf of horeb. the set up of this maypole be a lamentable spectacle to the precise separatist that live at new plymouth. they term it a idol. yea, they call it the calf of horeb and stand at defiance with the place name it, mount dagon, threaten to make it a woeful mount and not a merry mount. the riddle, for want of oedipus they can not expound, only they make some explication of part of it and say it be mean by samson job, the carpenter of the ship that bring over a woman to her husband that have be there long. before and thrive so well that he send for she and her child to come to he where short after he die, have no reason, but because of the sound of those two word, when, as the truth be the man they apply, it to be altogether unknown to the author. there be likewise a merry song: make which, to make their revel more fashionable, be sing with a corus, every man bear his part, which they perform in a dance, hand in hand about the maypole, while one of the company sing and fill out the good liquor, like gammede and jupiter, the song drink and be merry cor, merry merry boy, let all your delight be in hymen. joy jo to hymen. now the day be. come about the merry maypole. take a room, make green garlon, bring, bottle out and fill sweet nectar free about. uncover thy head and fear no harm, for she good liquor to keep it warm. then drink and be merry etc. io to hymen etc. nectar be a thing assign by the deity own mind to cure the hart, oppress with grief, and of good liquor be the chief. then drink etc. io to hymen etc. give to the mellancolly man a cup or two of it now and than this physic ' will soon revive his blood and make he be of a merry mood. then drink, etc. io to hymen etc. give to the nymph that be free from scorn no irish stuff, nor scotch over. wear lass in beaver coat, come away, you shall be welcome to we night and day to drink and be merry, etc. jo, to hymen, etc. this harmless mirth make by young man that live in hope to have wife bring over to they that will save they a labour to make a voyage to fetch any over, be much distaste of the precise separatist that keep much a do about the tithe of muit and cummin, trouble their brain more than reason will require about thing that be indifferent and from that time seek occasion against my honest host of ma-re mount to overthrow his ondertaking and to destroy his plantation quite and clean, but because they presume, with their imaginary gift which they have out of. phaos box. they can expound hide mystery to convince they of blindness as well. in this as in other matter of more consequence. i will illustrate the poem according to the true intent of the author of these revel. so much distaste by those mole. oedipus be general. receive for the absolute reader of riddle who be invoak silla and charybdis. be two dangerous place for seaman to encounter near unto vennice and have be by poet former resemble to man and wife the like licence. the author challenge for a pair of his nomination, the one lament for the loss of the other, as niobe for her child amphitrite. be a arm of the sea by which the news be carry up and down of a rich widow now to be take up or lay down by triton. be the fame spread that cause the suitor to muster as it have. be to penellope of greece and the coast lie circular. all our passage to and fro be make more convenient by sea then land. many aim at this mark, but he that play proteus best and can comply with her humour must be the man that will carry. she and he have need have sampsons strength to deal with a dallila and as much patience as job. that shall come there for a thing that i do observe in the life time of the former. but marriage and hang, they say, come by destiny, and scogans choice it be better, none at all. he that play proteus with the help of priapus, put their nose out of joint, as the proverb be. and this, the whole company of the reveler at ma-re mount know to be the true sense and exposition of the riddle that be fix to the maypole, which the separatist be at defiance with some of. they affirm that the first institution thereof be in memory of a whore, not know that it be a trophy erect at first in honour of maja, the lady of learning, which they despise. vilify the two university with uncivile term account. what be there, obtain by study be but unnecessary learning not consider. that learning do enable man mind to converse with climent of a high nature than be to be find within the habitation of the mole, chap 15 of a great monster suppose to be at ma-re-mount and the preparation make to destroy it. the separatist envy the prosperity and hope of the plantation at ma-re mount which they perceave begin to come forward and to be in a good way for gain in the beaver trade. conspire together against my host especial, who be the owner of that plantation, and make up a party against he and muster up what aid they can account of he as of a great monster. many threaten speech be give out both against his person and his habitation, which they divulge shall. be consume with fire and take advantage of the time when his company, which seem little to regard their threat be, go up into the inland to trade with the savage for beaver. they set upon my honest host at a place call wessaguscus where by accident they find he, the inhabitant there be, in good hope of the subvertion of the plantation at mare mount which they principal aim at, and the rather because my host be a man that endeavour to advance the dignity of the church of england, which they, on the contrary part, will labour to vilify with uncivile term, envey against the sacred book of common prayer and my host that use it in a laudable manner among his family as a practice. of piety there he will be a mean to bring sack to their mill, such be the thirst after beaver and help the. to my host, who be there all alone and they charge he because they will seem to have some reasonable cause against he to set a gloss upon their malice with criminal thing, which indeed have be do by such a person, but be of their conspiracy. my host demand of the conspirator, who it be, that be author of that information that seem to be their ground for what they now intend, and because they answer they will not tell he. he as peremptory reply that he will not stay. whether he have or he have not do as they have be. inform the answer. make no matter, as it seem, whether it have be negative or affirmative, make for they have. resolve what he shall suffer because, as they boast, they be now become the great number they have, shake of their shackle of servitude and be become master and masterless people. it appear they be like bear whelp in former time when my host plantation be of as much strength as they. but now they be strong, they, like overgrow bear, seem monstrous. in brief, my host must endure to be their prisoner until they can contrive it so that they may send he for england, as they say there, to suffer. according to the merit of the fact which they intend to father upon he suppose belike, it will prove a heinous crime. much rejoice be make that they have get their capital enemy as they conclude, he who they purpose to hamper in such sort that he shall not be able to uphold his plantation at ma-re mount, the conspirator sport themselves at my honest host. that mean they no hurt and be so joccund that they feast their body and fall to tippeling as if they have obtain a great prize, like the trojan when they have the. custody of hippeus pinetree horse, my host feign grief and can not be persuade either to eat or drink because he know emptiness will be a mean to make he as watchful as the goose keep in the roman capital, whereon the contrary part, the conspirator, will be so drowsy that he may have a opportunity to give they a slip in stead of a tester. six person of the conspiracy be set to watch he at wessaguscus, but he keep. wake my host. get out of prison and in the dead of night one lie on the bed for further surety up, get my host and get to the second door that he be to pass, which, notwithstanding the lock, he get open and shut it after. he with such violence that it affright some of the conspirator. the word which be give with a alarm be o he be go, he be go. what shall we do? he be go the rest half a sleep, start up in a maze and, like rame, run their head one at another, full butt in the dark. the captain tear his clothes. their grand leader, captain shrimp, take on most furious and tear his clothes for anger to see the empty nest and their bird go the rest be eager to have tear their hair from their head, but it be so short that it will give they no hold. now, captain shrimp, think in the loss of this prize which he account, his master piece, all. his honour will be lose forever. my host get home to ma-re mount. in the mean time my host be get home to ma-re mount. through the wood eight mile round about the head of the river monatoquit, that part, the two plantation, find his way by the help of the lightning, for it thunder as he go terrible. and there he prepare powther three pound dry for his present imployement. he provide for his enemy and four good gun, for he and the two assistant leave at his house with bullet of several size, threehounderd or thereabouts, to be use if the conspirator shall pursue he thither and these two person promise their aid in the quarrel and confirm that promise with a health in good now. captain shrimp, the first captain in the land, as he suppose, must do some new act to repair this loss and to vindicate his reputation. who have sustain blemish by this oversight, begin now to study how to repair or survive his honour in this manner. call of council. they conclude. he take eight person more to he and like the nine worthy of new canaan, they embark with preparation against ma-re-mount, where this monster of a man, as their phrase be, have his den, the whole number, have the rest not be from home, be but seven. will have. give captain shrimp a quondam drummer such a welcome as will have, make he wish for a drum as big as diogenes tub that he may have creep. into it out of sight. now the nine worthy be approach and my host prepare have intelligence by a savage that hasten in love from wessaguscus to give he notice of their intent. one of my host man prove a craven, the other have prove his wit to purchase a little valour. before my host have observe his posture, the nine worthy come before the den of this suppose monster, this seven head hydra as they term he, and begin, like don quixote, against the windmill, to beat a party, a parley, and to offer quarter, if my host will yield for they resolve to send he for england and bid he lay by his arm. but he who be the son of a soldier have take up. arm in his just defence reply that he will not lay by those arm because they be so needful at sea. if he shall be send over yet to save the effusion of so much blood as will have issue out of the vein of these 9 worthy of new canaan, if my host shall have play upon they out at his port hole for they come within danger like a flock of wild goose, as if they have be tail one to another as coult to be sell at a fair, my host be content to yield upon quarter and do capitulate with they. in what manner it shall be for more certainty, because he know what captain shrimp be. captain shrimp promise that no violence shall. be offer to his person. he express that no violence shall be offer to his person, none to his good, nor any of his howsehold, but that he shall have his arm and what else be requisite for the voyage which their herald retorne it be agree upon and shall be perform. but my host no soon have set open the door and issue out but instant captain shrimp and the rest of the worty step to he lay hold of his arm and have he down, and so eager be every man () not regard any agreement make with such a carnal man that they fall upon he as if they will have eat he, some of they be so violent that they will have a slice. with scabbard, and all for haste, until a old soldier of the queen, as the proverb, be that be there by accident, clap his gun under the weapon and sharp rebuke these worthy for their unworthy practice. the worthy rebuke for their unworthy practice. so the matter be take into more deliberate consideration. captain shrimp and the rest of the nine worthy make themselves, by this outrageous riot, master of my host of ma-re mount and dispose of what he have at his plantation. this, they know, in the eye of the savage, will add to their glory and diminish the reputation of my honest host, who they practise to be ride of upon any term, as willing as if he have be the very hydra of the. time, chap 16, how the 9 worthy put my host of ma-re-mount into the enchant castle at plimmouthy and terrify he with the monster briareus. the nine worthy of new canaan have now the law in their own hand. there be no general governor in the land, nor none () ^^peration that regard the duty they owe their sovereign, who natural bear, subject they be, though. translate out of holland, from whence they have learned to work all to their own end and make a great show of religion, but no humanity for they be now to sit in counsel on the cause, and much. it stand my honest host upon to be very circumspect and to take aeacus to task. for that his voice be more allow. of then both the other, and have not my host confound all the argument that aeacus can make in their defence and confute he that sway the rest they will have, make he unable to drink in such manner of merriment any more. so that, follow this private counsel, give he by one that know who rule the roast, the hiracano cease, that else will split his pinnace. a conclusion be make and sentence give that my host shall be send to england a prisoner, but when he be bring to the ship for that purpose, no man dare be so fool hardy as to undertake to carry he. so these worthy set my host upon a island without gun, powther or shot or dog, or so much. as knife. my host set upon a island without any thing to shift for himself, to get, any thing to feed upon or any other clothes to shelter he with at winter than a thin suit, which he have one at that time home. he can not get to ma-re-mount upon this island. he stay a month at least and be relieve by savage that. take notice that my host be a sachem of and will bring bottle of strong liquor to he and unite themselves into a league of brother hood with my host. so full of humanity. be these infidel before those christian. from this place for england sail my host in a plymouth ship that come into the land to fish upon the coast. that land he safe in england at plymouth and he stay in england until the ordinary time for ship to set forth for these part and then return. no man be able to tax he of any thing but the worthy. in the mean time, hope they have be ride of he. chap 17 of the baccanall triumph of the nine worthy of new canaan. the separatist be not so contend when my host of ma-re-mount be go, but they be as much discontend when he be return again and the rather because their passage about. he and the business be so much deride and in song exemplify which, for better satisfaction of such as be in that kind affect, i have set forth as it be then in use by the name of the baccanall triumph. as follow the poem: master ben johnson, i sing the adventure of my worthy wight, and pity it be i can call they knight, since they have brawn and brain and be right able to be install of prince arthures table. yet all of they be squire of low degree, as do appear by rule of heraldry. the magi tell of a prodigious birth that short shall be find upon the earth by archimedes. art which they misconstrue unto their land will prove a hideous monster. seven. head it have and twice so many foot argue the body to be wondrous great, beside a fork tail heave up on high as if it threaten battle to the sky. the rumour of this fearful prodigy do cause the effeminate multitude to cry for want of great alcides aid and stand like people that have medusa head. great be the grief of hart, great be the moan and great the fear conceive by every one of hydra, hideous form and dreadful power. doubt in time this monster will devour all their best flock. who, dainty wool consort itself with scarlet in all, prince court, not jason, nor the adventurous youth of greece do bring from colcos any rich fleece in emulation of the grecian force. these worthy nine prepare a wooden horse and prick with pride of like success. divise how they may purchase glory by this prize, and if they give to hidra head the fall, it will remain a plat form unto all their brave atchivement, and in time to come they will erect a throne cloub, be turn trump. so now the lot be cast with fire and sword to hidra den. they haste mars in the assendant sol in cancer now, and lerna lake to pluto. court must bow. what, though, they rebuke? by thunder love. it be neither god nor man that can remove their mind from make this a dismal day. these nine will now be actor in this play and sum on hydra to appear a. before their witless combination. but his undaunted spirit, nurse with meat such as the cecrops, give their babe to eat, scorn their base accon, for with cecrops charm, he know he can defend himself from harm of minos, aeacus and radamand, prince of limbo, who must, out of hand, consult bout hydra. what must now be do? who have sit in counsel, one by one, return this answer to the stiggean fiend. and first grim minos speak most love, friend hydra. prognostic ruin to our state and that our kingdom will grow desolate. but if one head from thence be, take away the body and the member will decay. to take in hand what, aeacus, this task be such. we, harebrained phaeton, do ask of phoebus to begird. the world about which grant put the netherlands to rout presumption fool. learn wit at too much cost for life and labour both at once. he lose stern radamantus, be last to speak, make a great hum and thus do silence break. what if, with rattle, chain or iron band, hydra be bind either by foot or hand, and after be lashd with smart rodd, he be convey by styx unto the god to be accuse on the upper ground of his crime? find it will be unpossible. from thence i trow hydra shall come to trouble we below this sentence. please, the friend, exceed that up. they toss their bonnet and do cry. long live our court in great prosperity. the session end. some do straight devise. court, revel antique and a world of joy. brave christmas gambol, there be, open hall, keep to the full. and sport the devil and all labour despise the loom. be lay a way. and this proclaim the stigean holli day in come, grim minos with his motley beard and bring a distillation, well prepare. and aeacus who be as sure as text, come in with his preparative. the next then, radamantus, last and principal feast the worthy, in his sumptuous hall. there, charon cerberous and the rout of fiend have lap enough, and so their pastim end the illustration. now to illustrate this poem and make the sense more plain. it be to be consider that the person at ma-re-mount be seven, and they have seven head and 14.. foot, these be account hydra with the seven head and the maypole with the horn nail near the top be the fork tail of this, suppose, monster which they, for want of skill, impose yet fear in time. if they hinder not my host, he will hinder the benefit of their beaver trade, as he have do by mean of this help in kyny back river. fine ere they be a ware who come too late. be much dismay to find that my host, his boat, have glean away all before they come. which beaver be a fit. companion for scarlett, and i believe that jasons golden fleece be either the same or some other fleece not of so much value. this action breed a kind of hart burn in the plymouth planters who, after seek occasion against my host to overthrow his undertake and to destroy his plantation, who they account a main enemy to their church and state. now, when they have begin with he, they think best to proceed, for asmuch as they think themselves far enough from any control of justice and therefore resolve to be their own carver and the father, because they presume upon some encouragement they have from the favourite of their sect in england, and with fire and sword, nine in number pursue my host, who have escape. their hand, sin scorn of what they intend and betake he to his habitation in a night of great thunder and lightning, when they dare not follow he as hardy as these nine worthy seem to be. it be in the month of june that these martialist have appoint to go about this mischeifous project and deal so crabbid with my host. after a parley he capitulate with they about the quarter they proffer he, if he will consent to go for england there to answer, as they pretend, some thing. they can object against he principal to the general, but what it will be, he care not, neither be it any thing material. yet when quarter be agree upon they contrary wise, abuse he and carry he. to their town of plymouth where, if they have think he dare have go to england rather than they will have, be any more affront by he, they will have dispatch. he as captain shrimp, in a rage, profess that he will do with his pistol as my host shall set his foot into the boat. howsoever the chief elder voice in that place be more powerful than any of the rest who conclude to send my host without any other thing to be do to he, and this be the final agreement. contrary to shrimp and other, the nine worthy have a great feast make and the furmity po it be provide for the boat gang by no allowance and all manner of pastime, captain shrimp be. so overjoy in the performance of this exploit that they have, at that time, extraordinary merriment, a thing not usual among those presisian. and when the wind serve, they take my host into their shallop hoist sail and carry he to the northern part, where they leave he, upon a island, chap 18 of a doctor make at a commencement in new canaan, the church of plymouth. have due regard to the weal public and the brethren that be to come over and know that they will be busy employ to make provision for the cure of soul and therefore may neglect the body for that time. do hold themselves to be in duty bind to make search for a fit man that may be able, if so need require, to take the charge upon he in that place of employment. a council call, and therefore call a counfell of the whole synagoge, among which company they choose out a man that long time have be nurse up in the tender bosom of the church, one that have special gift: he can wright and read. nay, more he have take the oath of abjuration, which be a special step, yea, and a main degree unto perferment. he they wean and out of phaos box fit he with special gift of no less worth, they style he doctor and forth they send he to gain imployement. and opinion. what luck be it. i can hit on his name but i will give you he by a periphrasis that you may know he when you meet he next, he be bear at wrington in the county of somerset where he be breed a butcher. he wear a long beard and a garment like the greek that beg in paul church. this new make doctor come to salem to congratulate where he find some be new come from sea and ill at ease. he take the patient and the urinal vie the state there, find the crasis syptome and the attomi and tell the patient that his disease be wind, which he have take by gape feast over board at sea. but he will quick ease. he of that grief and quite expel the wind. and this he do perform with his gift he have. and then he handle the patient so handsome that he ease he of all the wind he have in a instant. and yet i hope this man may be forgive if he be make a fit plant for heaven. how he go to work with his gift be a question. yet he do a great cure for captain littleworth. he cure he of a disease call a wife, and yet i hope this man may be forgive if she be make a fit plant for heaven by this mean he be allow 4. p a month and the chirgeons chest and make physician general of salem where he exercise. his gift so well, that of full 42.. that there he take to cure. there be not one, have more cause to complain or can say: black be his eye. this save captain littleworth. credit that have. truck away the victual, though it bring forth a scandal on the country by it, and then i hope this man may be forgive if they be all make fit plant for heaven. but in my opinion he deserve to be set upon a palfrey and lead up and down in triumph. throw new canaan with a collar of jurdan about his neck, as be one of like desert in richard the second time through the street of london that man may know where to find a quacksalver. chap 19 of the silence of a minister in new canaan. a silence minister, out of courteousness, come over into new canaan to play the spy. he pretend out of a zealous intent to do the savage good and to teach they. he bring a great bundle of horn book with he, and careful he be, good man, to blot out all the cross of they, for fear lest the people of the land shall become idolater. he be in hope, with his gift to prepare a great auditory against great josua shall arrive there. he apply himself on the week day to the trade of beaver, but it be, as might seem, to purchase the principal benefit of the land when the time shall come, for he have a hope to be the caiphas of the country, and well he may, for he be high by the head than any of his tribe that come after he, this man, it seem, play the spievery handsome. for in the exercise of his gift on the lord day at weenasimute, this caiphas that condemn covetousness and commit it himself, he, espy a savage, come in with a good beaver coat and take occasion to reproove the covetous desire of his auditory to trade for beaver on those day, which make they all use so much modesty about the matter for the present, that he find opportunity the same day to take the savage a side into a corner where, with the help of his wampampeack he have in his pocket for that purpose, in a readiness he make a shift to get that beaver coat which their mouth water at and so deceive they all. but short after when josua come into the land he have soon spy out caiphas practice and put he to silence and either he must put up his pipe and be pack or forsake jonas posture and play demas. part altogether chap 20 of the practice of the separatist to get a snare to hamper my host of ma-re-mount, although the nine worthy have leave my host upon a island in such a inhuman manner as you hear before. yet when they understand that he have get ship and be go to england of his own accord, they dispatch letter of advise to a agent they have there and by the next ship send after to have a snare make that may hamper my host. so as he may not any more trouble their conscience. and to that end the general collection make, make a general collection of beaver to defray the charge, and he be not think a good christian that will not lay much out for that employment. some contribute three pound, some four, some five pound and procure a pretty quantity by that devise, which shall be give to a cunning man that can make a snare to hamper he, the agent, according to his direction. do his endeavoure in the best manner he can to have this instrument. make and use vo little diligence to have it effect. no cost spare for the get of a skilful man. his reputation, stand upon the task, impose upon he against my. host the only enemy account of their church and state. much inquiry be make in london and about for a skilful man that will work the feat. no cost be spare for gold. he have good store. first he inquire of one and then another. at the last he hear news of a very famous man, one that be excellent at make subtle instrument such as that age have never be acquaint with. he be well know to be the man that have wit and wondrous skill to make a cunning instrument where with to save himself and his whole family if all the world beside shall be drown. and this the best, yea, and the best cheap too. for no good do the man will nothing take. to he, this agent, go and pray his aid, declare his cause and tell the substance of his grievance all at large and lay before his eye a heap of gold. the heap of gold when all be show that can be, she will, and say what can be say and all too little for to have it. do the agent than do see his gold, refuse his cause, despise and think himself disgrace. to leave the work undo so that he be much dismay, yet importune the cunning who find no reason to take the task in hand. he think, perhaps my host, that have the slight to escape from the nine worthy to chain argus eye and by enchantment make the door of the watch tower. fly open at a instant will not be hamper, but with much a do, and so he be unwilling to be trouble with that task. the agent wonder to see that his gold will do no good. do ask the cunning man, if he can give he no advice, who say he will? and what be that? think you to let my host alone, who be ship again for the part of new canaan, be put in at plymouth in the very face of they, my host, a rive again in plymouth, to their terrible amazement to see he at liberty, and tell he he have not yet full answer the matter. they can object against he. he only make this modest reply that he do perceive they. be wilful people that will never be answer and deride they for their practice and loss of labour. chap 21 of captain littleworth, his new devise for the purchase of beaver. in the mean time, while these former passage be there be, a great swell fellow of littleworth creep over to salem by the help of master charter party, the treasurer charter party treasurer and master ananias increase the collector for the company of separatist to take upon he their employment for a time. he resolve to make hay while the son do shine first, pretend himself to be send over as chief justice of the massachussets bay and salem forsooth, and take unto he a counsel, and a worthy one no doubt, for the cow keeper of. salem be a prime man in those employment and to add a majesty, as he think, to his new, assume dignity, he cause the patent of the massachussets new bring into the land to be carry where he go in his progress to and fro, as a emblem of his authority, which the vulgar people not acquaint with think it to be some instrument of music, lock up in that cover case and think, for so some say, this man of litttleworth have be a fiddler and the rather, because he have put into the mouth of poor silly thing that be, send a long with he what skill he have in engine and in thing of quaint devise, all which prove in conclusion to be but impostury. warrant make by capt littleworth in his name. this man think none so worthy as himself. take upon he infinite and make warrant in his own name, without relation to his majesty authority in that place, and summon a general appearance at the worshipful town of salem, there in open assembly, be tender certain article devise between he and their new pastor, master eager that have renounce his old call to the ministry, receive in england by warrant of god word and take a new one there by their fantastical way, impose and confer upon he with some special gift, have out of phaos box to these article every planter, old and new, must sign or be expel from any manner of abode within the compass of the. land contain within that grant, then show which be so large it will suffice for elbow room for more than be in all the land by 700000. such a army may have. plant they a colony with that cirquit which he challenge, and not contend for room for their cattle, but for all that, he that shall refuse to subscribe must pack the tenor of the article be these: that in all cause, as we ecclesiastical, as political, we shall follow the rule of god. word. this make a show of a good intent, and all the assembly, only my host reply, do subscribe. my host subscribe not. he will not, unless they will add this caution so as nothing be do contrary or repugnant to the law. of the kingdom of england. these word, he know by former experience be necessary, and without these the same will prove a very mousetrapp to catch some body by his own consent, which the rest nothing suspect, for the construction of the word will be make by they of the separation to serve their own turn. and if any man shall in such a case be accuse of a crime, though in itself it be petty, they may set it on the tenter hook of their imaginary gift and stretch it to make it seem capital, which be the reason why my host refuse to subscribe. it be then agree upon that there shall be one general trade use within that patent, as he say, and a general stock, the patent, and every man to put in a part and every man for his person to have share alike and for their stock according to the ratable proportion with in, and this to continue for 12. month. and then to call a account, all be unite, but my host refuse. two truckmaster be choose wage prefix: all consent, but my host host put in a that the wage may be pay out of the clear profit which there, in black and white, be plain put down, but before the end of 6. month the partner in this stock handle by the truckmaster will have. a account some of they have perceave that wampambeacke can be pocket up and the underling that go in the boat along will be near the wise for any thing. hut what be truck for beaver. only the account be make between captain littleworth, instead of profit disproffit, and the two truckmaster. it be find that instead of increase the profit they have, decrease it, for the principal stock by this employment be freet so that there be a great hole to be see in the very middle of it, which cost the partner afterward one hundred mark to stop and make good to captain littleworth. but my host, that stir not his foot at all, for the matter. do not only save his stock from such a cancar but gain six and seven for one. in the mean time he deride the contributer for be catch in that snare chap 22 of a sequestration make in new canaan. captain littleworth that have a ache tooth at at my host of ma-re-mount devise how he may put a trick upon he by colour of a sequestration and get some person to pretend that he have corn and other good of they in possession and the rather, because my host have store of corn and he have improvident truck his store for the present gain of beaver in somuch that his people under his charge be put to short allowance which cause some of they to sicken with. conceit of such useage, and some of they by the practice of the new entertain doctor noddy with his imaginary gift. they send, therefore, to exhibit a petition to grim minos, aeacus and radamant, where they wish to have the author of their grief to be convert, and they have procure it quick. if curse will have cause it for good, prayer will be of no validity, as they suppose, in this extremity. now, in this extremity, capt littleworth give commission to such as he have find ready for such employment, to enter in the house at ma-re-mount commission for corn and with a shallop to bring from thence such corn and other utensille, as in their commission he have specify. but my host wary to prevent eminent. mischief have convey his powther and shot and such other thing as stand he in most steed for his present condition, into the wood for safety. and while this be put in practice by he, the shallop be land and the commissioner enter the house and wilful bend against my honest host that love good hospitality. my host corn and good carry away by violence. after they have feast their body with that they find there. they carry all his corn away with some other of his good, contrary to the law of hospitality, a small parcel of refuse corn only except, which they leave my host to keep christmas with. but when they be go, my host fall to make use of his gun as one that have a good faculty in the use of that instrument, and feast his body nevertheless, with foul and venison which he purchase with the help of that instrument. the plenty of the country and the commodiousness of the place afford mean, by the blessing of god- and he do but deride captain littleworth- that make his servant snap short in a country so much abound with plenty of food for a industrious man with great variety. chap 23 of a great bonfire make for joy of the arrival of great josua, surname temperwell, into the land of canaan. seven ship, set forth at once and altogether, arrive in the land of canaan to take a full possession thereof. what be all? the 12. tribe of new israel come, no, none but the tribe of issacar and some few scatter levite of the remnant of those that be descend of old elies house. and here come their josua too among they, and they make it a more miraculous thing for these seven ship to set forth together and arrive at new canaan together than it be for the israelite to go over jordan drishod. perhaps it be because they have a wall on the right hand and a wall on the left hand. these separatist. suppose there be no more difficulty in the matter then for a man to find the way to the counter at noonedaye between a sergeant and his yeoman. now you may think my host will be hamper or never. these be the man that come prepare to ride the land of all pollution. these be more subtle man that come to ride the land of pollution than the cunning that do refuse a goodly heap of gold. these man have bring a very snare indeed, and now my host must suffer the book of common prayer which he use to be despise, and he must not be spare. now they be come his doom before hand be conclude on. they have a warrant now, a chief one too. and now my host must know he be the subject of their hatred. the snare must now be use. this instrument must not be bring by josua in vain. a court be call of purpose for my host. he there convent and must hear his doom. a court call about i host before he go. nor will they admit he to capitulate and know wherefore they be so violent to put such thing in practice against a man they never see before. nor will they allow of it though he decline their jurisdiction. there. they all with one assent, put he to silence. cry out, hear the governor, hear the governor. a devilish sentence against he who give this. sentence against my host at first sight, that he shall be first put in the billbowe. his good shall be all confiscate, his plantation shall be burn down to the ground because the habitation of the wicked shall no more appear in israel, and his person banish from those territory and this put in execution with all speed. the harmless savage, his neighbour, come the. while the savage reproove, they grieve poor, silly lamb to see what they go about and do, reproove these eliphant of wit for their inhuman deed. the lord above do upon their mouth like balams ass and make they speak in his behalf. sentence of unexpected divinity beside morrallity, and tell they that god will not love they that burn this good man. house and plain say that they who be new come will find the want of such a house in the winter. so much themselves to he confess the smoke that do assend appear to be the very sacrifice of kain. epictetus philosophioe, my host, that a far of aboard a ship do there behold this woeful spectacle, know not what he shall do in this extremity, but bear and forbear, as epictetus say it be bootless to exclaim. he do consider then these transitory thing be, but as cicero call they all be burn down to the ground and nothing do remain but the bare ash as a emblem of their cruelty. and unless it can like to the phoenix rise out of these ash and be new. again to the immortal glory and renown of this fertile canaan. the new, the stump and post in their black livery, will mourn, and piety itself will add a voice to the bare remnant of that monument and make it cry for recompense, or else revenge against the sect of cruel, schismatic chap 24 of the digrade and create gentry in new canaan. there be a zealous professor in the land of canaan, grow a great merchant in the beaver trade that come over for his conscience sake, as other man have do, and the mean as the phrase be, who in his minority have be apprentice to a tomb maker who come to more ripeness of year, though less discretion, find a kind of scruple in his conscience that the trade be in part against the second commandment and therefore leave it off whole and betake himself to some other employment. in the end he settle upon this course where he have hope of preferment and become one of those thing that any judas may hang himself upon, a elder that be a elder he have, be a man of. some reccon in his time, as himself will boast, for he be a officer just under the exchequer at westminster in a place call phlegeton. there he be controller and converse with no plebeian, i tell you. but such as have angel for their attendance, i mean some lawyer with appertenance that be clark with who a jugg of bear and a crusty roll in the term be as currant as a three penny scute at hall time. there be another place thereby call stick. these be to two daingerous place by which the infernal god do swear, but this of stick be the more daingerous of the two because there, if a man be once in, he can tell how to get out again. handsome, i know. a under sheriff be in unawaire and he labour to be free of it, yet he break his back before he get so far as quietus. there be no such danger in phlegeton, where this man of so much reccon be controller. he be here, wait a opportunity to be make a gentl and josua displease. now it fall out that a gentl new come into the land of canaan before he know what ground he stand upon, have incur the displeasure of great josua so high that he must therefore be digrade. no reconciliation can be have for he all hope be pass for that matter. where upon this man of much reccon pretend a grant of the approach in avoidance, help the lame dog over the. style and be as jocund on the matter as a magpie over a mutton. wherefore the herall with drum and trumpet proclaim in a very solemn manner that it be the pleasure of great josua for diverse and sundry. very good cause and consideration, master temperwell, master temperwell, there unto especial move to take away the title, prerogative and pre-eminence of the delinquent so unworthy of it and to place the same upon a professor of more reccon, so that it be make a penal thing for any man after to lift the same man again on the top of that style, but that he shall stand perpetual digrade from that prerogative and the place by this mean be void this man of so much more reckon be. receive in like a cipher to fillip a room and be make a gentleman of the first head, and his coat of arm, blazon and trick out fit for that purpose. in this poem. follow the poem: what ail pygmalion. be it lunacy or doteage on his own imagery, let he remember how he come from hell, that after age by record may tell the complete story. to postertty put it this way: blazon his coat in form of heraldry, he bear argent, always at command, a bar between three crusty roll at hand, and for his crest with froth there do appear a jugg of bear. now that it may the more easy be understand. i have here endeavour to set it forth in these illustration. follow pygmalion, be a image maker who dote on his own perfection in make the image of venus grow to be amaze man, like our gentleman here, of the first head, and by the figure be he herein exemplify, he be translate from a tomb maker to be the tapster at hell, which be in westminster under the exchequer office. for benefit of the mean, he translate himself into new england whereby the help of beaver and the command of a servant or two, he be advance to the title of a gentleman, where i leave he to the exercise of his gift. chap 25 of the manner how the separatist do pay debt to they that be without there be a honest man, one, mr innocence fairecloath. by mr mathias charterparty send over into new canaan to raise a very good merchantable commodity for his benefit. for while the man be bind by covenant to stay for a time and to employ such servant as do there belong to mr charterparty. he disdain the tenant of the separatist and they also find he to be none disdain to be employ by a carnal man, as they term he, and seek occasion against he to do he a mischief. intelligence be convey to mr charterparty that this man be a member of the church of england and therefore in their account a enemy to their church and state. and to the end they may have some colour against he. some of they practise to get into. his debt, which he not mistrust, suffer and give credit for such commodity as he have sell at a price. when the day of payment come instead of money, he be at that time sick and weak. good payment and stand in need of the beaver he have contract for. he have a epistle full of zealous exhortation to provide for the soul and not to mind these transitory thing that perish with the body, and to be think himself whether his conscience will be so prompt to demand so great a some of beaver as have be contract for. he be further exhort therein to consider he be but a steward for a time and by all likely hood be go to to give up a account. of his stewardship and therefore persuade the creditor not to load his conscience with such a burden which he be bind by the gospel, to ease he of if it be possible. and for that cause he have frame this epistle in such a friendly manner to put he in mind of it. the perusal of this lap in the paper be as bad as a potion to the creditor to see his debtor master subtilety, a zealous professor as he think, to deride he in this extremity that he can not choose in admiration of the deceit but cast out these word. be these your member. if they be all like these, i believe the devil be the setter up of their church. this be call in. question when mr fairecloath, lest think of it, capt, little worth must be. the man must press it against he for blasphemy, against the church of salem, blasphemy, a example for carnal man. and to great josua temperwell he go with a bitter accusation to have master innocence make a example for all carnal man to presume to speak the least word that may tend to the dishonour of the church of salem yea, the mother church of all that holy land. and he convent be before their synagoge where no defence will serve his turn. yet be there none to be see to accuse he. save the court alone. the time of his sickness, nor the urgent cause be not allow to be. urge for he, but whatsoever can be think upon against he be urge see he be a carnal man of they that be without, so that it seem by those proceed there the matter be. adjudge before he come, he only bring to hear his sentence in public, which be to have his tongue bore through his nose, slit his face, brand his ear, cut his body, to be whip in every several plantation of their jurisdiction and a fine of forty pound impose with perpetual banishment, and to execute this vengeance. shackle the deacon of charles town. be as ready as mephistopheles when doctor faustus be bend upon mischief, he be the purser. general of new canaan who, with his whip, with knot most terrible, take this man unto the count house there, capitulate with he why he shall be so hasty for payment when god, dear child, must pay as they be able. and he weep and sob and his handkerchief walk as a sign of his sorrow for master fairecloath sin that he shall bear no better affection to the church and the saint of new canaan and strip innocence the while and comfort he though he be make to stay for payment. he shall not think it long. the payment will be sure when it do come and he shall have his due to a doit. he shall not wish for a token more and then tell it. he down in such manner notable pay that he make fairecloath innocent back like the picture of rawhead and blowdy bone and his shirt like a pudding. wife aperon, in this employment shackle, take a great felitity and glory in the practice of it. this cruel sentence be stop in part by sir christopher gardiner than present at the execution by expostulate with master temperwell, who be content with that whip and the cut of part of his ear to send innocence, go with the loss of all his good to pay the fine, impose and perpetual banishment out of their land of new canaan in loe, this be the payment you shall get if you be one of they. they term without chap 26 of the charity. of the separatist, charity be say to be the darling of religion and be indeed the mark of a good christian. but where we do find a commission for minister to the necessity of the saint, we do not find any prohibition against cast our bread upon the water where the unsanctified as well as the sanctify be in possibility to make use of it. i can perceive that the separatist do allow of help our poor, though they magnify their practice, incontribute to the nourishment of their saint for as much as some that be, of the number of those who they term, without though it be in case of sickness, upon their land, when a little fresh victual will have recover their health. yet can they. not find any charitable assistance from they. nay, my host of ma-re-mount, if he may have have the use of his gun, powther and shot, and his dog, which be deny he doubtless will have, preserve such poor, helpless wretch as be neglect by those that bring they over. lame charity which be so apparent as it seem that one of their own tribe, say the death of they will be, require at some body hand one day. mean master temperwell. but such good must not come from a carnal man. if it come from a member, than it be a sanctify work, if otherwise it be reject as unsanctified. but when shackle wife and such as have husband, parent or friend happen to be sick, my host. help be use and instrument provide for he to kill fresh victual with, wherein he be industrious and the person have fresh victual live. so doubtless may many other have be preserve, but they be of the number leave without. neither will those precise people admit a carnal man into their house, though they have make use of he in the like case. they be such antagonist to those that do not comply with they and seek to be admit to be of their church that in scorn they say: you may see what it be to be without chap 27 of the practice of their church, the church of the separatist, be govern by pastor, elder and deacon, and there be not any of these, thouh he. be but a cow keeper, but be allow to exercise his gift in the public assembly on the lord day, so as he do not make use of any note for the help of his memory. for such thing, they say smell of lamp oil and there must be no such unsavery perfume. admit to come into the congregation. these be all public preacher. there be among these people a deakonesse. make of the sister that use her gift at home in a assembly of her sex by way of repetition or exhortation. such be their practice. the pastor, before he be allow of, must disclaim his former call to the ministry as heretical and take a new call after their fantastical invention, and then he be admit. to be their pastor, the manner of disclaime be to renounce his call with bitter execration. for the time that he have heretofore, live in it and after his new election, there be great joy. conceive at his commission and their pastor have this pre-eminence above the civil magistrate. he must first consider of the complaint make against a member and if he be dispose to give the party complain of a admonition, there be no more to be say. if not, he deliver he over to the magistrate to deal with he in a course of justice, according to their practice. in case of that nature of these pastor i have not know many, some i have observe together with their carriage in new canaan and can. inform you what opinion have be conceive of their condition. in the particular, there be one who, as they give it out there that think they speak it to advance his worth, have be expect to exercise his gift in a assembly that stay his come in the midst of his journey, fall into a fit which they term a zealous meditation and be 4. mile past the place appoint before he come to himself. or do remember where abouts he go, and how much these thing be different from the action of maze man, i leave to any indifferent man to judge, and if i shall say they be all much alike, they that have see and hear what i have do will not condemme i altogether. now for as much as by the practice of their church every elder or deacon may preach. it be not amiss to discover their practice in that particular before i part with they. it have be a old say and a true: what be breed in the bone will not out of the flesh, nor the step into the pulpit that can make the person fit for the employment. the unfitness of the person undertake to be the messenger have bring a blemish upon the message. lewes the 11. send a barber ambassador, as in the time of lewes, the eleven, king of france, who have advance his barber to place of honour and grace. he with eminent title, make he so presumptuous to undertake a embassage to. treat with foreign prince of civil affair. but what be the issue? he behave himself so unworthy yet, as well as his breed will give, he leave that both the messenger and the message be despise, the embassage despise, and have not, he be discover, convey himself out of their territory. they have make he pay for his barbarous presumption. socrates say if a man observe these people in the exercise of their gift, he may thereby discern the tincture of their proper call. the ass ear will peep through the lion hide. i be sorry. they can discern their own infirmity. i will deal fair with they, for i will draw their picture, cap a, that you may discern. they plain from head to foot in their posture that so much bewitch- as i may speak with modesty- these illiterate people, to be so fantastical to take jonas task upon. they, without sufficient warrant, one step up, like the minister of justice, with the balance only a grocer, not the sword. for fear of affright his auditory, he point at a text and handle it as even as he can and teach the auditory that the thing he have to deliver must be well weigh, for it be a very precious thing, yet much more precious than gold or pearl, and he will teach they the mean how to way thing of that excellent worth that a man will suppose he and his auditory be to part. stake by the scale and the like distribution they have use about a bag pudding, another of a more cut disposition, step in his steed and he take a text, a tailor, which he divide into many part, to speak true as many as he listen. the fag end of it he pare away as a superfluous remnant. he put his auditory in comfort that he will make a garment for they and teach they how they shall put it on and incourage they to be in love with it. for it be of such a fashion as do best become a christian man. he will. they that it shall be armour of proof against all assault of satan. this garment, say he be not compose as the garment make by a carnal man that be sow with a hot needle and a burn thread, but it be a garment that shall out last all the garment, and if they will make use of it as he shall direct they, they shall be able, like saint george, to terrify the great dragon error and defend truth, which error, with her wide chap, will devour who mouth shall be fill with the shredd and pare which he continual gape for under the cut board, a three, a tapster. he supply the room and, in the exercise of his gift, begin with a text that be draw out of a fountain that have in it no dregs of popery. this shall prove unto you, say he, the cup of repentance. it be not like unto the cup of the whore of babylon, who will make man drink with the dregs thereof. it be fill up to the brim with comfortable joice and will prove a cordial, a comfortable cordial to a sick soul, say he. and so he handle the matter as if he deal by the pint and the quart with nic and froth. a other, a very learned man indeed, go another way to work with his auditory, a cobbler, and exhort they to walk upright in the way of their call and not, like carnal man, tread awry. and if they shall fail in the performance of that duty yet they shall seek for. amendment while it be time, and tell they it will be to late to seek for help when the shop window be shut up, and prick they forward with a friendly admonition, not to place their delight in worldly pleasure which will not last but in time will come to a end, but so to handle the matter that they may be find to wax better and better, and then they shall be double reward for their work. and so close up the matter in a comfortable manner. but stay here, be one step up in haste and be not mind to hold his auditory. in expectation of any long discourse. he take a text and, for brevity sake, divide it into one part and then run so fast a fore with the matter, a very pattrick, that his auditory can follow. he doubtless his father be some irish footman- by his speed it seem so, and it may be at the hour of death. the son be present, do participate of his father nature, according to pythagoras, and so the virtue of his father nimble foot be infuse into his brain, may make his tongue outrun his wit. well, if you mark it, these be special gift indeed, which the vulgar people be. so take with that there be no persuade they, that it be so ridiculous this be the mean o the mean that they pursue this. that come without premeditation. this be the suparlative, and he that do not approve of this they say be a very reprobate, many unwarrantable tenant. they have likewise, some of which be come to my knowledge. i will here set down one, whereof be, in public practice, maintain be more notorious than the rest. i will therefore begin with that and convince they of manifest error by the maintenance of it, which be this: that it be the magistrate office, absolute, and not the minister, to join the people in lawful matrimony. tenent 1, and for this they vouch. the history of ruth say boas be, marry to ruth. in presence of the elder of the people. herein they mistake the scope of the text 2. that it be a relic of popery to make use of a ring in marriage and that it be a diabolical circle for the devil to dance in. 3. that the purification use for woman after delivery be not to be use. 4. that no child shall be baptize who parent be not receive into their church first. 5. that no person shall be admit to the sacrament of the lord supper that be without. 6. that the book of common prayer be a idol and all that use it idolater. 7. that every man be bind to believe a professor upon his bare affirmation only, before a protestant upon oath. 8. that no person have any right to god creature, but god child only, who be themselves. and that all other be but usurper of the creature. 9 and that for the general good of their church and common wealth they be to neglect father, mother and all friendship. 10. much a do they keep about their church discipline, as if that be the most essential part of their religion. tithe be banish from thence all except the tithe of muit and commin. 11. they differ from we some thing in the creed too, for if they get the good of one that be without into their hand, he shall be keep without remedy for any satisfaction, and they believe that this be not cozenage. 12. and last, they differ from we in the manner of pray, for they wink when they pray because they think themselves so perfect in the high way to heaven that they can find it blindfold. so do not i chap 28 of their policy inpublik justice. now that i have anottomize the two extreme part of this politic, commonwealth, the head and the inferior member, i will show you the hart and read a short lecture over that too, which be justice. i have a petition to exhibit to the high and mighty mr temperwell, and i have my choice whether i shall make my plaint in a case of conscience or bring it with in the compass of a point in law. and because i will go the sure way to work at first, i will see how other be. answer in the like kind, whether it be with hab or nab as the judge. do the countryman, here come mr hopewell. his petition be in a case of conscience, as he say. but see great josua allow conscience to be of his side. yet cut he off with this answer: law be flat against he. well, let i see another, i marry. here come one master. doubtnot, his matter depend, i be sure, upon a point in law. alas, what will it not do? look you it be. affirm that law be on his side, but conscience like a blanket over spread it. this passage be like to the procustes of room, i think, and therefore i may very well say of they even so, by rack out the joint and chap of the head, procustes fit all his guest unto his iron bed. and if these speed no better with who they be friend that neither find law nor conscience to help they, i do not wonder to see my host of ma-re-mount speed so ill that have be proclaim a enemy so many year in new canaan to their church and state chap 29 how my host be put into a whale belly the separatist after they have burn ma-re-mount. they can not get any ship to undertake the carriage of my host from thence either, by fair mean. or foul they be, enforce, contrary to their expectation to be trouble with his company, and by that mean have time to consider more of the man than they have do of the matter, wherein, at length it be, discover that they, by mean of their credulity, of the intelligence, give they in england of the matter and the false carecter of the man, have run themselves headlong into a error and have do that ona sudden, which they repent at leisure but can not tell which way to help it. as it stand now they can debate upon it and especial upon two difficult point whereof one must be conclude upon: if they send my host a way by banishment, he be in possibility to survive to their disgrace for the injury. do if they suffer he to stay and put he in. all the vulgar people will conclude they have be too rash in burn a house that be useful and count they man unadvised, so that it seem by their discourse about the matter they stand betwixt hawk and bussard and can not tell which hand to incline unto. they have sound he secret. he be content with it. go which way it will nay shackle himself who be employ in the burn of the house. and therefore fear to be catch in england and other, be so forward in put my host, after they have find their error, which be so apparent that luceus eye will have serve to have, find it out in less time that they will contribute 40. shilling a piece towards it and affirm that every man, according to his ability, that have a hand in this black design shall be tax to a contribution in like nature. it will be do exact. now, while this be in agitation and be well urge by some of those party to have be the upshot unexpected in the depth of winter, when all ship be go out of the land, in come mr wethercock, a proper mariner, and they say he can observe the wind, blow it high, blow it low. he be resolve to lie at hull rather than encounter such a storm as my host have meet with, and this be a man for their turn. he will do any office for the brethren if they, who he know have a strong purse and his conscience, wait on the string of it. if all the zeal he have will bear he out in it, which they profess they will, he undertake. to ride they of my host by one mean or another. they give he the best mean they can according to the present condition of the work and letter of credence to the favoure of that sect in england with which his business there be do, and his ship clear, he hoist the sail and put to sea. since which time my host have not trouble the brethren but only at the counsel table where now chap 30 of sir christopher cardiner knight, and how he speed among the separatist. sir christopher gardiner, a knight that have be a traveller both by sea and land, a good, judicious gentleman in the mathematticke and other science, useful for plantation, kimistry etc. and also be a practical engineer, come into. those part intend discovery, but the separatist love not those good part when they proceed from a carnal man, as they call every good protestant, in short time have find the mean to pick a quarrel with. he the mean be that they pursue to obtain what they aim at the word. be there the mean, so that when they find any man like to prove a enemy to their church and state, then straight the mean must be use for defence. the first precept in their politic be to defame the man at who they aim, and then he be a holy israelite, in their opinion, who can spread that fame like butter upon a loaf, no matter how thin. it will serve for a veil. and then this man, who they have thus deprave, be a spot unclean leper. he must out lest he pollute the land. and they that be clean, if this be one of their gift than machevill have as good gift as they. let they a scandal on any, though never so innocent yet they know it be, never wipe, clean out. the stain mark remain, which have be well observe by one in these word of he stick candle against a virgin wall, white back. if they will not burn yet at the least they will black. and thus they deal with sir christopher and plot, by all the way, and mean they can to overthrow his undertake in those part, and therefore i can choose but conclude that these separatist have special gift, for they be give to envy and malice extreme. the knowledge of their defamation can not please the gentleman well when it come to his ear, which will cause he to make some reply, as they suppose to take exception at, as they do against fair cloth, and this will be a mean, they think, to blow the coal and so to kindle a brand that may fire he out of the country too and send he after my host of ma-re-mount. they take occasion, some of they, to come to. his house when he be, go up into the country and find he be from home, so go to work that they leave he neither house, nor habitation, nor servant, nor any thing to help he if he shall return. but of that they have no hope as they give it out for he be, go, as they affirm, to lead a savage life and for that cause take no company with he. and they have consider of the matter, think it not fit that any such man shall live in so remoate a place within the compass of their patent. so they fire the place and carry away the person. and good, sir christopher be. go with a guide, a savage, into the in land part for discovery. but before he be return he meet with a savage. that tell the guide. sir christopher will be kill master temperwell who have now find out matter against he will have he dead or alive. this he relate and will have the gentleman not to go to the place appoint because of the danger that be suppose. but sir christopher be nothing dismay, he will on whatsoever come of it and so meet with the savage and between they be a terrible skirmish. but they have the worst of it and he escape. well enough, the guide be glad of it and learn of his fellow that they be promise. a great reward for what they shall do in this employment. which thing, when sir christopher understand, he give thanks to god. and after, upon this occasion, to solace himself, in his table book, he compose this sonnet, which i have here insert for a memorial. the sonnet: wolves in sheep clothing. why will you think to deceive god? that do see your simulate sartity. for my part, i do wish you can your own infirmity behold, for than you will not be so bold like sophist. why will you dispute with wisdom? so you do confute none but yourselves. for shame, be mute least. great jehovah with his power do come upon you in a hour when you least think and you devour this sonnet, the gentleman. compose as a testimony of his love towards they that be so ill affect towards he, from who they may have receive much good if they have be so wise to have embrace he in a love fashion. but they despise the help that shall come from a carnal man, as they term he, who, after his return from those design, find how they have use he with such disrespect, take ship and dispose of himself for england and discover their practice in those part towards his majesty true heart subject which they make weary of their abode in those part. chap 31 of my host of ma-re-mount, how he play jonas after he have be in the whale belly for a time, my host of ma-re-mount be. put to sea have, deliver he, for his relief, by the way, because the ship be unvittele and the seaman put to straight allowance which can hold out, but to the canary a part of his own provision be two month proportion in all but 3.. small piece of pork which make he expect to be famish before the voyage shall be end by all likelihood. yet he think he will make one good meal before he die, like the colony servant, in that before he shall go to the gallows, call to his wife to set on the loblolly pot and let he have one good meal before he go. who have commit a petty crime that in those day be make a capital offence. and now my host be merry, dispose on, go the piece of pork where with he feast his body and cherish the poor sailor and get out of they. what, mr wethercock, their master purpose to do with? he that he have no more provision, and along they sail from place to place, from island to island, in a pitiful wether beat ship where my host be in more danger, without all question, than jonas when he be in the whale belly. and it be the great mercy of god that they have not all perish vittel they be, but for a month when they weigh anchor and leave the first port, they be a pray for the enemy, for want of powther. if they have meet they, beside the vessel, be a very slug and so unserviceable that the master call a counsel of all the company in general to have their opinion which way to go and how to bear the helm, who, all, under their hand, affirm the ship to be unserviceable, so that, in fine, the master and man and all be at their wit end about it. yet they employ the carpenter to search and caulke her side and do their best while they be. in she nine month they make a shift to use she and shift for supply of vittell at all the island they touch at, though it be so poor that all those help and the short allowance of a biscuit a day and a few lemon take in at the canary serve. but to bring the vessel in view of the land end. they be in such a desperate case that if god in his great mercy have not favour they and dispose the wind fair until the vessel be in plymouth road, they have without question perish, for when they let drop a anchor near the island of s michaels not one bit of food. leave for all that starve. allowance of this wretched weathercock that if he will have launch out his beaver, may have buy more vittell in new england than he and the whole ship with the cargazoun be worth, as the passenger he carry, who vittel themselves affirm. but he play the miserable wretch and have possess his man with the contrary who repent they. of weigh anchor before they know so much, my host of ma-re-mount, after he have be in the whale belly, be set a shore to see if he will now play jonas so metamorphose with a long voyage that he look like lazarus in the paint cloth. but my host, after due consideration of the premise, think it fit for he to play jonas in this kind, then for the separatist to play jonas in that kind as they do. he therefore bid wethercock tell the separatist that they will be make in due time to repent those malicious practice, and so will he too, for he be a separatist among the separatist as far as his wit will give. he leave, though, when he come in company. of basket maker, he will do his indevoure to make they pin the basket if he can. as i have see he and now my host, be merry dispose. have past many perilous adventure in that desperate whale belly. begin in a posture like jonas and cry: repent you, cruel separatist. repent. there be as yet but 40. day if jove vouchsafe to thunder charter and the kingdom of the separatist will fall a sunder. repent you, cruel, schismatic repent. and in that posture he greet they by letter, return into new canaan and ever, as opportunity be fit for the purpose, he be both hear, etc. see in the posture of jonas, against they. cry: repent you, cruel separatist. repent. there be as yet but 40. day. if jove vouchsafe to thunder the charter and the kingdom of the separatist will fall a sunder. repent you cruel, schismatic, repent. if you will hear any more of this proclamation, meet he at the next markettowne for.