a brief relation of the discovery and plantation of new england, although it be a course far from the mind of we that be undertaker for the advancement of the plantation of new-england to seek, by any vain ostentation, to extol our own endeavour. yet we can but strive to vindicate our reputation from the injurious aspersion that have be lay upon it by the malicious practice of some that will adventure nothing in the beginning but will now reap the benefit of our pain and charge and yet not seem behold to we. and to that end, they disvalue what be past and, by sinister information, derogate what they can from the present course, intend the rather, because the good order appoint to be put in execution. there be likely to restrain the licentious irregularity of other place. and this have induce we to publish our proceed whereunto it have, please god to give a blessing as to any of indifferent judgement may appear by that which follow when this design be. first attempt some of the present company be therein chief interest, who be careful to have the same accomplish. do send to the discovery of those northern part a brave gentleman, captain henry challons, with two of the native of that territory, the one call maneday, the other assecomet. but his misfortune do expose he to the power of certain stranger enemy to his proceed, so that by they, his company be, seize the ship and good confiscate and that voyage whole overthrow. this loss and unfortunate beginning do much abate the rise courage of the first adventurer. but immediate upon his departure, it please the noble lord chief justice, sir john popham knight, to send out another ship wherein captain thomas haman, go commander, and martin, prinne of bristol, master, with all necessary supply for the second, of captain challons and his people, who arrive at the place appoint and not find that captain there. after they have make some discovery and find the coast, haven and harbour answerable to our desire, they return upon who relation, the lord chief justice, and we all wax so confident of the business that the year follow every man of any worth former interest in it be willing to join in the charge. for the send over a competent number of people to lay the ground of a hopeful plantation here upon captain popham, captain rawley, gilbert and other be send away with two ship and a hundred landman, ordnance and other provision necessary for their sustentation and defence until other supply may be send in the mean while. before they can return it, please, god to take from we this worthy member, the lord chief justice, who sudden death do so astonish the heart of the most part of the adventurer, as some grow cold and some do whole, abandon the business. yet sir francis popham, his son, certain of his private friend and other of, we omit not, the next year hold on our first resolution to join in. send forth a new supply which be according perform. but the ship arrive there, do not only bring uncomfortable news of the death of the lord chief justice, together with the death of sir john gilbert, the elder brother unto captain rawley gilbert, who at that time be precedent of that council, but find that the old captain popham be also dead, who be the only man indeed that die there that winter wherein they endure the great excremity for that, in the depth thereof, their lodging and store be burn and they thereby wondrous distress. this calamity and evil news, together with the resolution that captain gilbert be force to take for his own return, in that he be to succeed his brother in the inheritance of his land in england, make the whole company to resolve upon nothing but their return with the ship and for that present to leave the country again. have, in the time of their abode there, notwithstanding the coldness of the season and the small help they have, build a pretty bark of their own which serve they to good purpose as ease they in their return. the arrival of these people here in england be a wonderful discouragement to all the first undertaker in so much as there be no more speech of settle any other. plantation in those part for a long time after only sir francis popham have the ship and provision which remain of the company and supply what be necessary for his purpose, send diverse time to the coast for trade and fish, of who loss or gain himself be best able to give account. our people abandon the plantation in this sort, as you have hear. the frenchman immediate take the opportunity to settle themselves within our limit, which be hear of by those of virginia that, discreet, take to their consideration the inconvenience that may arise by suffer they to harbour there. they dispatch sir samuel argall with commission to displace they, which he perform with much discretion, judgement, valour and dexterity, for have seize their fort which they have build at mount mansell, saint croix and port real. he carry away their ordnance, he also surprise their ship cattle and other provision which he transport to the colony in virginia to their great benefit, and hereby he have make a way for the present hopeful plantation to be make in nova-scotia which we hear his majesty have late grant to sir william alexander knight, one of his majesty most honourable council of the kingdom of scotland, to be hold of the say crown, and that not without some of our privity, as by approbation under writing. may and do. appear, whereby it be manifest that we be so far from make a monopoly of all those land belong to that coast as have be scandalous by some object that we wish that many will undertake the like in this interim. there be of we who apprehenedd better hope of good that may ensue by this attempt, be thereunto persuade both by the relation of our people that have endure the many difficulty whereunto such action be subject, chief in the winter season, and likewise by the information give they by certain of the native that have be keep a long time in their hand, wherefore we resolve once more to try the verity thereof and to see if possible we may find something that may induce a. fresh resolution to prosecute a work so pious and so honourable. and thereupon they dispatch captain hotson of the i will of wight, together with captain herley, master john matthew, master sturton, with two saluage, the one call epenow, the other manawet, with commission and direction fit for they to observe and follow the better to bring to pass what be expect. but as in all human affair, there be nothing more certain than the uncertainty thereof. so fall it out in this for a little, before such time as they arrive upon the coast with the foresay savage who be natural of those part. it happen there have be one hunt, a worthless fellow of our nation, set out by certain merchant for love of gain who, not content with the commodity he have by the fish and peaceable trade, he find among the savage, after he have make his dispatch and be ready to set sail, more savage-like than they seize upon the poor, innocent creature that, in confidence of his honesty, have put themselves into his hand and stow they under hatch to the number of twnety four, carry they into the straits where he seek to sell they for slave and sell as many as he can get money for, but when it be understand from whence they be. bring the friar of those part, take the rest from. they and keep they to be, instruct in the christian faith and so disappoint this unworthy fellow of the hope of gain he conceive to make by this new and devilish project this, be know by our two saluage former, speak of they present contract such a hatred against our whole nation as they immediate study how to be revenge and contrive with their friend, the best mean to bring it to pass, but manawet die in a short time after the ship arrival there and the other observe the good order and strong guard our people keep, study only how to free himself out of our hand and thereupon lay the plot very orderly and indeed effect his purpose, although with so great hazard to himself and friend that labour his rescue, that captain hobson and his whole company imagine he have be slay, and though in the recovery of his body they wound the master of our ship and diverse other of our company. yet be not their design. without the slaughter of some of their people and the hurt of other compass as appear afterward hereupon, captain hobson and his company conceive the end of their attempt to be frustrace, resolve without more ado to return, and so those hope that charge and voyage be lose also, for they bring home nothing but the news of their evil success, of the unfortunate cause thereof and of a war now new begin between the inhabitant of those part and we, a miserable comfort for. so weak mean as be now leave to pursue the conclusion of so tedious a enterprise. while this be a work, we find the mean to send out captain john smith from plymouth in a ship together with master darmer and diverse other, with he to lay the foundation of a new plantation and to try the fish of that coast and to seek to settle a trade with the native. but such be his misfortune as be scarce, free of our own coast, he have his mast shake over board by storm and tempest, his ship wonderful distress and in that extremity force to come back again. so as the season of the year be almost spend, we be of necessity enforce to furnish he with another. ship and take out the provision of the first, dispatch, he away again, who come to the height of the western island, be chase by a french pirate and by he make prisoner, although his ship, in the night, escape away and return home with the loss of much of her provision and the overthrow of that voyage to the ruin of that poor gentleman, captain smith, who be detain prisoner by they and force to suffer many extremity before he get free of his trouble. notwithstanding these disaster, it please god so to work for our encouragement again as he send into our hand one of those saluage that former have be betray by this unworthy hunt before name by who mean there be hope conceive to. work a peace between we and his friend, they be the principal inhabitant of that coast where the fire be kindle. but this savage be at that time in the new-found land with captain mason, governor there for the undertaker of that plantation, master darmer, who be there also and sometime before employ, as we have say by, we, together with captain john smith, find the mean to give we intelligence of he and his opinion of the good use that may be make of his employment. with the readiness of captain mason to further any of our attempt that way, either with boat or other provision necessary, and resolve himself to go from thence, advise we to send some to meet with he at our usual place. of fish to aid he in his endeavour that they join together may be able to do what he hope will be very acceptable unto all well wisher of that business. upon this news we dispatch the next season captain rocraft with a company for that purpose, in hope to have meet with captain darmer. but the care and discretion of captain mason be such find captain darmers resolution to go beyond his mean that he persuade he first to go for england. that provide himself there as be requisite he may proceed in time expedient, which counsel he observe as fit it be, although our expectation of his join with captain rocraft be thereby disappoint. yet. so it happen that captain reoraft, at his arrival in those part, meet with a french bark that lie in a creek, a fish and trade, which he seize on and send home the master and company in the same ship which he go out in. with this bark and his own company, he mean to keep the coast, that winter quarter, be very well fit both with salt and other necessary for his turn. but as this be a act of extremity, the poor man be of our own religion, so succeed it according, for in a short time after certain of this captain company conspire together to cut his throat and to make themselves master of the whole spoil and so to seek a new fortune. where they can best make it. this conspiracy be discover to the captain, he let it go on till the time that it shall have be put in execution. when he catch they in there own train, and so apprehend they in the very instant that they be purpose to begin their massacre. but after he have prevent the mischief and seize upon the malefactor, he take to his consideration what be best to be do with they, and be loath by himself to dispatch they as they deserve. he resolve to put they ashore. think, by their hazard, that it be possible they may discover something that may advance the public, and so give they some arm for their defence and some victual for their sustentation until they know better how to provide for themselves. he leave they at a place call sawaguatock, where they remain not long but get from thence to menehighon, a island lie some three league in the sea and fifteen league from that place, where they remain all that winter with bad lodging and worse fare. yet come all safe home, save one sickly man which die there. the rest return with the ship we send for rocraft supply and provision to make a fish voyage. after these fellow be land, the captain find himself but weak. man and his ship to draw too much water to coast those place that, by his instruction, he be assign to discover. he resolve to go for virginia, where he have live a long time before and have, as he conceive, many friend that will help he with some thing that he have occasion to use. arrive there, he be not deceive of his expectation for sir samuel argall be their governor and one that respect he much for his own sake, be the ready to help he in regard of the good he wish to the business wherein he be employ. but all this can not prevail, for after that sir samuel argall come from thence, his departure be more sudden than be expect it fall out. that the new governor enter the harbour and find rocraft ready to be, go send to he to command he to come aboard to speak with he, which he ready obey assoon as he can fit his boat and man for that purpose, and so leave his bark with her great anchor, a head, and take with he the half of his company. he be force to stay aboard. the new governors ship that night in the mean, while a storm arise, our bark want hand to do their labour, drive a shore and there sink. but yet the governor and captain so labour the next day, when they know thereof as that, they free she again, but that occasion force our captain to stay so long in. the country to fit himself anew, as in the interim a quarrel fall out between he and another of that place so as rocraft be slay and the bark sink the second time and final, disable from yield we any benefit to this present. but we not know this disaster and captain darmer arrive with his savage out of newfoundland, dispatch he away the next season in a ship we send again for the fish business and assign he a company to join with rocraft and his people. captain darmer arrive there and not find rocraft, be a little perplex and in doubt what to do, yet hear by those mutineer which he find there that he be go for virginia. he be hopeful of his return and live in that expectation till such time as he hear, by a ship that come from thence to fish for the colony, the confusion of his fortune and the end of his misery in this world. then he determine to take the pinnace that the year before be assign to rocraft for he to make the trade with and with she, to proceed on his design and so embark himself and his provision and company in she and leave the fisherman to their labour. he coast the shore from thence, search every harbour and compass every cape-land till he arrive in virginia where he be in hope to meet with some of the provision or company of rocraft to help to supply he of what he want, as also to lay a deck upon his pinnace that before have not any and now be teach by experience the necessity of have that defect supply. but those hope fail, he all be, before that time, ruin and disperse so far as he see it in vain to hope for help by that mean and therefore attempt to make the best of what he have of his own and go to set his man a work. they all, in a few day after their arrival, fall sick of a disease which happen at that time in the country. so as now he be not only force to be without hope of their help of he, but must labour himself all he can to attend and sustain they. but so god favour he that they recover and in time convenient he dispatch his business there and put himself to sea again. resolve to accomplish in his journey back to new-england what in his last discovery he have omit in his passage. he meet with certain hollander who have a trade in hudson river some year before that time, with who he have conference about the state of that coast and their proceed. with those people who answer, give he good content. he betake himself to the follow of his business, discover many goodly river and exceed pleasant and fruitful coast and island for the space of 80. league from east to west, for so that coast do range along from hudson river to cape james. now, after we have find by captain rocrafts relation make the year before the hope he conceive of the benefit that coast will afford. towards the uphold of the charge for settle our plantation by reason of the commodity arise by fish and fur. if a course may be take for the manage of that business as be fit for such a design as well as for the advancement of the public good of our whole nation and satisfaction of every well dispose person that have a will to be interest therein, it be hold to be most convenient to strengthen ourselves by a new grant to be obtain from his royal majesty, the rather find that those of virginia have, by two several patent, settle their bound and exclude all from intermeddle with they that be not free of their company and have whole alter the form of their government from. the first ground lay for the manage the affair of both colony, leave we as desperate and our business as abandon. these consideration as be say, together with the necessity of settle our affair, bound and limit distinct from they, make we resolve to petition his majesty for the renew of our grant, by which time the rumour of our hope be so public, spread abroad and the commodity of the fish and trade so look into, as it be desire that all that coast may be, make free as well to those of virginia as to we to make their commodity. how just or unjust that motion be, we will not argue. see the business be end by this mean, our precede be interrupt and we question. about it first by the counsel of virginia, who we think to have beneful satisfy therein. before we can have way, give we for a new patent () have be hear by certain of the lord of the council and the business, by they so order (@) we be direct to proceed and to have our grant agreeable to the liberty of the virginia company, the frame of our government, except, but this order not be like of it be again hear and conclude: last the parent be past the seal, it be stop upon new suggestion to the king and by his majesty refer to the council to be settle by who. the former order be confirm the difference clear and we order to have our patent. deliver we these dispute hold we almost two year, so as all man be afraid to join with we, and we thereby leave hopeless of any thing more than that which our own fortune will yield to advance our proceed, in which time so many accident happen unto we at home and abroad that we be fain to give order by the ship we send a fish for the retire of master darmer and his people until all thing be clear and we better provide of mean to go through with our design. but this worthy gentleman, confident of the good likely to ensue and resolute resolve to pursue the end he aim at, can not be persuade to look back as yet and so refuse to accept. our offer, begin again to prosecute his discovery, wherein he be betray by certain new saluage who sudden set upon he give he fourteen or fifteen wound, but by his valour and dexterity of spirit he free himself out of their hand, yet be constrain to retire into virginia again, the second time for the cure of his wound, where he fall sick of the infirmity of that place and thereof die. so end this worthy gentleman his day. after he have remain in the discovery of that coast two year, give we good content in all he undertake, and after he have make the peace between we and the saluage that so much abhor our nation for the wrong do they by other, as you have hear. but the fruit of his labour in that behalf we as yet receive to our great commodity, who have a peaceable plantation at this present among they, where our people both prosper and live in good like and assuredness of their neighbour that have be former so much exasperate against we, as will more at large appear hereafter, but have pass all these storm abroad and undergo so many homebred opposition and free our patent, which we be by order of state assign to renew for the amendment of some defect therein contain. we be assure of this ground more bold to proceed on than before, and therefore we take first to consideration how to raise the mean to advance the plantation in the examination thereof two way. do offer themselves. the one be the voluntary contribution of the patentee, the other by a easy ransom of the freedom of those that have a will to partake only of the present profit arise by the trade and fish upon the coast. the first be to proceed from those nobleman and other that be patentee and they agree by order among themselves to disburse a hundred pound a piece for the advancement of such necessary business as they have in hand. the second be to be accomplish by settle such liberty and order in the western city and town as may induce every reasonable man in and about they affect the public good or a regular proceed in the business of trade to embrace a uniformity and to join in a community or joint stock together. how reasonable or unreasonable those order be be hereafter to be see and judge by every well affect person or any true love the public good of our nation. whereunto be annex: the difference of trade by a joint stock under government and order and the promiscuous trade without order and in a disjoint manner, as of late they have do, to the infinite prejudice of other already, as also to the loss of many of themselves that, contemptuous and greedy, have leap into that course as it be, in despite of all authority who reward in time will follow. before these order be to be tender to those city and town, it be desire that there may be letter send from their lordship, admonish they of his. majesty royal grant that prohibit any not free of that business to intermeddle within our limit, upon pain of confiscation of ship and good. these letter express withal the good affection of those that be interest in the business to entertain any that shall be willing to conform themselves to such order as have in that behalf be establish. but those letter, how full of justice soever they appear be as distasteful as be the rumour of order unto they, for by it every particular man think himself straight debar of liberty to run his own currant, in which he think his freedom do only consist, and by debar he thereof, his private end be overthrow, which be to endeavour to prevent his neighbour of the market. he. aim at, or the harbour he resolve to go unto, or the present trade he expect to have by his private industry. but as for the public, he care not. let that fare as it will. while these thing be in dispute and likely to have take a good foundation, the news of the parliament fly to all part, and then the most factious of every place present combine themselves to follow the business in parliament, where they presume to prove the same to be a monopoly and much tend to the prejudice of the common good, but that there shall be a conformity in trade or a course take to prevent the evil that be likely to ensue, or to appropriate possession or land, after a generous manner in remote part of the world, to certain public person of the commonwealth, for the take care and spend their time and mean how to advance the enlargement of their country, the honour of their king and glory of their god, these be think crime worthy the take notice of. and the principal actor in this kind must be first traduce in private, then public, call upon in parliament to answer such other scandal as can by malice be invent. but as this business be in itself just and righteous, so be it. as earnest desire they may have have the opportunity to have answer it before so unpartial judge and so reverend person. if so, it may have be without offence to the authority of his royal majesty that have extend itself by virtue of his prerogative, so far off and without the law of this realm, and to be put in execution without the public expense or charge of the commonwealth. or prejudice to any other former employment of our nation, and indeed, without offence to any that covet not to put their sickle into the harvest of other man or who, envious and covetous humour, stir they not up to shame themselves. in the conclusion, these trouble, thus unfortunate, fall out, have notwithstanding, hinder we from the hope we have this year to give some life extraordinary to those affair, and therefore we be force of necessity to refer the main of our resolution till a more convenient opportunity and till we have get our ship and provision fit to serve our turn, both to give the law along those coast and to perform such other service as be thereby intend for the public good of our adventurer. and defence of our merchant that shall frequent those place according to such order as shall be, find behooveful in that behalf the clime and condition of the country and the present estate of our affair. there you have hear already the many disaster, calamity, misfortune, opposition and hindrance we have have and receive, howbeit many. be omit in that we desire not to trouble the reader with more than enough or to affright the mind of weak spirit that will believe there be no better success to be look for from such attempt, although it be true that the best design do oftentimes carry with they the most impediment, whether it be that god will have it. so to try our constancy or otherwise to make. we know that it be he only that work after his own will, according to the time he have assign, and that there be nothing do but by he, as also that that be only best which he will have to be do and that time most proper which he have assign for the same, but by these, you may imagine, see, we have none other help than our own fortune to build upon. there can no great matter be perform in these, storm and tempest notwithstanding. you may know, we have not be more hinder one way than bless a other, for as our patience, constancy, travel and charge have be great, so have it indeed manifold be. require. for, by god favour and these gentleman industry, we have make a most ample discovery of the most commodious country for the benefit of our nation that ever have be find. for better satisfaction of the reader. in this behalf, we have think it fit, by the way, to acquaint he first with the nature of the place where we have settle ourselves, whereby he may see reason for what we have do. remember he likewise that in settle of plantation there be principal to be consider: the air for the health of the inhabitant, the soil for fertility, fit for corn and feed of cattle wherewith to sustain they, the sea for commodity of trade and commerce, the better to enrich their public and private state. as it shall grow to perfection, and to raise employment, to furnish the course of those affair. now, for the quality of the air, there be none of judgement, but know it, proceed either from the general disposition of the sphere or from the particular constitution of the place. touch the disposition of the sphere: it be not only seat in the temperate zone but, as it be, in the centre or middle part thereof, for that, the middle part of that country have about three hundred and ten degree of longitude and stand in the forty four and forty five degree of the northern latitude, that be, twenty degree from the fiery tropic and as much from the freeze arctic circle, under the same climate and course. of the sun that constantinople and rome, the lady of the world, italy and france, the garden of europe, have their situation within the limit of the five and six climate, after the late computation, have their long day, fifteen hour and some odd minute touch the constitution of the place, which be about sixty two degree by sea from our continent. westerly, the maritine part thereof be somewhat cold than the nature of the clime otherwise afford for that the beam of the sun be weaken, partly by the unstable reflection of the same upon the sea and partly by be lade with abundance of moisture it exhale out of the vast ocean, whereby the nature thereof be not so violent. there express, as in the like parallel further into the main, be accustom. nor be that sea coast so subject to drought or want of rain in seasonable time as other part be of like latitude, and by that reason the sea coast be at all time more cold than be the inland, and the eastern coast, which receive the rise of the sun, be likewise cold than be the western part, towards the decline of the same, as our morning air, for example, even in the heat of summer, be cold and quick when the day and evening be very swelter. and this make those part more suitable to the nature of our people, who neither find content in the cold climate nor health in the hot. but as herb and plant affect their native temperature and prosper kind no where else. and indeed the hot country yield sharp wit, but weak body and few child. the cold more slow of conceit but strong of body and more abound in procreation. so that though the invention of art have rise from the southern nation, yet they have still be subject to the inundation and invasion of the more northerly people, by reason of their multitude, together with the strength of their body and hardness of their constitution. but this country, what by the general and particular situation, be so temperate as it seem to hold the golden means and indeed be most agreeable to the nature of our own, which be make manifest by experience. the most infallible proof of all assertion, in so much as our people that be settle there enjoy their life and health much more happy then in other place, which can be impute to no other cause than the temperature of the climate. now, as the clime be find to be so temperate, so delicate and healthful, both by reason and experience, such be the soil also, some part thereof yield wonderful increase, both of the corn the native have most use of, as also of our own, of all sort, with infinite variety of nourish root and other herb and fruit, common among they but rare with we beside the coast do abound, with most convenient haven and harbour full of singular island fit for plantation replenish. with plant and wood of all sort as oak, cedar, spruce, fir, pyne, walnut, chestnut, elm, sassafras, plum-tree and etc. the people be tractable if they be not abuse to commerce and trade withal and as yet have good respect of we. the sea be store with all kind of excellent fish and in many place upon the coast fit to make salt in the country abound with diversity of wild foul, as turkey partridge swan, crane, wild goose of two sort, wild duck of three sort, many dove, especial when strawberry be ripe. there be several sort of dear in those part and some that bring forth two, three and four young at once, which be a manifest proof of the fertility of the soil or temper. of the clime, or both together. there be also a certain beast that the native call a moss. he be as big body as a ox, head like a fallow deer, with a broad palm which he mue every year as do the deer, and neck like a red deer, with a short mane run down along the reins of his back. his hair long like a elk, but esteem to be better than that for saddler use. he have likewise a great bunch hang down under his throat, and be of the colour of our black sort of fallow deer. his leg be long and his foot as big as the foot of our ox. his tail be long than the single of a deer and reach almost down to his huxen. his skin make very good buff and his flesh be excellent good food which the native use to jerkin and keep all the year to serve their turn and so prove very serviceable for their use. there have be many of they see in a great island upon the coast, call by our people, mount mansell, whither the saluage go at certain season to hunt they the manner whereof be by make of several fire and set the country with people to force they into the sea to which they be natural addict. and then there be other that attend they in their bote with bow and weapon of several kind. wherewith they slay and take at their pleasure, and there be hope that this kind of beast may be make serviceable for ordinary labour with art and industry. the know commodity of that country be fish of several sort, rich fur as beaver, otter, martin, black fox, sable, etc. there be likewise plenty of vine of three kind and those pleasant to the taste, yet some better than other. there be hemp, flax, silkgrasse, several vein of ironstone, commodity to make pitch rosen, tar, deal, board of all sort, sparres, mast for ship of all burden. in a word, there come no commodity out of france, germany or the sound, but may be have there with reasonable labour and industry. further, we have settle at this present several. plantation along the coast and have grant patent to many more that be in preparation to be go with all conveniency. those of our people that be there have both health and plenty. so, as they acknowledge there be no want of any thing but of industrious people to reap the commodity that be there to be have, and they be indeed so much affect to the place as they be loath to be draw from thence, although they be direct to return to give satisfaction to those that send they, but choose rather to perform that office by letter, together with their excuse for breach of their duty in that behalf. and thus you see there be no labour well employ, but have his reward at one. time or other. these encouragement have embolden we to proceed to the engage of ourselves for the build of some ship of good burden and extraordinary mould to lie upon the coast for the defence of merchant and fisherman that be employ there, as also to waft the fleet as they go to and from their market. and we purpose from henceforth to build our ship there where we find all commodity fit for that service, together with the most opportune place that can be desire. last find that we have so far forth prevail as to wind ourselves into familiarity with the native, which be in no great number along the coast. for two hundred league together we have now dispatch some of our people of purpose. to dive into the bowel of the continent there to search and find out what port or place be most convenient to settle our main plantation in, where we mean to make the residency of our state and government, as also to be assure what other commodity may be raise for the public and private benefit of those that be dealer in that business and willing to be interest in any the land there whither be go, this year already for we to vary from it, and therefore we have resolve to build our edifice upon it and to frame the same after the platform already lay and from whence we take our denomination, so as we purpose to commit the manage of our whole affair there in. general unto a governor to be assist by the advice and counsel of so many of the patentee as shall be there resident, together with the officer of state, that be to say the treasurer, for the manage of the treasure and revenue belong to that state. the marshal for matter of arm and affair of war, be it defensive or offensive, the admiral for maritine business, civil or criminal, and the force belong to the sea. the master of the ordnance for munition, artillery and other provision for public store of army by sea or land, as also such other person of judgement and experience as by the precedent and counsel establish here for the better govern of those affair shall be think fit by this head. and these member unite together, the great affair of the whole state be to be manage according to their several authority, give they from their superior, the precedent, and council establish as aforesaid, and for that all man by nature be best, please to be their own carver and do most willing submit to those ordinance or order whereof themselves be author. it be therefore resolve that the general law whereby that state be to be govern shall be first frame and agree upon by the general assembly of the state of those part, both spiritual and temporal, for the better distinction whereof and the more orderly proceed, agreeable as be say to the present state of this our realm. two part of the whole territory be to be divide between the patentee into several county to be, by themselves or their friend, plant at their pleasure or best commodity. the other three part be to be reserve for public use, to be belong to the state as their revenue for defray of public charge. but as well this three part, as the two former speak of, be to be divide into county, baronries, hundred and the like, from all, which the deputy for every county and baronry be to be send in the name and behalf of the subject under they to consult and agree upon the law, so to be frame, as also to reform any notable abuse commit in former proceed. yet these be not to be assemble but by order from the precedent and council here who be to give life to the law, so to be make as those to who of right it best belong, according to his majesty royal grant in that behalf, as also that under god and his sacred highness, they be the principal. author of that foundation. and thus much for the general form of our government. in like manner, be the county to be govern by the chief head or deputy thereof, with other officer under he as his steward, controller, treasurer of his revenue, and so the baronry by their steward and other inferior minister who be to have assign, they, the power of high and low justice within themselves for determine of controversy, with reservation of appeal in some case to the supreme court. and further, these lord of county may of themselves subdivide their, say county into manor and lordship. as to they shall seem best give to the lord thereof power of keep of court and l^^^ as be here use in england for the determine. of petty matter arise between the lord and the tenant or any other, and there be no less care to be take for the trade and public commerce of merchant, who government ought to be within themselves in respect of the several occasion arise between they, the tradesman and () mechanic, with who they have most to do and who be general, the chief inhabitant of great city and town in all part. it be likewise provide that all the city in that territory and other inferior town where tradesman be in any number, shall be incorporate and make body politic to govern their affair and people, as it shall be find most behooveful for the public good of the same, according unto the greatness or capacity of. they who shall be make likewise capable to send certain their deputy or burgess to this public assembly as member thereof, and who shall have voice equal with any the rest. by this you see our main drift be but to take care for the well order of the business, seek by all mean to avoid what we may, the intermeddle with any man money or dispose of any man fortune, save only our own. leave to every particular undertaker the employment of their adventure and the raise of their profit out of their proper limit and possession, as shall seem best to themselves or their officer or minister, who they employ and who they may be bold to question or displace as to themselves shall seem most. fit, and hereby all man may know that as it be not in our will to delude and deceive any so we be careful not to give the least cause of suspicion of any evil in that kind. so much the rather for that we daily see by experience the abuse commit in like case by inferior minister to be a notable cause to dehort the good disposition of many otherwise well affect to plantation, for that they observe those that be so employ to grow rich and their adventure to come to nothing. and we further desire that all man shall be persuade we covet not to engross any thing at all unto ourselves, but that we shall be exceed glad to find more of our nation. so free in disposition as to partake with we as well, in the profit as in the future travel and charge thereof, without look back to our expense or labour already past to the end, that all our hand be unite together. the work may be so much the soon advance, well know and free confess that it be sufficient to give content to a multitude, and that of all sort, for such as be true pious shall find here the opportunity to put in practice the work of piety, both in building of church and raise of college for the breed of youth, or maintenance of divine and other learned man, if they be such as affect glory and to continue their memory to future age. they may have here the mean to raise house, parish, yea, town or province to their name and posterity. do they aim at wealth? here be the way for their industry to satiate their appetite, in that, if they be not unsatiable, do they long after pleasure. here be as much to be have as may content any, not mere voluptuous or only prodigal. do they aspire to be commander? here be the place where they may have command of their own friend or tenant. if they be of any worth or mean extraordinary, wherewith to transport any number, if otherwise, of experience and virtue, it be likely they may attain place of government for the public state. so, as you see, there want no occasion or opportunity. to invite or give satisfaction to such as have patience to attend the time, and indeed we shall be glad that this or any thing else may induce a free and noble resolution in any well affect person to endeavour the advancement of these end together with we, in that they shall find they agreeable to honour and honesty, and if there be any that can add aught unto our endeavour, by their advice or otherwise, there be none that shall more ready embrace the same. then we who intent be only frame for the prosperity of the business, as be already say and as we hope will all those be that shall assent to join with we both in the labour, profit and honour, without respect to the weakness of the motive by which it have be heretofore move or any thing save the work itself, for by it you shall find the honour of our god, our king and nation will be advance without effusion of christian blood or question of wrong to the present inhabitant, for that they themselves both desire it, and we intend not to take aught, but what they that be there be willing, we shall be seize of both for the defence of they against their enemy. and their preservation in peace among themselves and propagation of the christian faith which, with wonderful alacrity, many of they seem to give care unto, and for who speedy conversion. we intend to be as careful as of our own happiness and as diligent to build they house and to provide they tutor for their breed and bring up of their child of both sect as to advance any other business whatsoever for that. we acknowledge ourselves special bind thereunto. and this be do to refer the success to the author of heaven and earth, to who be all honour and glory.