sir francis drake revive, call upon this dull or effeminate age to follow his noble step for gold and silver. as there be a general vengeance which secret pursue the doer of wrong and suffer they not to prosper, albeit no man of purpose, impeach they, so be, there a particular indignation engraft in the bosom of all that be wrong, which cease not seek by all mean possible to redress or remedy the wrong receive in somuch as those great and mighty man in who their prosperous estate have breed such a overween of themselves that they do not only wrong their inferior but despise they be injure, seem to take a very unfit course for their own safety and far unfit for their rest. for as that they do not only wrong their inferior but despise they be injure, seem to take a very unfit course for their own safety and far unfit for their rest. for, as esope teach, even the fly have her spleen and the emmet be not with on their choler, and both together many time find mean whereby though the eagle lie her egg in jupiters lap, yet by one way or other she escape not requital of her wrong. do the emmet, among the manifold example hereof which former age have commit to memory or our time yield to sight, i suppose there have not be any more notable than this in hand either in respect of the greatness of the person by who the first injury be time yield to sight. i suppose there have not be any more notable than this in hand, either in respect of the greatness of the person by who the first injury be offer, or the meanness of he who right himself, the one being, in his own conceit, the mighty monarch of all the world, the other a english captain, a mean subject of her majesty, who, beside the wrong receive at rio de hacha with captain john lovel in the year 65. and 66. have be greivos endamage at saint john ullua in the bay of mexico with captain john hawkins in the year 67. and 68, not only in the loss of his good of some value, but also of his kinsman and friend. and that. of mexico with captain john hawkins in the year 67. and 68, not only in the loss of his good of some value but also of his kinsman and friend, and that by the falsehood of don martin henriquez, then the viceroy of mexico, and find that no recompense can be recover out of spain by any of his own mean or by her majesty letter, he use such help as he may by two, several voyage into the west indies, the first with two ship, the one call the dragon, the other the swan, in the year 70. the other in the swan alone, in the year 71. to gain such intelligence as may further he to get some amends for his loss and have in those the year 70.. the other, in the swan alone, in the year 71. to gain such intelligence as may further he to get some amends for his loss and have, in those two voyage, get such certain notice of the person and place aim at, as he think requisite, and thereupon, with good deliberation, resolve on a three voyage, the description whereof we have now in hand. he according, prepare his ship and company, and then take the first opportunity of a good wind, have such success in his proceed as now follow far to be declare. on whitsunday eeve be the 24. may, 24. 1572. of may, in the year 1572. captain drake, in the of plymouth of 70. ton, his admiral, with the swan of the, declare on whitsunday eeve be the 24. may 24. 1572. of may in the year 1572. captain drake, in the of plymouth of 70. ton, his admiral, with the swan of the same port of 25. ton, his vice-admiral, in which his brother john drake be captain, have in both of they, of man and boy, seventy three all voluntary assemble, of which the elder be fifty, all the rest under thirty, so divide that there be forty seven in the one ship and twenty six in the other. both rich, furnish with victual and apparel for a whole year and no less heedful, provide of all manner of munition, artillery, artificer stuff and tool that be requisite for such a man of war in such a attempt. for a whole year and no less heedful, provide of all manner of munition, artillery, artificer stuff and tool that be requisite for such a man of war. in such a attempt, but especial, have three dainty pinnace make in plymouth, take a sunder all in piece and stow aboard to be set up as occasion serve. set sail from out of the sound of plymouth with intent to land at dios. the wind continue prosperous and favourable at north-east, and give as a very good passage, without any alteration or change, june 3, so that albeit we have sight of porto sa to one of the maderas, and of the canary also, within twelve day of our set forth. yet we never strike sail, nor come to. albeit we have sight of porto sa to one of the maderas, and of the canary also, within twelve day of our set forth. yet we never strike sail, nor come to anchor, nor make any stay for any cause, neither there nor elsewhere, until 25. june 28.. day after, when we have sight of the island of guadalupe, one of the land of the west indies, goodly high land. the next morning we enter between dominica and guadalupe where we descry two canoas. june 29, come from a rocky island three league off dominica, which usual repair thither to fish by reason of the great plenry thereof which, be there continual to be find. we land on the south side of it, remain there three day to. usual repair thither to fish by reason of the great plenry thereof which be there continual to be find. we land on the south side of it, remain there three day to refresh our man and water our ship out of one of those goodly river which fall down off the mountain. there we see certain poor cottage, build with palmito, bough and branch, but no inhabitant at that time, civil nor savage the cottage it may be, for we can know no certain cause of the solitariness we find there serve not for continual inhabitation but only for their use that come to that place at certain season to fish. july 1, the three day, after about three in the afternoon we set sail from thence towards but only for their use, that come to that place at certain season to fish, july 1. the three day after, about three in the afternoon, we set sail from thence towards the continent of, and the five day after we have sight of the high land of santa martha, july 6.. but come not near the shore by ten league, but thence direct our course for a place call by we port pheasant, for that our captain have so name it in his former voyage, by reason of the great store of those goodly fowl which he and his company do then daily kill and feed on in that place. in this course notwithstanding, we have two day calm, july 12.. yet within six day after, we which he and his company do then daily kill and feed on in that place. in this course notwithstanding, we have two day, calm july 12.. yet within six day after we arrive at our port pheasant, which be a fine round bay of very safe harbour for all wind, lie between two high point, not past half a cable length over at the mouth, but within eight or ten cable length every way, have ten or twelve fathom water, more or less full of good fish, the soil also very fruitful, which may appear by this that our captain have be in this place within a year and few day before and have rid the place with many alley and path make. yet now all be so. this, that our captain have be in this place within a year and few day before and have rid the place with many alley and path make yet now all be so overgrown again as that we doubt at first whither this be the same place or no. at our entrance into this bay our captain have give order to his brother what to do if any occasion shall happen in his absence. be on his way with intent to have go aland with some few only in his company, because he know there dwell no spaniard within thirty five league of that place. tolou be the near to the eastward and to the westward where any of that nation dwell, but as we be row a shore. spaniard within thirty five league of that place, tolou be the near to the eastward and to the westward where any of that nation dwell. but as we be row a shore we see a smoke in the wood, even near the place which our captain have aforetime frequent. therefore think it fit to take more strength with we. he cause his other boat also to be man with certain musket and other weapon, suspect some enemy have be a shore. when we land we find by evident mark that there have be late there, a certain english man of plymouth call john garret, who have be conduct thither by certain english mariner which have be there with our captain in some of his former voyage. he have certain english man of plymouth call john garret, who have be conduct thither by certain english mariner which have be there with our captain in some of his former voyage. he have now leave a plate of lead nail fast to a mighty great tree, great than any four man join hand can fathom about, on which be engrave these word direct to our captain: captain drake, if you fortune to come to this port, make haste away for the spaniard which you have with you here. the last year have bewray this place and take away all that you leave here. i depart from hence this present. 7. of july 1572.. your very love friend john garret, the smoke which we see be occasion by a fire. away all that you leave here i depart from, hence this present 7. of july 1572. your very love friend john garret. the smoke which we see be occasion by a fire which the say garret and his company have make before their departure, in a very great tree not far from this, which have the lead nail on it, which have continue burn at least five day before our arrival, this advertisement notwithstanding, our captain mean not to depart before he have build his pinnace, which be yet aboard in piece, for which purpose he know this port a most convenient place and therefore, assoon as we have moar our ship, our captain command his pinnace to be bring ashore for the carpenter to set up himself. know this port a most convenient place, and therefore, assoon as we have, moar our ship, our captain, command his pinnace to be, bring ashore for the carpenter to set up himself, employ all his other company in, fortify a place which he have choose out as a most fit plot of three quarter of a acre of ground to make some strength or safety for the present, as sufficient as the mean he have will afford, which be perform by fell of great tree and bouse and hale they together with great pulley and hawser until they be enclose to the water, and then let other fall upon they until they have raise with tree and bough thirty foot in height, round about, leave only one gate. until they be enclose to the water and then let other fall upon they until they have raise with tree and bough thirty foot in height, round about. leave only one gate to issue at near the water side, which every night that we may sleep in more safety and security. be shut up with a great tree, draw athwart it. the whole plot be build in a pentagonal form, to wit of five equal side and angle, of which angle two be towards the sea and that side between they be leave open for the easy launch of our pinnace. the other four, equal side, be whole, except the gate before mention, firm close up without, instead of a trench, the ground be ride for fifty foot. easy launch of our pinnace. the other four equal side be whole except the gate before mention, firm, close up without. instead of a trench, the ground be ride for fifty foot space round about. the rest be very thick with tree, of which many be of those kind which be never without green leaf till they be dead at the root, except only one kind of tree among they, much like to our ash, which when the sun come right over they cause great reins, sudden cast all their leaf, viz within three day, and yet within six day after become all green again. the leaf of the other tree do also in part fall away, but so, as the tree continue still green notwithstanding, be of yet within six day, after become all green again, the leaf of the other tree do also in part fall away. but so as the tree continue, still green notwithstanding, be of a marvellous height and support as it be, with five or six natural buttress grow out of their body so far that three man may so be hide in each of they that they which shall stand in the very next buttress shall not be able to see. they, one of they special be mark to have have seven of those stay or buttress for the support of his greatness and height, which be measure with a line close by the bark and near to the ground as it be, indent or extant, be find to for the support of his greatness and height, which be measure with a line close by the bark and near to the ground, as it be indent or extant, be find to be above thirty nine yard about the wood of those tree, be as heavy or heavy than brafill, or and be in colour white. the next day after we have arrive, july 1^, there come also into that bay a english bark of the i will of wight of sir edwaad horseys, wherein james rause be captain and john ouery master, with thirty man, of which some have be with our captain in the same place the year before. they bring in with they a spanish carvel of seville which he have take the day before. of which some have be with our captain in the same place the year before. they bring in with they a spanish carvel of seville, which he have take the day before athwart of that place, be a carvel of adviso, bind for de dios, and also one salop with oar which he have take at cape blank. this captain rause understand our captain purpose, be desirous to join in consort with he and be receive upon condition agree on between they: july 20.. within seven day after his come, have set up our pinnace and dispatch all our business in provide all thing necessary out of our ship into our pinnace. we depart from that harbour, set sail in the morning towards, continue our course till we. dispatch all our business in provide all thing necessary out of our ship into our pinnace. we depart from that harbour, set sail in the morning towards, continue our course till we come to the isle of pinos, where, be within three day arrive, we find two frigate of lade, plank and timber from thence july 22.. the negro which be in those frigate give we some particular understanding of the present state of the town, and beside tell we that they have hear a report that certain soldier shall come thither short and be daily look for from the governor of panama and the country thereabouts to defend the town against the symeron, a black people which, about 80. year past, flee from the spaniard, their master. look for from the governor of panama and the country thereabouts to defend the town against the symeron, a black people which, about 80. year past, flee from the spaniard, their master, by reason of their cruelty, and be since grow to a nation under two king of their own, the one inhabit to the west, the other to the east, of the way from to panama, which have near. surprise it, about six week before our captain, willing to use those negro well not hurt himself, set they ashore upon the main that they may perhaps join themselves to their countryman, the symeron, and gain their liberty, if they will, or if they will not yet by reason of the length and troublesomeness of the way by. perhaps join themselves to their countryman, the symeron, and gain their liberty, if they will, or if they will not yet by reason of the length and troublesomeness of the way by land to he may prevent any notice of his come which they shall be able to give, for he be loath to put the town to too much charge, which he know they will willing bestow in provide before hand for his entertainment, and therefore he hasten his go thither with as much speed and secrecy as posible. he can to this end dispose of all his company according as they incline most. he leave the three ship and the carvel with captain rause and choose into his four pinnace. captain rause' shallop make the four of all his company according as they incline most. he leave the three ship and the carvel with captain rause and choose into his four pinnace captain rause' shallop make the four beside fifty three of our man, twenty more of captain rause' company with which he seem competent, furnish to achieve what he intend especial, have proportion according to his own purpose and our man disposition, their several arm viz. six target, six firepike, twelve pike, twenty four musket and calliver, sixteen bow and six partisan, two drum and two trumpet thus have part from our company. july 28.. we arrive at the island of catinaas, be twenty five league distant. about five day after there we land all in the morning betimes and our captain train. our company, july 28.. we arrive at the island of catinaas, be twenty five league distant, about five day after there. we land all in the morning betimes and our captain train his man, deliver they their several weapon and arm, which hitherto he have keep very fair and safe in good cask, and exhort they, after his manner, he declare the greatness of the hope of good thing that be there, the weakness of the town be unwall and the hope he have of prevail to recompense his wrong, especial now that he shall come with such a crew who be like mind with himself, and at such a time as he shall be utter undiscovered. therefore, even that afternoon he cause we to set sail for with such a crew who be like mind with himself, and at such a time as he shall be utter undiscovered. therefore, even that afternoon, he cause we to set sail for so that before sun set we be as far as rio, francisco. thence he lead we hard aboard the shore that we may not be descry of the watch house until that be come within two league of the point of the bay. he cause we to strike a hull and cast our grapper ride so until it be dark night. then we weigh again and set sail, row hard aboard the shore with asmuch silence as we can, till we recover the point of the harbour under the high land. there we stay all silent. again and set sail row hard aboard the shore with asmuch silence as we can till we recover the point of the harbour under the high land. there we stay all silent, purpose to attempt the town in the dawn of the day. after that we have repose ourselves for a while, but our captain, with some other of his best man, find that our people be talk of the greatness of the town and what their strength may be, especial by the report of the negro that we take at the i will of pinos. think it best to put these conceit out of their head and therefore to take the opportunity of the rise of the moon that night, persuade they that it be the day. think it best to put these conceit out of their head and therefore to take the opportunity of the rise of the moon that night persuade they that it be the day dawn. by this occasion, we be at the town a large hour soon than first be purpose, for we arrive there by three of the clock after midnight. at what time it fortune that a ship of spain of sixty ton, lade with canary wine and other commodity which have but late come into the bay and have not yet furl her spritsail espy. our four pinnace be a extraordinary number, and those row with many oar send away her gundeloe towards the town to give warning. but our captain perceive it, cut betwixt she, and our four pinnace be a extraordinary number and those row with many oar send away her gundeloe towards the town to give warning. but our captain perceive it, cut betwixt she and the town force she to go to the other side of the bay, whereby we land without impeachment, although we find one gunner upon the platform, in the very place where we land, be a sandy pray and no key at all, not past twenty yard from the house. there we find six great piece of brass ordinance mount upon their carriage, some some whole culvering we present, dismount they the gunner, flee the town, take alarm, be very ready thereto by reason of their often disquiet by their near neighbour, the symeron, as we perceive. whole culvering we present dismount. they, the gunner, flee the town, take alarm, be very ready thereto, by reason of their often disquiet by their near neighbour, the symeron, as we perceive not only by the noise and cry of the people but by the bell ring out and drum run up and down the town. our captain, according to the direction which he have give over night to such as he have make choice of for the purpose, leave twelve to keep the pinnace that we may be sure of a safe retreat if the worst befall, and have make sure work of the platform. before he will enter the town, he think best first to view the mount on the east side of the town, where worst befall and have make sure work of the platform. before he will enter the town, he think best first to view the mount on the east side of the town, where he be inform by sundry intelligence the year before they have a intent to plant ordinance which may scour round about the town. therefore, leave one half of his company to make a stand at the foot of the mount. he march up present unto the top of it with all speed to try the truth of the report for the more safety. there we find no piece of ordinance but only a very fit place prepare for such use, and therefore we leave it without any of our man and, with all celerity, return down. we find no piece of ordinance but only a very fit place prepare for such use, and therefore we leave it without any of our man and, with all celerity, return down the mount. then our captain appoint his brother with john oxnam and sixteen other of his man to go about behind the king treasure-house and enter near the easter end of the marketplace. himself with the rest will pass up the broad street into the market place with sound of drum and trumpet. the firepike divide half to the one and half to the other company serve no less for fright to the enemy. then light of our man, who by this mean may discern every place very well, as if it be near day, whereas other company serve no less for fright to the enemy. then light of our man, who by this mean may discern every place very well, as if it be near day, whereas the inhabitant stand amaze at so strange a fight, marvel what the matter may be and imagine, by reason of our drum and trumpet sound in so sundry place, that we have be a far great number than we be. yet, by mean of the soldier which be in the town and by reason of the time which we spend in march up and down the mount, the soldier and the inhabitant have put themselves in arm and bring their company in some order at the south east end of the market place, near the governor. down the mount, the soldier and the inhabitant have put themselves in arm and bring their company in some order. at the south east end of the market place, near the governor house and not far from the gate of the town, which be only one lead towards panama, have, as it seem, gather themselves thither, either that in the governor sight they may show their valour, if it may prevail, or else that by the gate they may best take their vale and escape ready and to make a show of far great number of shot, or else of a custom they have, by the like device to terrify the symeron they have hang line with match light, overthwart the wester-end of the marketplace between the church. shot, or else of a custom they have by the like device to terrify the symeron, they have hang line with match light, overthwart the wester-end of the marketplace between the church and the cross, as though there have be, in a readiness, some company of shot, whereas indeed there be not. pass two or three that teach these line to dance till they themselves run away, assoon as they perceive they be, discover, but the soldier and such as be join with they present we with a jolly hot volue of shot, beat full upon the egress of that street in which we march, and level very low, so as their buller oft time graze on the sand, we stand not to answer they in like term. the egress of that street in which we march and level very low so as their buller oft time graze on the sand. we stand not to answer they in like term but have discharge our first volley of shot and feather they with our arrow, which our captain have cause to be make of purpose in england, not great sheaf arrow but fine rove shaft, very careful reserve for the service we come to the push of pike so that our firepike be well arm and make of purpose. do we very great service for our man with their pike and short weapon in short time take such order among these gallant some use the butt-end of their piece in stead of other weapon. that partly by our man with their pike and short weapon, in short time take such order among these gallant some use the butt-end of their piece in stead of other weapon. that, partly by reason of our arrow, which do we there notable service, partly by occasion of this, strange and sudden close with they in this manner, unlooked for and the rather for that, at the very instant our captain brother with the other company with their firepike enter the market place by the easter street, they cast down their weapon, flee all out of the town by the gate aforesaid which have be build for a bar to keep out of the town the symeron who have often assail it but now serve for a gap for the. by the gate aforesaid, which have be build for a bar to keep out of the town the symeron who have often assail it but now serve for a gap for the spaniard to fly at. in. follow and return. diverse of our man be hurt with the weapon which the enemy have let fall as he flee. somewhat for that we march with such speed, but more for that they lie so thick and cross on the other be return, we make our stand near the midst of the market place where a tree grow hard by the cross, whence our captain send of our man to stay the ring of the alarm bell which have continue all this while. but the church be very strong, build. hard by the cross, whence our captain send of our man to stay the ring of the alarm bell which have continue all this while but the church be very strong, build and fast shut. they can not, without fire, which our captain forbid, get into the steeple where the bell hang. in the mean time our captain have take two or three spaniard in their flight, command they to show he the governors house, where he understand be the ordinary place of unlade the moil of all the treasure which come from panamah by the king appointment, although the silver only be keep there, the gold, pearl and jewel be there, once enter by the king officer, be carry from thence to the king treasure-house, not far. king appointment. although the silver only be keep there, the gold, pearl and jewel be there. once enter by the king officer, be carry from thence to the king treasure-house. not far off be a house, very strong build of lime and stone for the safe keep thereof. at our come to the governors house we find the great door where the moil do usual unlade even than open, a candle light upon the top of the stair and a fair jennet ready saddle, either for the governor himself or some other of his household to carry it after he. by mean of this light we see a huge heap of silver in that. neither room be a pile of bar of silver of as nearea we can. carry it after he. by mean of this light we see a huge heap of silver. in that neither room be a pile of bar of silver of, as nearea we can guess, seventy foot in length, of ten foot in breadth and twelve foot in height, pile up against the wall. each bar be between thirty five and forty pound in weight. at sight hereof, our captain command straight that none of we shall touch a bar of silver, but stand upon our weapon because the town be full of people and there be in the king treasure-house near the water side more gold and jewel than all our four pinnace can carry, which we will present set some in hand to break open, notwithstanding the spaniard. the king treasure-house near the water side more gold and jewel than all our four pinnace can carry, which we will present, set some in hand to break open, notwithstanding the spaniard report of the strength of it. we be no soon return to our strength, but there be a report, bring by some of our man that our pinnace be in danger to be take and that if we ourselves get not aboard before day we shall be oppress with multitude both of soldier and townspeople. this report have his ground from one, diego a negro, who in the time of the first conflict come and call to our pinnace to know whether they be captain drake and upon answer receive continue entreat to be take aboard. negro who, in the time of the first conflict, come and call to our pinnace to know whether they be captain drake and upon answer receive continue entreat to be take aboard, though he have first three or four shot make at he until at length they fetch he and learned by he that not past eight day before our arrival, the king have send thither some hundred and fifty soldier to guard the town against the symeron. and the town at this time be full of people beside which all the rather believe because it agree with the report of the negro which we take before at the i will of pinos. and therefore our captain send his brother and john oxnam to understand the truth thereof. agree with the report of the negro which we take before at the i will of pinos, and therefore our captain send his brother and john oxnam to understand the truth thereof. they find our man, which we leave in our pinnace much fright by reason that they see great troop and company run up and down with match light, some with other weapon, cry queen, which have not be at the first conflict but come from the utter end of the town, be at least as big as plymouth, come many time near we and understand that we be english, discharge their piece and run away present. after this, a mighty shower of rain with a terrible storm of thunder and lightning fell which pour down so understand that we be english, discharge their piece and run away present. after this, a mighty shower of rain with a terrible storm of thunder and lightning fell, which pour down so vehement, as it usual do in those country, that before we can recover the shelter of a certain shade or penthouse at the wester end of the king treasure-house, which seem to have be build there of purpose to avoid sun and rain, some of our bowstring be wet and some of our match and powder hurt which, while we be careful of to refurnish and supply diverse of our man harp on the report late bring. we be mutter of the force of the town which our captain perceive. tell they that he have bring. refurnish and supply diverse of our man. harp on the report late, bring we be mutter of the force of the town which our captain perceive. tell they that he have bring they to the mouth of the treasure of the world, if they will want it. they may henceforth blame no body but themselves. and therefore, as soon as the storm begin to assuage of his fury, which be a long half hour, willing to give his man no long leisure to demur of those doubt, nor yet allow the enemy far respite to gather themselves together, he step forward, command his brother with john oxnam and the company, appoint they to break the king treasure-house, the rest to follow he to keep the strength of the. themselves together. he step forward, command his brother with john oxnam and the company appoint they to break the king treasure-house, the rest to follow, he to keep the strength of the market place till they have dispatch the business for which they come. but as he step forward, his strength and sight and speech fail he and he begin to faint for want of blood which, as then we perceive, have in great quantity, issue upon the sand out of a wound receive in his leg in the first encounter, whereby, though he feel some pain yet for that, he perceive, diverse of the company have already get many good thing to be very ready to take all occasion of wind themselves out of that conceit danger. pain. yet for that he perceive diverse of the company have already get many good thing to be very ready to take all occasion of wind themselves out of that conceit danger. will he not have it know to any till this, his faint against his will bewray it. the blood have first fill the very print which our footstep make, to the great dismay of all our company who think it not credible that one man shall be able to spare so much blood and live, and therefore even they which be willing to have adventure most for so fair a booty will in no case hazard their captain life, but have give he somewhat to drink wherewith he recover himself, and have bind his scarf about. adventure most for so fair a booty will in no case hazard their captain life. but have give he somewhat to drink, wherewith he recover himself, and have bind his scarf about his leg for the stop of the blood, entreat he to be content to go with they aboard there to have his wound search and dress and then to return a shore again if he think good this, when they can not persuade he unto, as who know it, utter time impossible, at least very unlikely that ever. they shall for that return again to recover the state in which they now be and be of opinion that it be more honourable for himself to jeopard his life for so great a benefit, then to leave. to recover the state in which they now be and be of opinion that it be more honourable for himself to jeopard his life for so great a benefit, then to leave off so high a enterprise unperformed. they join altogether and with force mingle with fair entreaty, they bear he aboard his pinnace and so abandon a most rich spoil for the present, only to preserve their captain life as be resolve of he that, while they enjoy his presence and have he to command they, they may recover wealth sufficient, but if, once they lose he, they shall hardly be able to recover home, no, not with that which they have get already. thus we embark by break of the day, july 29.. have beside our lose he, they shall hardly be able to recover home. no, not with that which they have get already. thus we embark, by break of the day, july 29.. have beside our captain, many of our man wound though, none slay but one trumpeter, whereupon though, our surgeon be busy employ in provide remedy and salve for their wound. yet the main care be respect by all the rest, so that, before we depart out of the harbour, for the more comfort of our company, we take the aforesaid ship of wine without great resistance, but before we have she free off the haven, they of the town have make mean to bring one of their culverin, which we have dismount, so as they make a shot at. before we have she free off the haven. they of the town have make mean to bring one of their culverin, which we have dismount, so as they make a shot at we. but hinder we not from carry forth the prize to the i will bastimiento, or the i will of victual, which be a island that lie without the bay, to the westward, about a league off the town where we stay the two next day to cure our wound man and refresh ourselves in the goodly garden which we there find abound with great store of all dainty root and fruit, beside great plenty of poultry and other fowl no less strange than delicate. short upon our first arrival in this island, the governor and great store of all dainty, root and fruit, beside great plenty of poultry and other fowl, no less strange than delicate. short upon our first arrival in this island, the governor- and the rest of his assistant in the town, as we afterward understand- send unto our captain, a proper gentleman of mean stature, good complexion and fair speak, a principal soldier of the late send garrison, to view in what state we be. at his come, he protest, he come to we of mere good will, for that we have attempt so great and incredible a matter with so few man, and that at the first they fear that we have be french at who hand they know they shall find no mercy. but after they perceive, a matter with so few man, and that at the first they fear that we have be french. at who hand they know they shall find no mercy. but after they perceive by our arrow that we be englishman, their fear be the less. for that they know that though we take the treasure of the place yet we will not use cruelty towards their person, but albeit this his affection, give he cause enough to come aboard such who virtue so he honour. yet the governor also have not only consent to his come, but direct send he. upon occasion that diverse of the town affirm, say he that they know our captain who the last two year have be often on their coast and have always direct send he upon occasion that diverse of the town affirm, say he that they know our captain who the last two year have be often on their coast and have always use their person very well and therefore desire to know, first, whether our captain be the same captain drake or no, and next, because many of their man be wound with our arrow, whether they be poison or no, and how their wound may best be cure. last, what victual we want, or other necessary, of which the govereour promise by he to supply and furnish we, as large as he dare our captain, although he think this soldier but a spy, yet use he very courteous and answer he to his governors, demand that he. and furnish we, as large as he dare, our captain, although he think this soldier but a spy yet use, he very courteous and answer he to his governors demand that he be the same drake who they mean it be. never his manner to poison his arrow. they may cure their wound by ordinary chirurgery. as for want, he know the island of bastimiento have sufficient and can furnish he if he list. but he want nothing but some of that special commodity which that country yield to content himself and his company. and therefore he advise the governor to hold open his eye, for before he depart, if god lend he life and leave, he mean to reap some of their harvest which they get out. he advise the governor to hold open his eye for before he depart, if god lend he life and leave, he mean to reap some of their harvest which they get out of the earth and send into spain to trouble all the earth. to this answer, unlooked for, this gentleman, reply, if he may, without offence, move such a question, what shall then be the cause of our depart from that town at this time? where be above three hundred and sixty tun of silver ready for the fleet, and much more gold in value rest in iron chest in the king treasure-house? but when our captain have show he the true cause of his unwilling retreat aboard, he acknowledge that we have no less reason in rest in iron chest in the king treasure-house. but when our captain have show he the true cause of his unwilling retreat aboard. he acknowledge that we have no less reason in depart than courage in attempt, and no doubt do easy see, that it be not for the town to seek revenge of we by man forth such frigate or other vessel as they have, but better to content themselves and provide for their own defence. thus, with great favour and courteous entertainment, beside such gift from our captain, as most content he after dinner he be in such sort dismiss to make report of that he have see that he protest he be never so much honour of any in his life. after his departure the he be in such sort dismiss to make report of that he have. see that he protest he be never so much honour of any in his life. after his departure, the negro forementioned be examine more full, confirm this report of the gold and silver with many other intelligence of importance especial, how we may have gold and silver enough if we will, by mean of the symeron who, though he have betray diverse time, be use thereto by his master so that he know they will kill he if they get he. yet if our captain will undertake his protection, he dare adventure his life because he know our captain name be most precious and high honour of they. this report, minister, occasion to further consultation. our captain will undertake his protection. he dare adventure his life because he know our captain name be most precious and high honour of they. this report, minister, occasion to further consultation for which, because this place seem not the safe as be neither the healthy nor quiet, the next day in the morning we all set our course for the i will of or port plenty where we have leave our ship, continue all that day and the next till towards night before we recover it. we be the long in this course. for that our captain send away his brother and ellis hixon to the westward to search the river of chagro, where himself have be the year before and yet be careful to gain more. our captain send away his brother and ellis hixon to the westward to search the river of chagro, where himself have be the year before and yet be careful to gain more notice of it. be a river which trend to the southward, within six league of panamah, where be a little town call venta cruz, whence all the treasure that be usual bring thither from panams by moil be embark in frigate down that river into the north sea, and so to number de dios. it ebb and flow not far into the land, and therefore it ask three day row, with a fine pinnace, to pass from the mouth to venta cruz, but one day and a night serve to return down the river at our therefore, it ask three day row with a fine pinnace to pass from the mouth to venta cruz, but one day and a night serve to return down the river. at our return to our ship, in our consultation, august 1. captain rause forecast diverse doubt of our safe continuance upon that coast. be now discover, be willing to depart and our captain no less willing to dismiss. he and therefore assoon as our pinnace return from chagro with such advertisement as they be send for about eight day before captain rause take his leave, august 7. leave we in the- i will aforesaid where we have remain five or six day in which, mean time, have put all thing in a readiness, our captain resolve with his 7. leave. we, in the i will aforesaid, where we have remain five or six day, in which, mean time, have put all thing in a readiness, our captain resolve with his two ship and three pinnace to go to carthagene. whither in sail we spend some 6. day, by reason of the calm which come often upon we. but all this time we attempt nothing that we may have do, by the way, neither at tolou nor otherwhere, because we will not be discover. we come to anchor with our two ship in the evening, in seven fathom water, august 13. between the land of charesha and saint barnard, our captain lead the three pinnace about the island into the harbour of carthagene where, at the very in seven fathom water, august 13.. between the land of charesha and saint barnard, our captain lead the three pinnace about the island into the harbour of carthagene where at the very entry he find a frigate at anchor aboard which be only one old man who be demand where the rest of his company be. answer that they be go ashore in their gundeloe that evening to fight about a mistress and voluntary relate to our captain that two hour before night there past by they a pinnace with sail and oar. as fast as ever they can row, call to he whether there have not be any english or frenchmen there late, and upon answer that there have be none, they bid they look to themselves. ever they can row, call to he whether there have not be any english or frenchmen there late, and upon answer that there have be none, they bid. they look to themselves that within a hour that this pinnace be come, to the utterside of carthagene, there be many great piece shoot off, whereupon one go to top to descry what may be the cause, espy over the land, diverse frigate and small ship bring themselves within the castle this report. our captain credit the rather for that himself have hear the report of the ordinance at sea and perceive sufficient that he be now descry notwithstanding, in far examination of this old mariner, have understand that there be within the next point a great ship of seville. at sea and perceive sufficient that he be now descry, notwithstanding in far examination of this old mariner, have understand that there be within the next point a great ship of seville which have here discharge her load and rid now with her yard, a cross be bind. the next morning for saint domingo. our captain take this old man into his pinnace to verify that which he have inform and row towards this ship which, as we come near it hail. we ask whence our shallop be. we answer from straight way. they rail and revile. we give no heed to their word. but every pinnace according to our captain order, one on the starboard bough, the other on the starboard quarter and the captain in the. revile. we give no heed to their word. but every pinnace according to our captain order, one on the starboard bough, the other on the starboard quarter and the captain in the midship on the larboard side, forthwith board she, though we have some difficulty to enter by reason of her height, be of two hundred forty tun, but assoon as we enter upon the deck, we throw down the grate and spardeck to prevent the spaniard from annoy. we, with their close fight, who then perceive that we be possess of their ship, stow themselves all in hold with their weapon, except two or three yonker which be find afore the beet when have light out of our pinnace. we find no danger of the enemy remain. all in hold with their weapon, except two or three yonker which be find afore the beet. when have light out of our pinnace we find no danger of the enemy remain. we cut their cable at half and with our three pinnace tow she, without the island, into the sound right afore the town, without danger of their great shot. mean, while the town have intelligence hereof by their watch, take the alarm ring out their bell, shoot off about thirty piece of great ordinance, put all their man in a readiness, horse and foot, come down to the very point of the wood and discharge their caliver to impeach. we, if they may in, go forth the next morning our ship, take two frigate august 14.. come down to the very point of the wood and discharge their caliver to impeach we, if they may, in go forth the next morning our ship, take two frigate august 14. in which be two who call themselves the king scrivanos, the one of carthagene, the other of veragua, with seven mariner and two negro who have be at de dios and be now bind for cathagene with double letter of advice to certify they that captain drake have be at have take it and have it not be that he be hurt with some bless shot. by all likelihood he have sack it, he be yet still upon the coast. they shall therefore careful prepare for he. after that our captain have bring all his fleet. bless shot. by all likelihood he have sack it, he be yet still upon the coast. they shall therefore careful prepare for he, after that our captain have bring all his fleet together at the scrivanos entreaty, he be content to do they all favour in set they and all their company a shore, and so bear thence with the land of saint barnard, about three league off the town, where we find great store of fish for our refresh. here our captain consider that he be now discover upon 2. of the chief place of all the coast, and yet not mean to leave it till he have find the simeron and make his voyage, as he have conceive, which will require some length of time and all the coast and yet not mean to leave it till he have find the simeron and make his voyage, as he have conceive, which will require some length of time, and sure man of his pinnace, he determine with himself to burn one of his ship and make of the other a storehouse. that his pinnace, which can not otherwise, may be thorough man and so he may be able to abide any time but know the affection of his company how loath they be to leave either of their ship, be both so good sailor and so well furnish. he purpose in himself, by some policy, to make they most willing to effect that he intend and therefore send for one thomas moon, who be carpenter. sailor and so well furnish he purpose in himself by some policy to make they most willing to effect that he intend. and therefore send for one thomas moon, who be carpenter in the swan, and take he into his cabin, charge he to conceal for a time a piece of service which he must in any case consent to do aboard his own ship, that be in the middle of the second watch, to go down secret into the well of the ship and with a great spike-gimlet to boar three hole as near the keel as he can and lie something against it. that the force of the water enter may make no great noise, nor be discover by boil up thomas moon at the hear. keel as he can and lie something against it. that the force of the water enter may make no great noise, nor be discover by boil up. thomas moon, at the hear hereof be utter dismay, desire to know what cause there may be to move he to sink so good a bark of his own, new and strong, and that by his mean, who have be in two so rich and gainful voyage in she with himself. heretofore. if his brother, the master and the rest of the company shall know of such his fact, he think very they will kill he. but when our captain have impart to he his cause and have persuade he with promise that it shall not be know till all of he think very they will kill he. but when our captain have impart to he his cause and have persuade he with promise that it shall not be know till all of they shall be glad of it, he undertake it and do it according. the next morning our captain take his pinnace very early august 15.. purpose: to go a fish, for that there be very great store on all the coast and fall aboard the swan. call for his brother to go with he who rise sudden, answer that he will follow present or if it will please he to stay a very little, he will attend. he. our captain, perceive the feat wrought will not hasten he but in row away. demand of they why. if it will please he to stay a very little, he will attend he. our captain, perceive the feat wrought, will not hasten, he, but in row away, demand of they why their bark be so deep as make no great account of it. but by occasion of this demand, his brother send one down to the steward to know whether there be any water in the ship or what other cause may be. the steward, hasty, step down at his usual scuttle, be wet up to the waste and shift with more haste to come up again as if the water have follow. he cry out that the ship be full of water. there be no need to hasten the company. some to the pump, other to up again as if the water have follow. he cry out that the ship be full of water. there be no need to hasten the company, some to the pump, other to search for the leak, which the captain of the bark see they do on all hand. very willing. he follow his brother and certify he of the strange chance befall they that night that whereas they have not pump twice in six week before now, they have six foot water in hold. therefore he desire leave from attend he in fish to intend the search and remedy of the leak. and when our captain with his company proffer to go to help they, he answer they have man enough aboard and pray he to continue his search and remedy of the leak. and when our captain, with his company, proffer to go to help they, he answer they have man enough aboard, and pray he to continue his fish that they may have some part of it for their dinner. thus return, he find his company have take great pain, but have free the water very little. yet such be their love to the bark, as our captain well know, that they cease not but to the utmost of their strength, labour all that they may till three in the afternoon, by which time the company perceive that though they have be relieve by our captain himself and many of his company, yet they be not able to free above a foot and a. which time the company perceive that though they have be relieve by our captain himself and many of his company, yet they be not able to free above a foot and a half of water and can have no likelihood of find the leak, have now a less like of she then before and great content to hear of some mean foot remedy, whereupon our captain consult with they what they think best to be do, find that they have more desire to have all as he think fit than judgement to conceive any mean of remedy, and therefore he propound that himself will go in the pinnace till he can provide he some handsome frigate and that his brother shall be captain in the admiral and the remedy, and therefore he propound that himself will go in the pinnace till he can provide he some handsome frigate and that his brother shall be captain in the admiral and the master shall also be there place with he. instead of this, which see they can not save, he will have fire that the enemy may never recover. she, but first all the pinnace shall be, bring aboard she that every one may take out of she whatsoever they lack, or like this though the company at the first marvel at yet present it be put in execution and perform that night our captain have his desire and man enough for his pinnace. the next morning we resolve to seek out some fit place in the sound. put in execution and perform. that night our captain have his desire and man enough for his pinnace. the next morning, we resolve to seek out some fit place in the sound of darienne- aug 16.- where we may safe leave our ship at anchor not discoverable by the enemy, who thereby may imagine we quite depart from the coast and we, the mean time, better follow our purpose with our pinnace, of which our captain will himself take two to rio grande and the three leave with his brother to seek the symeron upon this resolution, aug 21.. we set sail present for the say sound which, within five day, we recover. abstain of purpose from all such occasion as may hinder our determination or bewray our resolution, aug 21.. we set sail present for the say sound which within five day we recover, abstain of purpose from all such occasion as may hinder our determination or bewray our be upon the coast. assoon as we arrive where our captain intend and have choose a fit and convenient road out of all trade for our purpose. we repose ourselves there for some fifteen day, keep ourselves close that the brute of our be upon the coast may cease. but in the mean time we be not idle for beside such ordinary work as our captain every month do usual, enure we to about the trim and fit of his pinnace for their better sail and row, he cause we to ride a large plot of our captain every month do usual enure we to about the trim and fit of his pinnace for their better sail and row. he cause we to ride a large plot of ground, both of tree and brake, and to build we house sufficient for all ourlodging and one especial for all our public meeting, wherein the negro which flee to we before do we great service as be well acquaint with the country and their mean of building our archer make themselves butt to shoot at, because we have many that delight in that exercise and want not a fletcher to keep our bow and arrow in order. the rest of the company, every one as he like, best make his disport at bowl, quoit, keile, etc. and want, not a fletcher, to keep our bow and arrow in order. the rest of the company, every one as he like, best make his disport at bowl, quoit, keile, etc. for our captain, allow one half of their company to pass their time thus every other day, interchangeable. the other half be enjoin to the necessary work about our ship and pinnace and the provide of fresh victual fish, foule, hog, dear coney, etc. whereof there be great plenty here. our smith set up their forge as they use be furnish out of england, which anvil, iron, coal and all manner of necessary which stand we in great steed septem 5.. at the end of these fifteen day our captain leave his ship in his brother. which anvil, iron, coal and all manner of necessary which stand we in great steed, septem 5.. at the end of these fifteen day, our captain leave his ship in his brother charge to keep all thing in order himself. take with he, according to his former determination, two pinnace for rio grand and pass by carthagene, but out of sight when we be within two league of the river septem 8.. we land to the westward, on the main, where we see great store of cattle. there we find some indian who ask we in friendly sort, in break spanish, what we will have, and understand that we desire fresh victual. in traffic they take such cattle for we as we need, with ease and so ready. friendly sort, in break spanish, what we will have, and understand that we desire fresh victual in traffic. they take such cattle for we as we need, with ease and so ready, as if they have a special commandment over they, whereas they will not abide we to come near they, and this also they do willing, because our captain, according to his custom content they, for their pain with such thing as they account great of, in such sort that they promise we shall have there of they at any time what we will. the same day we depart thence to rio grand, where we enter about three of the clock in the afternoon, there be two enter into this river, of which we enter the westermost. same day we depart thence to rio grand where we enter about three of the clock in the afternoon. there be two enter into this river, of which we enter the westermost. call the freshet of this river be so great that we be half a league from the mouth of it. fill fresh water for our beverage. from three a clock till dark night we row up the stream but the current be so strong downward that we get but two league all that time we moar our pinnace to a tree that night for that present. with the close of the evening there fall a monstrous shower of rain with such strange and terrible clap of thunder and flash of lightning as make we not a that present. with the close of the evening there fall a monstrous shower of rain with such strange and terrible clap of thunder and flash of lightning as make we not a little to marvel at, although our captain have be acquaint with such like in that country and tell we that they continue seldom long than three quarter of a hour. this storm be no soon cease, but it become very calm and therewith there come such a innumerable multitude of a kind of fly of that country call muskito, like our gnat, which bite so spiteful that we can not rest all that night nor find mean to defend ourselves from they by reason of the heat of the country. the best remedy we then find so spiteful that we can not rest all that night nor find mean to defend ourselves from they by reason of the heat of the country. the best remedy we then find against they be the juice of lemon. at the break of day we depart, row in the eddy, and hale up by the tree where the eddy fail with great labour. septemb 9 by spell without cease, each company their half hour glass without meet any till about three a clock afternoon, by which time we can get but five league a head. then we espy a canow with two indian fish in the river, but we speak not to they, lest so we may be descry, nor they to we, as take we to be. we espy a canow with two indian fish in the river, but we speak not to they, lest so we may be descry, nor they to we, as take we to be spaniard, but within a hour after we espy certain house on the other side of the river, who channel be twenty five fathom deep and his breadth so great that a man can scant be discern from side to side, yet a spaniard which keep those house, have espy our pinnace and think we have be his countryman, make a smoke for a signal to turn that way as be desirous to speak with we. after that we espy this smoke, have make with it and be half the river over. he wheaved we with his to turn that way as be desirous to speak with we after that. we espy this smoke have make with it and be half the river over. he wheaved we with his hat and his long hang sleeve to come ashore. but as we draw near unto he and he discern that we be not those he look for, he take his heel and flee from his house, which we find to be five in number, all full of white ruske dry bacon, that country cheese, like holland cheese in fashion but far more delicate in taste, of which they send into spain as special present. many sort of sweet meat and conserve with great store of sugar be provide to serve the fleet return to spain with taste of which they send into spain as special present. many sort of sweet meat and conserve with great store of sugar be provide to serve the fleet. return to spain with this store of victual, we load our pinnace and by the shut in of the day we be ready to depart. for that we hasten the rather, by reason of a intelligence give we, by certain indian woman which we find in those house, that the frigate, these be ordinary thirty or upward, which usual transport the merchandise send out of spain to carthagene, from thence to these house, and so in great canoas up hence into nuevo reyno, for which the river run many hundred league within the land, serve very fit and return in. from thence to these house and so in great canoas up hence into nuevo reyno, for which the river run many hundred league within the land, serve very fit and return in exchange the gold and treasure, silver, victual and commodity which that kingdom yield abundant be. not yet return from carthagene, since the first alarm they take of our be there as we be, go aboard our pinnace from these storehouse, sept 10.. the indian of a great town call villa rey, some 2. mile distant from the water side where we land, be bring down by the spaniard into the bush and shoot their arrow, but we row down the stream with the current, for that the wind be against we only one league. and because down by the spaniard into the bush and shoot their arrow, but we row down the stream with the current, for that the wind be against we only one league. and because it be night, anchor till the morning when we row down to the mouth of the river where we unlade all our provision and cleanse our pinnace according to our captain custom, and take it in again and the same day go to the westward. in this return, we descry a ship, a bark and a frigate, of which the ship and frigate go for carthagene, but the bark be bind to the northwards, with the wind easterly, so that we imagine she have some gold or treasure go for spain. therefore, we give her chase. for carthagene but the bark be bind to the northwards, with the wind easterly, so that we imagine she have some gold or treasure. go for spain. therefore, we give her chase but take she and find nothing of importance in she understand that she be bind for sugar and hides. we let she go and have a good gale of wind, continue our former course to our ship and company. in the way between carthagene and tolou, we take five or six frigate which be lade from tolou sept 11.. with live hog hen and maiz which we call guynie wheat. of these have, get what intelligence they can give of their preparation for we and diverse opinion of we. we dismiss all the man, only stay. maiz which we call guynie wheat. of these have, get what intelligence they can give of their preparation for we and diverse opinion of we. we dismiss all the man, only stay two frigate with we because they be so well store with good victual. within three day after we arrive at the place which our captain choose at first to leave his ship in which be call by our company, p^r^, plenty by reason, we bring in thither, continual, all manner store of good victual which we take. go that way by sea for the victual of carthagene and nombre, as also the fleet go and come out of spain so that if we have be two thousand, yea three thousand person, we may with our pinnace. victual of carthagene and nombre, as also the fleet, go and come out of spain so that, if we have be two thousand, yea three thousand person, we may, with our pinnace, easy have, provide they sufficient victual of wine meal, ruske cassavy, a kind of bread make of a root call yucca, who juice be poison, but the substance good and wholesome. dry beef, dry fish, live sheep, live hog, abundance of hen, beside the infinite store of dainty, fresh fish, very easy to be take every day, insomuch that we be force to build four several magazine or storehouse, some ten, some 20.. league a sunder, some in land, some in the main, provide ourselves in diverse place that though, the enemy shall with force surprise. four, several magazine or storehouse, some ten, some 20.. league a sunder, some in land, some in the main, provide ourselves in diverse place that though the enemy shall with force surprise any one yet we may be sufficient furnish till we have make our voyage, as we do hope. in building of these our negro help be very much, as have a special skill in the speedy erection of such house, this our store, be such as thereby we relieve not only ourselves and the symeron while they be with we, but also two french ship in extreme want, for, in our absence, captain john drake, have one of our pinnace as be appoint, go in with the main and, as he row a loof, the shore. ship in extreme want. for, in our absence, captain john drake have one of our pinnace as be appoint, go in with the main and, as he row a loof, the shore where he be, direct by diego the negro aforesaid which willing, come unto we at he espy, certain of the symeron with who he deal, so effectual that, in conclusion, he leave two of our man with their leader and bring aboard two of. they agree that they shall meet he again the next day at a river midway between the cabezas and our ship which they name rio diego. these two be very sensible man choose out by their commander, do, with all reverence and respect, declare unto our captain that their nation conceive great. ship which they name rio diego. these two be very sensible man choose out by their commander. do, with all reverence and respect, declare unto our captain that their nation conceive great joy of his arrival, because they know he to be a enemy to the spaniard, not only by his late be in but also by his former voyage, and therefore be ready to assist and favour his enterprise against he and their enemy, to the uttermost. and to that end, their captain and company do stay at this present, near the mouth of rio diego, to attend what answer and order shall be give they that they will have march by land even to this place, but that the way be very long and more troublesome. diego to attend. what answer and order shall be give they that they will have march by land even to this place, but that the way be very long and more troublesome by reason of many steep, mountain, deep river and thick brake. desire, therefore, that it may please our captain to take some order as he think best, with all convenient speed, in this behalf. our captain consider the speech of these person and weigh it with his former intelligence have, not only by negro but spaniard also, whereof he be always very careful, as also confer it with his brother, information of the great kindness that they show. he be late with they after he have hear the opinion of those of best service with he. also confer it with his brother information of the great kindness that they show. he be late with they. after he have hear the opinion of those of best service with he, what be fit to be do present, resolve himself, with his brother and the two symeron in his two pinnace, to go towards this river as he do. the fame evening give order that the ship and the rest of his fleet shall the next morning follow he, because there be a place of as great safety and sufficiency which his brother have find out near the river. the safety of it consist not only in that which be common all along that coast, from tolou to be above sixty league, that it be a most out near the river. the safety of it consist not only in that which be common all along that coast, from tolou to be above sixty league, that it be a most goodly and plentiful country and yet inhabit not with one spaniard or any for the spaniard, but especial in that it lie among a great many of goodly land full of tree, where though there be channel, yet there be such rock and shoal that no man can enter by night without great danger, nor by day without discovery, whereas our ship may lie hide within the tree, sept 14.. the next day we arrive at this river appoint where we find the symeron, according to promise, the rest of their number be a mile up. hide within the tree, sept 14.. the next day we arrive at this river appoint where we find the symeron. according to promise, the rest of their number be a mile up in a wood by the river side there. after we have give they entertainment and receive good testimony of their joy and good will towards we, we take two more of they into our pinnace, leave our two man with the rest of they to march by land to another river call rio guana, with intent there to meet with another company of symeron which be now in the mountain. so we depart that day from rio diego with our pinnace towards our ship. as marvel that she follow we not as be appoint, but two. which be now in the mountain. so we depart that day from rio diego with our pinnace towards our ship as marvel that she follow. we not as be appoint, but two day after we find she in the place where we leave she, but in far other state, sept 16. be, much spoil and in great danger by reason of a tempest she have in our absence. as soon as we can trim our ship, sept 18. be, some two day, our captain send away one of his pinnace towards the bottom of the bay, among the shoal and sandy land, to sound out the channel for the bring in of our ship near the main. the next day we follow and be with wary pilotage, direct. among the shoal and sandy land to sound out the channel for the bring in of our ship near the main. the next day we follow and be, with wary pilotage, direct safe into the best channel, sept 19, with much ado to recover the road among so many flat and shoal. it be near about five league from the cativaa betwixt a island and the main where we moar our ship. the island be not above four cable length from the main. be in quantity some three acre of ground flat and very full of tree and bush. we be force to spend the best part of three day after our departure from our port plenty, sept 22.. before we be quiet in this new-found road, sept. tree and bush, we be force to spend the best part of three day after our departure from our port plenty, sept 22.. before we be quiet in this new-found road, sept 23. which we have but new enter when our two man and the former troop of simeron, with twelve other who they have meet in the mountain, come in sight, over against our ship on the main, whence we fetch they all aboard to their great comfort and our content. they rejoice that they shall have some fit opportunity to wreak their wrong on the spaniard. we hope that now our voyage shall be better. at our first meeting, when our captain have move they to show he the mean which they have to furnish he. the spaniard. we hope that now our voyage shall be better. at our first meeting, when our captain have move they to show he the mean which they have to furnish he with gold and silver. they answer plain, that have they know gold have be his desire they can have, satisfy he with store which for the present they can not do because the river in which they have sink great store which they have take from the spaniard rather to despite they then, for love of gold, be now so high that they can not get it out of such depth for he, and because the spaniard, in these rainy month, do not use to carry their treasure by land. this answer, although it be somewhat not get it out of such depth for he, and because the spaniard, in these rainy month, do not use to carry their treasure by land. this answer, although it be somewhat unlooked for, yet nothing discontent we, but rather persuade we far of their honest and faithful meaning. towards we therefore, our captain to entertain these five month, command all our ordinance and artillery, a shore with all our other provision, send his pinnace to the main to bring over great tree, to make a fort upon the same island, for the plant of all our ordinance therein and for our safeguard, if the enemy in all this time shall chance to come. sept 24. our symeron cut down palmi^o, bough and branch, and with wonderful speed. our ordinance therein and for our safeguard, if the enemy in all this time shall chance to come, sept 24.. our symeron cut down palmi^o bough and branch and with wonderful speed raise up two large house for all our company. our fort be then make, by reason of the place, triangle wise, with main timber and earth of which the trench yield we good store, so that we make it thirteen foot in height, octob 7.. but after we have continue upon this island fourteen day, our captain have determine, with three pinnace, to go for carthagene, leave his brother, john drake, to govern these who remain behind with the symeron to finish the fort which he have begin, for which he appoint he to fetch board. for carthagene, leave his brother, john drake, to govern these who remain behind with the symeron to finish the fort which he have begin, for which he appoint he to fetch, board and plank as many as his pinnace will carry from the prize which we take at rio grand, and leave all the cativaa, where she drive a shore and wrack in our absence, but now she may serve very commodious to supply our use in make platform for our ordinance. thus our captain and his brother take their leave, the one to the eastward and the other to the cativaa. that night we come to a i will which he call spurkite island, because we find there great store of such a kind a bird in. and the other to the cativaa. that night we come to a i will which he call spurkite island because we find there great store of such a kind a bird, in shape but very delicate, of which we kill and roast. many stay there till the next day midnoone when we depart, thence, octo 8.. and about four a clock, recover a big island in our way where we stay all night by reason that there be great store of fish and especial of a great kind of shellfish of a foot long, we call they whelk. the next morning we be clear of these land and shoales and hale off into the sea, octo 9, about four. day after, near the land of saint barnard, octo. they whelk. the next morning we be clear of these land and shoales and hale off into the sea, octo 9, about four day after, near the land of saint barnard, octo 13.. we chase two frigate a shore, oct 14, 15.. and recover one of the land, make our abode there some two day to wash our pinnace and take of the fish. thence we go towards tolou, octo 16.. and that day land near the town in a garden where we find certain indian who deliver we their bow and arrow and gather for we such fruit as the garden do yield be many sort of dainty fruit and root still content they. for that we receive our captain principal intent in take this and other we such fruit as the garden do yield, be many sort of dainty fruit and root, still content they. for that we receive our captain principal intent in take this and other place, by the way, not be for any other cause but only to learn true intelligence of the state of the country and of the fleet. hence we depart present and row towards charesha, the island of carthagene, and enter in at bocha chica. and have the wind large, we sail in towards the city and let fall our grapper betwixt the island and the main, right over against the goodly garden island, in which our captain will not suffer. we to land, notwithstanding our importunate desire because he know it may be dangerous for that. the main right over against the goodly garden island, in which our captain will not suffer. we to land, notwithstanding our importunate desire, because he know it may be dangerous for that, they be wont to send soldier thither when they know any man of war upon the coast which we find according, for within three hour after pass by the point of the island, we have a volley of a hundred shot from they, and yet there be but one of. our man hurt octo 17.. this evening we depart to sea and the day follow be some two league off the harbour. we take a bark and find that the captain and his wife, with the better sort of the passenger, have forsake she and be. follow be some two league off the harbour. we take a bark and find that the captain and his wife, with the better sort of the passenger, have forsake she and be go a shore in their gundeloe by occasion, whereof we board without resistance, though they be very well provide with sword and target and some small shott beside four iron base. she be about fifty tun, have ten mariner, five or six negro great store of soap and sweet meat bind from saint domingo to carthagene. this captain leave behind he a silk, ancient with his arm, as may be think, in hasty depart octo 1g. the next day, we send all the company a shore to seek their master, save a young negrito of three. with his arm, as may be think. in hasty depart octo 1g. the next day we send all the company a shore to seek their master, save a young negrito of three or four year old which we bring away but keep the bark and in she bear into the mouth of carthagene harbour where we anchor. that afternoon certain horseman come down to the point by the wood side and with the scrivano forementioned come towards our bark with a flag of truce, desire of our captain, safe conduct for his come and go, the which be grant he come aboard. we give our captain great thanks for his manifold favour etc. promise that night before day break to bring asmuch victual as they will desire what which be grant he come aboard. we give our captain great thanks for his manifold favour etc. promise that night before day break to bring asmuch victual as they will desire, what shift so ever he make or what danger soever he incur of law and punishment. but this fall out to be nothing but a device of the governor force upon the scrivano to delay time till they may provide ethemselue of sufficient strength to entrap we, for which this fellow, by his smooth speech, be think a fit mean octo 19, so by sun rise when we perceive his word but word, we put to sea, to the westward of the island, some three league off where we lie at hull, the rest of all that. rise when we perceive his word. but word, we put to sea to the westward of the island, some three league off, where we lie at hull the rest of all that day and night. the next day in the afternoon, octo 20.. there come out of carthagene two frigate bind for saint domingo, the one of fifty, the other of twelve ton have nothing in they but ballast. we take they within a league of the town and come to anchor with they within saker, short of the east bulwark. there be in those frigate some twelve or thirteen common mariner which entreat to be set a shore. to they our captain give the great frigate gundelow and dismiss they the next morning when they come down. some twelve or thirteen common mariner which entreat to be set a shore. to they, our captain, give the great frigate gundelow and dismiss they the next morning when they come down to the wester point with a flag of truce, octo 21.. our captain man one of his pinnace and row a shore. when we be within a cable length of the shore, the spaniard flee hide themselves in the wood as be afraid of our ordinance. but indeed, to draw we on to land confident and to presume of our strength, our captain command the grapnel to be cast out of the stern veer the pinnace a shore, and assoon as she touch the sand. he alone leap ashore in their sight to declare that he. the grapnel to be cast out of the stern veer, the pinnace, a shore, and assoon as she touch the sand. he alone leap ashore in their sight to declare that he dare set his foot a land, but stay not among they, to let they know that though he have not sufficient force to conquer they yet, he have sufficient judgement to take heed of they and therefore perceive their intent. assoon as our captain be aboard, we hale off upon our grapner and rid a while they present, come forth upon the sand and send a youth, as with a message from the governor, to know what our intent be to stay thus upon the coast. our captain answer. he mean to traffic with they, for. send a youth, as with a message from the governor, to know what our intent be to stay thus upon the coast. our captain answer he mean to traffic with they, for he have tin, pewter, cloth and other merchandise that they need. the youth swim back again with this answer and be present, return with another message that the king have forbid to traffic with any foreign nation for any commodity except powder and shot, of which, if he have any store they will be his merchant. he answer that he be come from his country to exchange his commodity for gold and silver and be not purpose to return without his errand. they be like, in his opinion, to have little rest, if that by fair. country to exchange his commodity for gold and silver and be not purpose to return without his errand. they be like, in his opinion, to have little rest, if that by fair mean they will not traffic with he. he give this messenger a fair shirt for a reward and so return he who roll his shirt about his head and swim very speedy. we hear no answer all that day and therefore towards night we go aboard our frigate and repose ourselves, set and keep very orderly all that night our watch with great and small shot. the next morning the wind, which have be westerly in the evening, alter to the eastward about the dawn of the day. we espy two sail turn towards we where. small shot. the next morning, the wind, which have be westerly in the evening, alter to the eastward about the dawn of the day. we espy two sail, turn towards we, where upon our captain weigh with his pinnace, leave the two frigate unman. but when we be come somewhat nigh they, the wind calm, and we be fain to row towards they. till that approach very nigh, we see many head peer over board. for as we perceive, these two frigate be man and set forth out of carthagene to fight with we and at least to impeach or busy we, whilst by some mean or other they may recover the frigate from we but our captain prevent both their drift. for command john oxnam to stay. least to impeach or busy we, whilst by some mean or other they may recover the frigate from we, but our captain prevent both their drift. for command john oxnam to stay with the one pinnace to entertain these two man of war, himself in the other, make such speed that he gate to his frigate which he have leave at anchor and cause the spaniard who in the mean time have get aboard in a small canow, think to have tow they, within the danger of their shot, to make great haste thence than they do thither, for he find that in shift thence some of they be fain to swim a land the canow not be able to receive they and have leave their apparel some. do thither. for he find that in shift thence, some of they be fain to swim a land, the canow not be able to receive they and have leave their apparel, some their rapier and target some their flask and calliver behind they, although they be tow away of one of they. therefore consider that we can not man they. we sink the one and burn the other. give they to understand by this that we perceive their secret practice. this be do. he return to john oxnam, octo 22.. who all this while lie by the man of war, without proffer of fight and assoon as our captain be come up to these frigate, the wind blow much from the sea so that we be betwixt the the man of war, without proffer of fight, and assoon as our captain be, come up to these frigate. the wind blow much from the sea, so that we be betwixt the shore and they be in a manner force to bear room into the harbour before they, to the great joy of the spaniard who behold it in suppose that we will still have flee before they. but assoon, as we be in the harbour and feel smooth water, our pinnace as we be assure of get the wind, we fight with they upon the advantage so that after a few shoot exchange and a storm rise, they be content to press no near. therefore, as they let fall their anchor, we present let drop our grapner. advantage, so that after a few shoot exchange and a storm rise, they be content to press no near. therefore, as they let fall their anchor, we present, let drop our grapner in the wind of. they, which the spanish soldier see, consider the disadvantage of the wind, the likelihood of the storm to continue and small hope of do any good. they be glad to retire themselves to the town, but by reason of the foul and tempestuous weather we ride there four day, feel great cold, by reason we have such sore reins with westerly wind and so little succour in our pinnace, octo 27.. the five day after there come in a frigate from the sea which see we make towards, she run herself a. westerly wind and so little succour in our pinnace, octo 27.. the five day after there come in a frigate from the sea which see we make towards she, run herself a shore, unhang her rudder and take away her sail that she may not easy be carry away. but when we be come up to she we perceive about a hundred horse and foot with their furniture, come down to the point of the main where we interchange some shot with they, one of our great short past, so near a brave cavalier of they, that thereby they be occasion to advise themselves and retreat into the wood where they may sufficient defend and rescue the frigate from we and annoy we also if we stay long. that thereby they be occasion to advise themselves and retreat into the wood where they may sufficient defend and rescue the frigate from we and annoy we also if we stay long about she. therefore, we conclude to go to sea again, put forth through with intent to take down our mast upon hope of fair wether and to ride under the rock. call las, which be two league off at sea, as we have usual do aforetime, so that they can not deserve we from the rock, but there the sea be so mighty grow that we be force to take the harbour again, where we remain six day, notwithstanding the spaniard grieve great at our abode there. so long, nouem. 2. put a other device in. that we be force to take the harbour again, where we remain six day, notwithstanding the spaniard grieve great at our abode there. so long, nouem 2. put a other device in practice to endanger we, for they send forth a great shallop, a fine gundeloe and a great canow, with certain spaniard with shott and many indian with poison arrow, as it seem, with intent to begin some fight and then to fly for assoon. as we row towards they and interchange shot they present, retire and go a shore into the wood where a ambush of some sixty shot be lay for we, beside two pinnace and a frigate warp towards we which be man as the rest they attteme. we, very bold, be assist by ambush of some sixty shot. be lay for we beside two pinnace and a frigate warp towards we which be man as the rest they attteme we very bold, be assist by those other which from out of the wood have get aboard the gondola and canow and see we bear from they which we do in respect of the ambuscado. they encourage themselves and assure their fellow of the day. but our captain, weigh this their attempt and be out of danger of their shot from the land, command his other pinnace to be, bring a head of he and to let fall their grapner, each a head the other, environ both the pinnace with bonnet as for a close fight, and then wheaved they aboard he. a head of he and to let fall their grapner, each a head the other environ, both the pinnace with bonnet. as for a close fight, and then wheaved they aboard he, they keep themselves upon their oar at calliver, shoot distance, spend powder apace as we do some two or three hour. we have one of our man only wound in that fight. what they have be unknow to we, but we see their pinnace shoot through in diverse place and the powder of one of they take on fire, whereupon we weigh, intend to bear room to overrun they, which they perceive and think that we will have board they row away amain to the defence which they have in the wood, the rather, because they bear room to overrun they which they perceive and think that we will have board. they row away amain to the defence which they have in the wood, the, rather, because they be disappoint of their help that they expect from the frigate which be warp towards we, but by reason of the much wind that blow can not come to offend we or succour. they thus see that we be still molest and no hope remain of any purchase to be have in this place any long, because we be now so notable make know in those part and because our victual grewv scant as soon as the weather wax somewhat better. the wind continue, always westerly, so that we can not return to our ship, our in those part, and because our victual grewv scant as soon as the weather wax somewhat better, the wind continue, always westerly, so that we can not return to our ship, our captain think best to go to the eastward, towards rio, grand nou 3.. alongst the coast where we have be before and find great store of victual nou 5.. but when, after two day sail we be, arrive at the village of store where before we have furnish ourselves with abundance of hen, sheep, calf, hog, etc. now we find bare nothing, not so much as any people leave for that. they, by the spaniard commandment be, flee to the mountain and have drive away all their cattle that we may not be relieve by they. much as any people leave for that they, by the spaniard commandment be flee to the mountain and have drive away all their cattle. that we may not be relieve by they. herewith be very sorry because much of our victual in our pinnace be spoil by the foul weather at sea and reins in harbour, a frigate be descry at sea. revive we and put we in some hope for the time that in she we shall find sufficient, and thereupon it may easy be guess how much we labour to recover she. but when we have board she and understand that she have neither meat nor money but that she be bind for rio grand to take in provision upon bill, our great hope convert into. we have board she and understand that she have neither meat nor money but that she be bind for rio grand to take in provision upon bill, our great hope convert into grief. we endure with our allowance seven or eight day more, proceed to the eastward and bear room for santa martha, upon hope to find some ship in the road or limpet on the rock or succour against the storm in that good harbour be. arrive and see no ship. we anchor under the wester point where be high land and, as we think, free safety from the town which be in the bottom of the bay. not intend to land there because we know that it be fortify and that they have intelligence of we. free safety from the town which be in the bottom of the bay, not intend to land there because we know that it be fortify and that they have intelligence of we. but the spaniard know we to be man of war and mislike that we shall shroud under their rock without their leave, have convey some thirty or forty shot among the cliff which annoy we so spiteful and so unrevenged. for that they lay hide behind the rock, but we lie open to they that we be soon weary of our harbour and enforce for all the storm without and want within to put to sea which though these enemy of we be well content withal. yet for a farewell as we come open of the. for all the storm without and want within to put to sea, which though these enemy of we be well content withal. yet for a farewell, as we come open of the town, they send we a culuerine shoot which make a near escape, for it fall between our pinnace. as we be upon conference of what be best to be, do the company advise that, if it please he, they may put themselves a land some place to the eastward to get victual and rather hope for courtesy of the countrypeople then continue at sea in so long, cold and great a storm, in so leak a pinnace. but our captain will in no wise like of that advice. he think it better to bear up towards. in so long cold and great a storm in so leak a pinnace. but our captain will in no wise like of that advice. he think it better to bear up towards rio de haca or coricao with hope there to have plenty without great resistance, because he know either the land be not very populous or else it be very likely that there will be find ship of victual in a readiness. the company of the other pinnace answer that they will willing follow he through the world. but in this they can not see how either their pinnace shall live in that sea without be eat up in that storm or they themselves able to endure so long time with so slender provision as they have. how either their pinnace shall live in that sea without be eat up in that storm, or they themselves able to endure so long time with so slender provision as they have, viz only one gammon of bacon and thirty pound of biscuit for eighteen man. our captain reply that they be better provide then himself be who have but one gammon of bacon and forty pound of biscuit for his twenty four man. and therefore, he doubt not. but they will take such part as he do and willing depend upon god almighty providence, which never fail they that trust in he. with that he hoist his foresail and set his course for coricao, which the rest perceive with sorrowful heart in respect of the weak pinnace. never fail they that trust in he. with that, he hoist his foresail and set his course for coricao, which the rest perceive with sorrowful heart in respect of the weak pinnace yet desirous to follow their captain consent to take the same course. we have not sail past three league, but we have espy, a sail ply to the westward with her two corpse, to our great joy, who vow together that we will have she, or else it shall cost we dear bear with she. we find she to be a spanish ship of above ninty tun, which be wheaved a main by. we despise our summons and shoot off her ordinance at we the sea go very high so that it be not for we. above ninty tun which be wheaved a main by. we despise our summons and shoot off her ordinance at we. the sea go very high, so that it be not for we to attempt to board she, and therefore we make fit small sail to attend upon she and keep her company to her small content, till fair weather may lay the sea. we spend not pass two hour in our attendance till it please god, after a great shewr, to send we a reasonable calm so that we may use our piece and approach she at pleasure, in such sort that in short time we have take, she find she lade with victual well, powder and dry, which at that present we receive as send we of. at pleasure, in such sort that in short time we have take, she find she lade with victual well, powder and dry, which at that present we receive as send we of god great mercy. after all thing be set in order and that the wind increase towards night, we ply off and on till day. at what time our captain send in edward hixom, nou 13.. who have then charge of his pinnace to search out some harbour along the coast, who have find out a little one, some ten or twelve league to the east of santa martha, where in sound he have good ground and sufficient water, present return and our captain bring in his new prize, then, by promise, liberty and all their apparel. east of santa martha where in sound he have good ground and sufficient water present. return and our captain bring in his new prize. then, by promise liberty and all their apparel to the spaniard which we have take if they will bring we to water and fresh victual, the, rather, by their mean we obtain of the inhabitant indian what they have, which be plentiful. these indian be clothe and govern by a spaniard which dwell in the next town not past a league off. we stay there all day, water and wood and provide thing necessary by give content and satisfaction to the indian. but towards night our captain call all of we aboard, only leave the spaniard late. take in the prize ashore, according to. thing necessary by give content and satisfaction to the indian. but towards night, our captain call all of we aboard, only leave the spaniard late. take in the prize ashore, according to our promise, make they to their great content. who acknowledge that our captain do they a far great favour in set they free at liberty than he have do they displeasure in take their ship and so set sail. the sickness, which have begin to kindle among two or three day before, do this day show itself in charles glub, one of our quarter-master, a very tall man and a right, good mariner. take away, to the great grief both of captain and company, what the cause of this malady be, we know, nor of certainty. a very tall man and a right good mariner, take away, to the great grief both of captain and company. what the cause of this malady be, we know, nor of certainty we impute it to the cold which our man have take lie without succour in the pinnace. but howsoever it be thus, it please god to visit we and yet, in favour, to restore unto health all the rest of our company that be touch with this disease, which be not a few nouem 15.. the next morning be fair weather, though the wind continue contrary. our captain command the minion, his lesser pinnace, to hasten away before he, towards his ship at fort diego, within the cabeca, to carry news of his come and to continue. contrary. our captain command the minion, his lesser pinnace, to hasten away before he, towards his ship at fort diego, within the cabeca, to carry news of his come and to put all thing in a readiness for our land journey. if they hear any thing of the fleet arrival by the simeron, give the minion charge if they want wine to take saint bernard in their way and there take in some such portion as they think good of the wine which we have there hide in the sand, nouem 22.. we ply to windward as near as we can so that within a seven-night after the minion depart from we, we come to saint barnard where we stay many hour, find but twelve botijos of. windward as near as we can, so that within a seven-night after the minion depart from we, we come to saint barnard where we stay many hour, find but twelve botijos of wine of all the store we leave, which have escape the curious search of the enemy who have be there for that. they be deep in the ground within four or five day after nou 27.. we come to our ship where we find all other thing in good order but receive very heavy news of the death of john drake, our captain brother, and another young man call richard allen, which be both slay at one time as they attempt the board of a frigate within two day after our depart from they. the manner. and another young man call richard allen, which be both slay at one time as they attempt the board of a frigate within two day after our depart from they. the manner of it, as we learn by examination of the company, be this: when they see this frigate at sea as they be go towards their fort with plank to make the platform, the company be very importunate on he to give chase and set upon this frigate which they deem have be a fit booty for they. but he tell they that they want weapon to assail. they know not how the frigate be provide they have their boat load with plank to finish that. his brother have command, but when this will not satisfy they weapon to assail. they know not how the frigate be provide. they have their boat load with plank to finish that, his brother have command. but when this will not satisfy they, but that still they, urge he with word and supposal: if you will needs, say he, adventure, it shall never be. say that i will be hindmost. neither shall you report to my brother that you lose your voyage by any cowardice you find in i, thereupon, every man shift as they may for the time and heave their plank over board. take they such poor weapon as they have, viz a break point rapier, one old visgee and a rusty caliver i^hn drake. take the rapier and make a gauntlet of his pillow, richard allen. such poor weapon as they have, viz a break point rapier, one old visgee and a rusty caliver. i^hn drake. take the rapier and make a gauntlet of his pillow. richard allen the visgee, both stand in the head of the pinnace. call the eirn robert, take the caliver and so board. but they find the frigate arm round about with a close fight of hide, full of pike and caliver which be discharge in their face and deadly wound those that be in the foreship, john drake in the belly and richard allen in the head. but notwithstanding their wound, they, with oar, shift off the pinnace, get clear of the frigate and with all haste recover their ship where, within a hour after, this young man, head. but notwithstanding their wound, they, with oar, shift off the pinnace, get clear of the frigate and with all haste recover their ship where, within a hour after this young man of great hope end his day, great lament of all the company thus have moar our ship. fast, our captain resolve to keep himself close without be descry until he may hear of the come of the spanish fleet and therefore set no more to sea but supply his want both for his own company and the symeron out of his foresay magazine, beside daily, out of the wood with wild hog pheasant, and continue in health. god be praise. all the mean time, which be a month at least, till at length about the begin. daily out of the wood with wild hog pheasant and continue in health. god be praise all the mean time, which be a month at least, till at length, about the begin of january ^an 3.. half a score of our company fall down sick together, and the most of they die within two or three day, so long that we have thirty at a time, sick of this calenture which attach our man, either by reason of the sudden change from cold to heat or by reason of brackish water, which have be take in by one pinnace through the sloth of their man in the mouth of the river, not row further in where the water be good. among the rest, joseph drake, another of his. by one pinnace through the sloth of their man in the mouth of the river, not row further in where the water be good. among the rest, joseph drake, another of his brethren, die in our captain arm of the same disease, of which that the cause may be the better discern and consequent remedy, to the relief of other. by our captain appointment, he be rip open by the surgeon who find his liver swell, his heart as it be sodden and his gut all fair. this be the first and last experiment that our captain make of anatomy in this voyage. the surgeon that cut he up over-lived, he not past four day, although he be not touch with that sickness of which he have be. captain make of anatomy in this voyage. the surgeon that cut he up, over-lived he not past four day, although he be not touch with that sickness of which he have be recover above a month before, but only of a overbold practice which he will needs make upon himself by receive a overstrong purgation of his own device, after which take he never speak, nor his boy recover the health which he lose by taste it till he see england, the symeron who, as be beforesaid, have be entertain by our captain in september last, and usual repair to our ship during all the time of our absence, range the country up and down between de dios and we to learn what they may. for we, whereof? and usual repair to our ship during all the time of our absence, range the country up and down between de dios and we to learn what they may for we, whereof they give our captain advertisement from time to time, as now particular certain of they, let he understand that the fleet be certain. arrive at de dios. therefore, he send the lion jan 30. to the seamost island of the cativaa to descry the truth of the report. by reason it must needs be that if the fleet be in all, the frigate of the country will repair thitherwards with victual the lion within few day, descry that she be, send for espy a frigate which she present, board and take lade with maiz hen and the country will repair thitherwards with victual the lion within few day. descry that she be send for espy a frigate which she present board and take lade with maiz, hen and pompion from tolou who assure we of the whole truth of the arrival of the fleet. in this frigate be take one woman and twelve man, of who one be the scrivano of tolou. these we use very courteous. keep they diligent guard from the deadly hatred of the symeron who seek daily by all mean they can to get they of our captain that they may cut their throat to revenge their wrong and injury which the spanish nation have. do they but our captain, persuade they not to touch they or they ill countenance. that they may cut their throat to revenge their wrong and injury which the spanish nation have do they. but our captain persuade they not to touch they or they ill countenance while they be in his charge and take order for their safety, not only in his presence but also in his absence. for when he have prepare to take his journey for panama by land, he give edward hixom charge of his own ship and company, and especial of those spaniard who he have put into the great prize which be hale a shore to the island which we term slaughter island because so many of our man die there and use as a store-house for ourselves and a prison for our enemy. all thing thus. to the island which we term slaughter island because so many of our man die there and use as a store-house for ourselves and a prison for our enemy. all thing thus: order our captain, confer with his company and the chief of the symeron what provision be to be prepare for this great and long journey, what kind of weapon, what store of victual and what manner of apparel be. especial advise to carry as great store of shoe as possible he may, by reason of so many river with stone and gravel as they be to pass. which according provide, prepare his company for that journey. 3 enter it upon shrove-tuesday. at what time there have die twenty eight of our man and a few whole. be to pass which according provide, prepare his company for that journey. 3 enter it upon shrove-tuesday, at what time there have die twenty eight of our man and a few whole man be leave aboard with edward hixom to keep the ship and tend the sick and guard the prisoner at his departure. our captain give this master straight charge, in any case not to trust any messenger that shall come in his name with any token, unless he bring his hand write which he know can not be counterfeit by the symeron or spaniard. we be in all forty eight, of which eighteen only be english, the rest be symeron, which beside their arm bear, every one of they, a great quantity of victual and provision. we be in all forty, eight, of which eighteen only be english, the rest be symeron- which beside their arm bear, every one of they, a great quantity of victual and provision supply, our want of carriage in so long a march so that we be not trouble with any thing but our furniture, and because they can not carry enough to suffice we altogether. therefore, as they promise before, so, by the way, with their arrow they provide for we competent store. from time to time they have, every one of they, two sort of arrow: the one to defend himself and offend the enemy, the other to kill his victual. these for fight be somewhat like the scotish arrow, only somewhat long and head with iron. arrow, the one to defend himself and offend the enemy, the other to kill his victual. these for fight be somewhat like the scotish arrow, only somewhat long and head with iron, wood or fishbones. but the arrow for provision be of three sort. the first serve to kill any great beast near hand, as ox, stag or wild boar. this have a head of iron of a pound and a half weight, shape in form like the head of a javelin or boar-spear, as sharp as any knife, make so large and deep a wound as can hardly be believe of he that have not see it. the second serve for lesser beast and have a head of three quarter of a pound. this he most usual. as can hardly be believe of he that have not see it. the second serve for lesser beast and have a head of three quarter of a pound. this he most usual shoot. the three serve for all manner of bird. it have a head of a ounce weight. and these head, though they be of iron only, yet be they so cunning temper that they will continue a very good edge a long time, and though they be turn sometime yet, they will never or seldom break the necessity in which they stand. hereof continual cause they to have iron in far great account than gold, and no man among they be of great estimation than he that can most perfect give this temper unto it every. cause they to have iron in far great account than gold, and no man among they be of great estimation than he that can most perfect give this temper unto it. every day we be march by sunrising. we continue till ten in the forenoon, then rest ever near some river till past twelve. we march till four, and then by some river side, we repose ourselves in such house as either we find prepare heretofore by they when they travel through these wood, or they daily build very ready for we in this manner assoon as we come to the place where we intend to lodge the symeron present, lay down their burden, fall to cut of fork or post and pole or rafter and palmito bough. as we come to the place where we intend to lodge the symeron present, lay down their burden, fall to cut of fork or post and pole or rafter and palmito bough or plantain leave and with great speed set up to the number of six house, for every of which they first fasten deep into the ground three or four great post with fork upon they. they lay one transome which be common about twenty foot, and make the side in the manner of the roof of our country house, thatch it close with those aforesaid leaf which keep out water long time. observe always that in the low ground, where great heat be, they leave some three or four foot open, unthatcht below, and make the aforesaid leaf which keep out water long time, observe always that in the low ground, where great heat be, they leave some three or four foot open unthatcht below and make the house, or rather roof, so many foot the high. but in the hill, where the air be more pierce and the night cold, they make our room always low and thatch. they close to the ground, leave only one door to enter at and a lover hole for a vent in the midst of the roof. in every of these they make four, several lodging and three fire, one in the midst and one at each end of every house so that the room be most temperate, warm and nothing annoy with smoke. partly by reason, lodging, and three fire, one in the midst and one at each end of every house so that the room be most temperate, warm and nothing annoy with smoke. partly by reason of the nature of the wood which they use to burn yield very little smoke, partly by reason of their artificial make of it as fire. the wood cut in length like our billet at the end and join they together so close that though no flame or fire do appear yet, the heat continue without intermission. near many of the river where we stay or lodge we find sundry sort of fruit which we may use with great pleasure and safety: temperate mammeas, pinos, orange, limb and diverse other from eat of which they dissuade. stay or lodge. we find sundry sort of fruit which we may use with great pleasure and safety- temperate mammeas, pinos, orange limb and diverse other from eat, of which they dissuade we in any case, unless we eat very few of they, and those first dry roast as potato and such like. in journey, as oft as by chance, they find any wild swine of which those hill and valley have s^ore, they will, ordinary, six at a time, deliver their burden to the rest of their fellow and pursue, kill and bring away after we as much as they can carry and time permit. one day, as we travel the symeron, find a otter and prepare it to be dress our captain marvel at it, pedro. we as much as they can carry and time permit. one day, as we travel, the symeron find a otter and prepare it to be dress, our captain marvel at it. pedro, our chief, symeron ask he be you a man of war, and in want, and yet doubt whether this be meat that have blood herewithal, our captain rebuke himself secret that he have so slight. consider of it before the three day of our journey, they bring we to a town of their own seat, near a fair river, on the side of a hill environ with a dike of eight foot broad and a thick mud wall of ten foot high. sufficient to stop a sudden surprise. it have one long and broad street lie. hill environ with a dike of eight foot broad and a thick mud wall of ten foot high, sufficient to stop a sudden surprise. it have one long and broad street lie east and west, and two other cross street of less breadth and length. there be in it some five or six and fifty household which be keep so clean and sweet that not only the house but the very street be very pleasant to behold. in this town we see they live very civil and clean for assoon. as they come thither they wash themselves in the river and change their apparel, which be very fine and fit make as also their woman do wear somewhat after the spanish fashion, though nothing so costly. this town themselves in the river and change their apparel, which be very fine and fit, make, as also their woman do wear, somewhat after the spanish fashion, though nothing so costly. this town be distant thirty five league from de dios and forty five from panama. it be plentiful store with many sort of beast and foul, with plenty of maiz and sundry fruit, touch their affection. in religion they have no kind of priest, only they hold the cross in great reputation, but at our captain persuasion they be content to leave their cross an^ to learn the lord prayer and to be instruct in some measure. concern god, true worship. they keep a continual watch in four part 3. mile off their town to prevent the mischief. learn the lord prayer and to be instruct in some measure, concern god true worship. they keep a continual watch in four part 3. mile off their town, to prevent the mischief which the spaniard intend against they by the conduct of some of their own coat, which have be take by the spaniard have be enforce thereunto, wherein, as we learn sometime, the spaniard have prevail over they, special when they live less careful. but since they, against the spaniard, who they kill like beast as often as they take they in the wood, have aforehand understand of their come, we stay with they that night, feb 7.. and the next day till noon, during which time they relate unto we diverse, very strange accident that have aforehand understand of their come. we stay with they that night, feb 7.. and the next day till noon, during which time they relate unto. we diverse, very strange accident that have fall out between they and the spaniard, namely one: a gallant gentleman, entertain by the governor of the country, undertake the year last pass with a hundred and fifty soldier to put this town to the sword. man, woman and child be conduct to it by one of they that have be take prisoner and win by great gift. he surprise it half a hour before day, by which occasion most of the man escape, but many of their woman and child be slaughter or take, but the same morning by sun rise after that, their hour before day, by which occasion most of the man escape, but many of their woman and child be slaughter or take, but the same morning, by sun rise, after that, their guide be slay in, follow another man, wife, and that the symeron have assemble themselves in their strength, they behave themselves in such sort and drive the spaniard to such extremity that, what with the disadvantage of the wood, have lose their guide and thereby their way, what with famine and want there, escape not pass thirty of they to return. answer to those which send they: their king dwell in a city within sixteen league southeast of panama, which be able to make one thousand seven hundred fight man. they all entreat our captain very. which send they their king, dwell in a city within sixteen league southeast of panama, which be able to make one thousand seven hundred fight man. they all entreat our captain very earnest, to make his abode with they some two or three day. promise that by that time they will double his strength if he think good. but he thank they for their offer. tell they that he can stay no long it be more than time to prosecute his purpose voyage. as for strength, he will wish no more than he have, although he may have present twenty time asmuch, which they take as proceed not only from kindness but also from magnanimity, and therefore they march forth that afternoon with great good. will this be? may have present twenty time asmuch, which they take as proceed not only from kindness but also from magnanimity, and therefore they march forth that afternoon with great good will this be the order of our march. four of those symeron that best know the way, go about a mile distance before we break bough as they go to be a direction to those that follow, but with great silence which they require we also to keep. then twelve of they be, as it be, our vanguard and other twelve our rearward. we, with their two captain in the midst all the way, be through wood, very cool and pleasant by reason of those goodly and high tree that grow there, so thick that it be cool travel. captain, in the midst all the way be through wood, very cool and pleasant by reason of those goodly and high tree that grow there, so thick that it be cool travel there under they in that hot region than it be in the most part of england in the summer time. this give a special encouragement unto we all that we understand there be a great tree about the midway from which we may at once discern the north sea from whence we come, and the south sea whether we be go feb 11.. the four day follow. we come to the height of the desire hill. a very high hill lie east and west like ridge a between the two sea, about ten of the clock. four day follow, we come to the height of the desire hill, a very high hill, lie east and west, like ridge a, between the two sea, about ten of the clock, where the chief of these, symeron, take our captain by the hand and pray he to follow he, if he be desirous to see at once the two sea which he have so long long for here, be that goodly. and great high tree in which they have cut and make diverse step to ascend up near unto the top, where they have also make a convenient bower wherein ten or twelve man may easy sit, and from thence we may without any difficulty plain see the atlantic ocean, whence now we come, and the south. make a convenient bower wherein ten or twelve man may easy sit and from thence we may without any difficulty plain see the atlantic ocean, whence now we come, and the south atlantic so much desire. south and north of this tree, they have fell certain tree that the prospect may be the clear and near about the tree, there be diverse strong house that have be build long before, aswell by other symeron as by these which usual pass that way as be inhabit in diverse place in those waste country. after our captain have ascend to this bower with the chief symeron and have, as it please god at that time, by reason of the breeze, a very fair day, have see that sea of which ascend to this bower with the chief symeron and have, as it please god, at that time, by reason of the breeze, a very fair day, have see that sea of which he have hear such golden report. he beseech almighty god of his goodness to give he life and leave to sail once in a english ship in that sea. and then call up all the rest of our man acquaint, john oxnam, especial with this, his petition and purpose, if it will please god to grant he that happiness, who, understanding it present, protest that unless our captain do beat he from his company, he will follow he by god grace. thus, all thorough satisfy with the sight of the sea, descend and after our repast, that unless our captain do beat he from his company, he will follow he by god grace. thus, all thorough satisfy with the sight of the sea descend and, after our repast, continue our ordinary march through wood, yet two day more, as before, without any great variety, feb 13.. but then we come to march in a champion country where the grass grow not only in great length, as the knotgrass grow in many place, but to such height that the inhabitant be fain to burn it thrice in the year, that it may be able to feed their cattle, of which they have thousand, for it be a kind of grass with a stalk as big as a great wheaten reed, which have a blade issue. able to feed their cattle, of which they have thousand, for it be a kind of grass with a stalk as big as a great wheaten reed, which have a blade issue from the top of it, on which, though, the cattle feed. yet it grow every day high, until the top be too high for a ox to reach than the inhabitant be wont put fire to it for the space of five or six mile together, which, notwithstanding, after it be thus burn, within three day spring up fresh like green corne, such be the great fruitfulness of the soil by reason of the eevennes of the day and night and the rich dew which fall every morning, feb 14.. in these three, last day, march, the great fruitfulness of the soil by reason of the eevennes of the day and night and the rich dew which fall every morning, feb 14.. in these three, last day, march in the champion, as we pass over the hill, we may see panama five or six time a day, and the last day we see the ship ride in the road, but after that we be come within a day journey of panama. our captain understand by the symeron that the dame of panama be wont to send forth hunter and fowler for take of sundry dainty foul which the land yield by who, if we march not very heedful, we may be descry, cause all his company to march out of all ordinary way and of sundry dainty foul which the land yield, by who, if we march not very heedful we may be, descry, cause all his company to march out of all ordinary way, and that with as great heed, silence and secrecy as possible they may, to the grove which be agree on four day before lie within a league of panama, where we may lie safe, undiscovered, near the high way that lead from thence to de dios. thence we send a choose symeron, one that have serve a master in panamah before time, in such apparel as the negro of panamah do use to wear to be our espial to go into the town to learn the certain night and time of the night when the carrier lade. as the negro of panamah do use to wear to be our espial, to go into the town to learn the certain night and time of the night when the carrier lade the treasure from the king treasure-house to de dios, for they be wont to take their journey from panama to venta cruz, which be six league ever, by night because the country be all champion and consequent, by day very hot, but from venta cruz to, as oft as they travel by land with their treasure, they travel always by day and not by night because all that way be full of wood and therefore very fresh and cool, unless the symeron happy encounter they and make they sweat with fear, as sometime they have do. night because all that way be full of wood and therefore very fresh and cool, unless the symeron happy encounter they and make they sweat with fear as sometime they have do, whereupon they be glad to guard their recoe with soldier as they pass that way this last day, our captain do behold and view the most of all that fair city, discern the large street which lie direct from the sea into the land, south and north. by three of the clock we come to this grove, pass for the more secrecy alongst a certain river which at that time be almost dry up, have dispose of ourselves in the grove. we dispatch our spy a hour before night so that by the close in of certain river which at that time be almost dry up, have dispose of ourselves in the grove. we dispatch our spy a hour before night so that by the close in of the evening he may be in the city. as he be whence present he return unto we that which, very happy. he understand by companion of he, that the treasurer of lima intend to pass into spain in the first adviso, which be a ship of three hundred and fifty tun. a very good sailor be ready that night to take his journey towards with his daughter and family, have fourteen moil in company, of which eight be load with gold and one with jewel, and far that there be two other reco of fifty moil. with his daughter and family, have fourteen moil in company, of which eight be load with gold and one with jewel, and far that there be two other reco of fifty moil, in each load with victual, for the most part with some little quantity of silver, to come forth that night after the other. there be twenty eight of these recas, the great of they be of seventy moil, the less of fifty, unless some particular man hire for himself ten, twenty or thirty as he have need. upon this notice, we forthwith march four league till we come within two league of venta cruz, in which march two of our symeron, which be send before by scent of his match, find and bring a spaniard who league till we come within two league of venta cruz, in which march two of our symeron, which be send before by scent of his match, find and bring a spaniard who they have find a sleep by the way by scent of the, say match, and draw near thereby, hear he take his breath as he sleep and be but one they fall upon he, stop his mouth from cry, put out his match and bind he so that they well near strangle he by that time he be bring unto we by, examine he. we find all that to be true which our spy have report to we, and that he be a soldier entertain with other by the treasurer for the guard and conduct of we find all that to be true, which our spy have report to we, and that he be a soldier, entertain with other by the treasurer for the guard and conduct of this treasure from venta cruz to de dios. this soldier have learn who our captain be, take courage and be bold to make two request unto he. the one that he will command his symeron, which hate the spaniard especial, the soldier extreme, to spare his life, which he doubt not, but they will do at his charge. the other, be that see he be a soldier and assure he that they shall have that night more gold beside jewel and pearl of great price than all they can carry, if not, than he be to. be a soldier and assure he that they shall have that night more gold beside jewel and pearl of great price than all they can carry. if not, than he be to be deal with how they will. but if they all find it so, than it may please our captain to give unto he as much as may suffice for he and his mistress to live upon, as he have hear our captain have do to diverse other, for which he will make his name as famous as any of they which have receive. like favour, be at the place, appoint our captain with half of his man lay on one side of the way, about fifty pace off in the long grass. john oxnam with the. favour, be at the place, appoint our captain, with half of his man lay on one side of the way, about fifty pace off in the long grass, john oxnam with the captain of the symeron, and the other half lay on the other side of the way at the like distance but so far behind that. as occasion serve, the former company may take the foremost moil by the head and the other the hindmost, because the moil tie together be always drive one after another, and especial that if we shall have need to use our weapon that night, we may be sure not to endamage our fellow. we have not lie thus in ambush much above a hour, but we hear the reco come both. use our weapon that night, we may be sure not to endamage our fellow. we have not lie thus in ambush much above a hour, but we hear the reco come both from the city to venta cruz and from venta cruz to the city, which have a very common and great trade. when the fleet be there, we hear they by reason. they delight much to have deep sound bell which in a still night be hear very far off. now though, there be as great charge give as may be that none of our man shall show or stir themselves, but let all that come from venta cruz to pass quiet. yea, their recos also because we know that they bring nothing but merchandise from thence. man shall show or stir themselves. but let all that come from venta cruz to pass quiet, yea, their recos also because we know that they bring nothing but merchandise from thence. yet one of our man call robert pike, have drunken too much without water, forget himself and entice a symeron forth with he be, go hard to the way with intent to have show his forwardness on the foremost moil. and when a cavalier from venta cruz, well mount with his page run at his stirrup, pass by unadvised. he rise up to see what he be. but the symeron of better discretion, pull he down and lay upon he that he may not discover they any more. yet by this the gentleman have take notice. what he be, but the symeron of better discretion. pull he down and lay upon he that he may not discover they any more. yet by this the gentleman have take notice by see one all in white, for that we have all put our shirt over our other apparel, that we may be sure to know our own man in the pell-mell in the night. by mean of this sight, the cavalier put spur to his horse, ride a false gallop, as desirous not only himself to be free of this doubt which he imagine, but also to give advertisement to other that they may avoid it. our captain, who have hear and observe, by reason of the hardness of the ground and stillness of the night, but also to give advertisement to other that they may avoid it. our captain, who have hear and observe, by reason of the hardness of the ground and stillness of the night, the change of this gentleman trot to a gallop, suspect that he be discover, but can not imagine by who fault, neither do the time give he leisure to search, and therefore consider that it may be. by reason of the danger of the place well know to ordinary traveller. we lay still in expectation of the treasurer come, who be by this time within half a league and have come forward to we but that this horseman meet he and, as we afterward learn by the other recoe, make report to he what he have. within half a league and have come forward to we but that this horseman meet. he and, as we afterward learn by the other recoe, make report to he what he have see present that night, what he hear of captain drake this long time and what he conjecture to be most likely, viz that the say captain drake or some for he, disappoint of his expectation of get any great treasure both at de dios and other place, be by some mean or other, come by land in covert through the wood unto this place to speed of his purpose and thereupon persuade he to turn his reco out of the way and let the other recoe which be come after to pass on. they be whole. to speed of his purpose and thereupon persuade he to turn his reco out of the way and let the other recoe which be come after to pass on. they be whole recoe and load, but with victual for the most part, so that the loss of they be far less if the worst befall. and yet they shall serve to discover they as well as the best. thus, by the recklessness of one of our company and by the carefulness of this traveller, we be disappoint of a most rich booty which, be to be think god will not shall be. take for that, by all likelihood it be well. get by that treasurer. the other two recoe be no soon come up to we but be think god will not shall be. take for that by all likelihood it be well. get by that treasurer. the other two recoe be no soon come up to we, but be stay and seize on one of the chief carrier, a very sensible fellow. tell our captain by what mean we be discover and counsel we to shift for ourselves betimes unless we be able to encounter the whole force of the city and country which before day will be about we. it please we but little that we be defeat of our golden recoe and that in these we can find not pass some two horseload of silver. but it grieve our captain much more that he be discover, and that by one of his own. and that in these we can find not pass some two horseload of silver. but it grieve our captain much more that he be discover, and that by one of his own man. but know it bootless to grieve at thing past and have learn by experience that all safety in extremity consist in take of time. after no long consultation with pedro, the chief of our symeron, who declare that there be but two way for he the one to travel back again the same secret way they come for four league space into the wood, or else to march forward by the high way to venta cruz, be two league and make a way with his sword through the enemy, he resolve. consider the long and wood, or else to march forward by the high way to venta cruz, be two league and make a way with his sword through the enemy. he resolve, consider the long and weary march that we have take, and chief that last evening and day before, to take now the short and ready way as choose, rather to encounter his enemy while he have strength remain, then to be encounter or chase when we shall be wear out with weariness. principal, now have the moil to ease they that will, some part of the way, therefore, command all to refresh themselves. moderate with such store of victual as we have there in abundance, he signify his resolution and reason to. they all. ask pedro by name whether he command all to refresh themselves, moderate, with such store of victual as we have there in abundance. he signify his resolution and reason to. they all. ask pedro by name whether he will give his hand, not to forsake he, because he know that the rest of the symeron will also then stand fast and firm. so faithful be they to their captain. he be very glad of his resolution. give our captain his hand and vow that he will rather die at his foot then leave he to the enemy if he hold this course. so have, strengthen ourselves for the time we take our journey towards venta cruz, with help of the moil, till we come within a mile of the town where we turn away. so have strengthen ourselves for the time we take our journey towards venta cruz with help of the moil, till we come within a mile of the town where we turn away the recoe, charge the conductor of they not to follow we upon pain of their life there. the way be cut through the wood about ten or twelve foot broad so as two recoe may pass one by another. the fruitfulness of the soil cause that with often shred and rid the way. those wood grow as thick as our hick hedge in england. that be often cut to the midst of this wood. a company of soldier which continual lie in that town to defend it against the symeron be come forth to stop we. that be often cut to the midst of this wood, a company of soldier which continual lie in that town to defend it against the symeron. be come forth to stop we, if they may, on the way, if not, to retreat to their strength and there to expect we, a convent of friar, of who one be become a leader. join with these soldier to take such as they do, our captain, understand by our two symeron which, with great heedfulness and silence, march now but about half a flightshot before we, that it be time for we to arm and take we to our weapon, for they know the enemy be at hand by smell of their match and hear of a noise. have give we. time for we to arm and take we to our weapon. for they know the enemy be at hand by smell of their match and hear of a noise, have give we charge that no one of we shall make any shot until the spaniard have first spend their volley, which he think they will not do before they have speak, as indeed fall out. for as soon as we be within hear a spanish captain cry aloud: hoo, our captain. answer he likewise, and be demand, reply englishman. but when the say commander, charge he in the name of the king of spain, his master, that we shall yield ourselves promise in the word and faith of a gentleman soldier that if we will so do he. in the name of the king of spain, his master, that we shall yield ourselves promise, in the word and faith of a gentleman soldier, that if we will so do he will use. we, with all courtesy, our captain, draw somewhat near. he say that for the honour of the queen of england, his mistress, he must have passage that way and therewithal discharge his pistol towards he. upon this they present, shoot off their whole volley which, though it light, wound our captain and diverse of our man, yet it cause death to one only of our company, call john harris, who be so powder with hailshot which they all use, for the most part, as it seem, or else quarter for that our man be. only of our company call john harris, who be so powder with hailshot, which they all use for the most part, as it seem, or else quarter for that, our man be hurt with that kind that we can not recover his life, though he continue all that day afterward, with we present, as our captain perceive their shot to come slack as the latter drop of a great shower of rain, with his whistle he give we his usual signal to answer they with our shot and arrow, and so march onward upon the enemy with intent to come to handistroke and to have join with they who, when he find retire as to a place of some better strength, he increase his pace to prevent they. with intent to come to handistroke and to have join with they who, when he find retire as to a place of some better strength, he increase his pace to prevent they, if he may, which the symeron perceive, although by terror of the shot, continue they be for the time, step a side. yet as soon as they discern by hear that we march onward, they all rush forward, one after another, traverse the way with their arrow ready in their bow and their manner of country dance or leap, very lusty, sing yo peho, yo peho, and so get before we where they continue their leap and song after the manner of their own country war, till they and we overtake some of the enemy who yo peho. and so get before we where they continue their leap and song after the manner of their own country war, till they and we overtake some of the enemy who, near the town end, have convey themselves within the wood to have take their stand at we as before. but our symeron now, thorough encourage when they see our resolution break in through the thicket on both side of they, force they to fly friar and all, although diverse, of our man be wound and one symeron especial, be run through with one of their pike who courage and mind serve he so well, notwithstanding that he revenge his own death ere he die by kill he that have give he that deadly wound, we with their pike, who courage and mind serve he so well, notwithstanding that he revenge his own death ere he die by kill, he that have give he that deadly wound. we with all speed, follow this chase, enter the town of venta cruz, be of about forty or fifty house which have both a governor and other officer, and some fair house with many storehouse, large and strong, for the ware which be bring thither from by the river of chagro so to be transport by moil to panama, beside the monastery where we find above a thousand bull and pardon new send thither from rome. in those house we find three gentlewoman which have late be deliver of child there though their dwell be in because it. a thousand bull and pardon new, send thither from rome. in those house we find three gentlewoman which have late be deliver of child there, though their dwell be in, because it have be observe of long time, as they report to we, that no spaniard or white woman can ever be deliver in with safety of their child but that within two or three day they die. notwithstanding that, be bear and bring up in this venta cruz or panama five or six year and then bring to, if they escape sickness the first or second month they common live in it as healthy as in any other place, although no stranger, as they say, can endure there any long time without great danger of death or second month they common live in it as healthy as in any other place, although no stranger, as they say, can endure there any long time without great danger of death or extreme sickness. though at our first come into the town with arm so sudden, these gentlewoman be in great fear. yet, because our captain have give strait charge to all the symeron that while they be in his company they shall never hurt any woman nor man that have not weapon in his hand to do. they hurt which they earnest promise and no less faithful perform. they have no wrong offer. they nor any thing take from they to the worth of a garter, wherein, albeit they have indeed sufficient safety and security by those. less faithful, perform. they have no wrong offer. they nor any thing take from they to the worth of a garter, wherein, albeit they have indeed sufficient safety and security by those of his company which our captain send unto they of purpose to comfort they. yet they never cease most earnest entreat that our captain will vouchsafe to come to they himself for their more safety, which, when he do, in their presence, report the charge he have first give and the assurance of his man, they be comfort, while the guard which we have, not without great need, set aswell on the bridge which we be to pass over, as at the town end where we enter, they have no other entrance into the town by not without great need, set aswell on the bridge which we be to pass over, as at the town end where we enter. they have no other entrance into the town by land, but from the water side there be one other to carry up and down their merchandise from their frigate, gain we liberty and quiet. to stay in this town some hour and half we have not only refresh ourselves but our company and symeron have get some good pillage which our captain allow and give. they be not the thing he look for, so that it be not too cumbersome or heavy in respect of our travel or defence of ourselves. a little before we depart, some ten or horseman come from panama by all. so that it be not too cumbersome or heavy in respect of our travel or defence of ourselves. a little before we depart, some ten or horseman come from panama, by all likelihood. suppose that we be. go out of this town for that all be so still and quiet. come to enter the town confident, but find their entertainment such as it. be they that can ride fast back again for fear than they have ride forward for hope. thus we have end our business in this town and the day beginning to spring, we march over the bridge, observe the same order that we do before. there. we be all safe, in our opinion, as if we have be environ with wall and trench for that. march over the bridge observe the same order that we do before. there we be all safe, in our opinion, as if we have be environ with wall and trench, for that no spaniard, without his extreme danger, can follow. we the rather now. for that our symeron be grow very valiant, but our captain consider that he have a long way to pass and that he have be now well near fortnight from his ship where he have leave his company but, weak by reason of their sickness, hasten his journey asmuch as he may, refuse to visit the other symeron town, which they earnest desire he, and encourage his own company with such example and speech that the way seem much short for he march most. refuse to visit the other symeron town which they earnest desire. he and encourage his own company with such example and speech that the way seem much short. for he march most cheerful, and assure we that he doubt not, but ere he leave that coast we shall all be bountiful, pay and recompense for all those pain take. but by reason of this our captain haste and leave of their town. we march many day with hungry stomach, much against the will of our symeron who, if we will have stay any day from this continual journey, will have kill for we, victual sufficient. in our absence, the rest of the symeron have build a little town within three league off the port where our ship lay. continual journey will have kill for we, victual sufficient in our absence. the rest of the symeron have build a little town within three league off the port where our ship lay. there, our captain be content upon their great and earnest entreaty to make some stay, for that they allege it be only build for his sake, and indeed he consent the rather that the want of shoe may be supply by mean of the symeron, who be a great help unto we all. our man complain of the tenderness of their foot, who our captain will himself, in their complaint, accompany, sometime without cause, but sometime with cause, indeed, which make the rest to bear the burden the more easy, these symeron, during all the time. captain will himself, in their complaint, accompany, sometime without cause but sometime with cause indeed, which make the rest to bear the burden, the more easy these symeron. during all the time that we be with they do, we continual very good service and in particular in this journey, be unto we, instead of intelligencer to advertise, we of guide in our way to direct, we of purveyor to provide victual for we of housewright to build our lodging and have indeed able and strong body carry all our necessary yea. many time when some of our company faint with sickness or weariness, two symeron will carry, he with ease between they, two mile together, and at other time, when need be, they will show themselves, no less. our company faint with sickness or weariness, two symeron will carry, he with ease between they, two mile together, and at other time, when need be, they will show themselves no less valiant than industrious and of good judgement. feb 22. from this town, at our first entrance in the even on saturday, our captain dispatch a symeron with a token and certain order to the master who have this three week, keep good watch against the enemy and shift in the wood for fresh victual for the relief and recovery of our man. leave aboard assoon as this messenger be come to the shore, call to our ship as bring some news. he be quick, set aboard by those which long to hear of our captain speed. assoon as this messenger be come to the shore, call to our ship as bring some news. he be quick, set aboard by those which long to hear of our captain speed. but when he show the toothpick of gold which he say our captain have send for a token to edward hixom, with charge to meet he at such a river, though, the master know well the captain toothpick, yet by reason of his admonition and caveat, give he at part he, though he bewray, no sign of distrust, the symeron yet stand as amaze lest something have befall our captain. otherwise then well, the symeron perceive this, tell he that it be night when he be send away, so that our captain can not send any. lest something have befall our captain otherwise then well, the symeron perceive this, tell he that it be night when he be send away, so that our captain can not send any letter. but yet, with the point of his knife, he write something upon the toothpick which he say shall be sufficient to gain credit to the messenger. thereupon, the master look upon it and see write by: i francis drake, wherefore he believe, and according to the message, prepare what provision he can and repair to the mouth of the river of tortugos, as the symeron that go with, he than name it, that after noon, towards three a clock, we be come down to that river, not past half a hour before we see our the symeron that go with he than name it that after noon, towards three a clock, we be come down to that river. not past half a hour before we see our pinnace ready, come to receive we which be unto, we all a double rejoice, first that we see they and next, so soon our captain, with all our company. praise god most hearty for that. we see our pinnace and fellow again. we all seem to these who have live at rest and plenty, all this while aboard as man. strange change our captain, yet not much change in countenance and plight, and indeed our long, fast and sore travel may somewhat fore-pine and waste we but the grief we draw inward. for that we return. yet not much change in countenance and plight, and indeed our long, fast and sore travel may somewhat fore-pine and waste we, but the grief we draw inward for that we return without that gold and treasure we hope for do no doubt show her print and footstep in our face. the rest of our man, which be then miss, can not travel so well as our captain and therefore be leave at the indian new town and the next day we row to another river in the bottom of the bay and take they all aboard, feb 23.. thus be return from panama to the great rejoice of our company who be thorough reviue with the report we bring from thence. especial understand our captain purpose that aboard feb 23.. thus be return from panama, to the great rejoice of our company who be thorough reviue with the report we bring from thence. especial, understand our captain purpose, that he mean not to leave off thus, but will once again attempt the same journey whereof they also may be partaker. our captain will not, in the mean time, suffer this edge and forwardness of his man to be dull or rebate by lie, still idle, unemployed, as know right well by continual experience that no sickness be more noisome to impeach any enterprise then delay and idleness. therefore, consider deep the intelligence of other place of importance thereabouts, which he have get the former year, and particular of veragua, a rich town, lie to the. then delay and idleness. therefore, consider deep the intelligence of other place of importance thereabouts which he have get the former year, and particular of veragua, a rich town lie to the westward, between de dios and nicaragua. where be the rich mine of fine gold that be on this north side? he consult with his company, touch their opinion what be to be do in this mean time, and how they stand affect some thought that it be most necessary to seek supply of victual that we may the better be able to keep our man close and in health till our time come. and this be easy to be compass, because the frigate with victual go without great defence, whereas the frigate and bark with treasure. man close and in health till our time come. and this be easy to be compass, because the frigate with victual go without great defence, whereas the frigate and bark with treasure for the most part be waft with great ship and store of soldier. other. yet judge, we may better bestow our time in intercept the frigate of treasure first, for that our magazine and storehouse of victual be reasonable furnish and the country itself be so plentiful that every man may provide for himself if the worst befall, and victual may hereafter be provide abundant aswell as now, whereas the treasure never float upon the sea so ordinary as at this time of the fleet be there, which time in no wise may be neglect. the abundant aswell as now, whereas the treasure never float upon the sea so ordinary as at this time of the fleet be there, which time in no wise may be neglect. the symeron be demand also their opinion, for that they be experience in the particularity of all the town thereabouts, as in which some or other of they have serve. declare that by veragua, signior pezoro, sometime, their master, from who they flee, dwell not in the town, for fear of some surprise, but yet not far off from the town for his better relief, in a very strong house of stone where he have dwell nineteen year at least. never travel from home, unless happy, once a year to carthagene or nombre de dios, when the in a very strong house of stone where he have dwell nineteen year at least, never travel from home, unless happy once a year to carthagene or nombre de dios when the fleet be there. he keep a hundred slave at least in the mine. each slave be bind to bring in daily clear gain, all charge deduct: three peso of gold for himself and two for his woman. eight shilling three penny the pezo amount in the whole to about two hundred pound sterling each day, so that he have heap a mighty mass of treasure together which he keep in certain great chest of two foot deep, three broad and four long. be notwithstanding all his wealth hard and cruel, not only to his slave but treasure together, which he keep in certain great chest of two foot deep, three broad and four long. be, notwithstanding all his wealth, hard and cruel, not only to his slave but unto all man, and therefore never go abroad, but with a guard of five or six man to defend his person from danger which he fear, extraordinary from all creature. and as touch mean of compass this purpose, they will conduct he safe through the wood by the same way by which they flee, that he shall not need to enter their haven with danger but may come upon their back altogether unlooked for, and though his house be of stone so that it can not be burn. yet, if our captain will undertake the attempt. danger but may come upon their back altogether unlooked for, and though his house be of stone so that it can not be burn. yet if our captain will undertake the attempt, they will undermine and overthrow or otherwise break it open in such sort as we may have easy access to his great treasure. our captain have hear all their opinion conclude so that by divide his company, the two first different sentence be both, reconcile both to be practise and put in ure. john oxnam appoint in the bear to be send estward towards tolow to see what store of victual will come athwart his half and himself will to the westward in the minian, lie off and on the cabezas. where be the great trade. tolow to see what store of victual will come, athwart, his half and himself will, to the westward, in the minian lie off and on the cabezas, where be the great trade and most ordinary passage of those which transport treasure from veragua and nicaragua to the fleet, so that no time may be lose, nor opportunity let slip, either for victual or treasure. as for the attempt of veragua or signior peroros, house by land, by march through the wood he like not off, lest it may over weary his man by continual labour, who he study, to refresh and strengthen for his next srevice, forenamed, therefore, use our symeron most courteous: dismiss those that be desirous to their wife with such gift and favour as be. he study to refresh and strengthen for his next srevice. forenamed. therefore, use our symeron most courteous, dismiss those that be desirous to their wife with such gift and favour as be most please, and entertain those still aboard his ship which be content to abide with the company remain the pinnace. depart as be determine. the minion to the west, the bear to the east, the minion about the cabeca meet with a frigate of nicaragua in which be some gold and a genoese pilot, of which nation there be many in those coast which have be at veragua not past eight day before he be. very well entreat, certify our captain of the state of the town and of the harbour, and of a frigate that have be at veragua not past eight day before he be. very well, entreat, certify our captain of the state of the town and of the harbour and of a frigate that be there, ready to come forth within few day, aboard which there be above a million of gold, offer to conduct he to it. if we will do he his right for that. he know the channel very perfect, so that he can enter by night, safe, without danger of the sand and shallows, though there be but little water and utter undescryed for that, the town be five league within the harbour and the way by land be so far about and difficult through the wood that though we shall, by any casualty, be discover. that the town be five league within the harbour and the way by land be so far about and difficult through the wood that though we shall by any casualty be discover about the point of the harbour yet we may dispatch our business and depart before the town can have notice of our come. at his be there, he perceive they have hear of drake be on the coast which have put they in great fear. as in all other place, pezoro purpose to remove himself to the south sea but there be nothing do to prevent he their fear be so great that, as it be accustom in such case, it exclude counsel and breed despair. our captain confer with his own knowledge and former intelligence. to prevent he their fear be so great that, as it be accustom in such case, it exclude counsel and breed despair. our captain confer with his own knowledge and former intelligence, be purpose to have return to his ship, to have take some of those symeron which have dwell with signior pezoro, to be the more confirm in this point. but when the genoese pilot be very earnest to have the time gain and warrant our captain of good speed, if we delay not, he dismiss the frigate somewhat light to hasten her journey and with this pilot advise labour with sail and oar to get this harbour and to enter it by night. accorcord consider that this frigate may now be gain and pezoros house attempt. with this pilot advise labour with sail and oar to get this harbour and to enter it by night. accorcord, consider that this frigate may now be gain and pezoros house, attempt hereafter notwithstanding. but when we be come to the mouth of the harbour, we hear the report of two chamber and far off, about a league within the bay. two other, as it be, answer they, whereby our genoese pilot conjecture that we be discover, for he assure we that this order have be take since his last be there, by reason of the advertisement and charge which the governor of panama have send unto all the coast which, even in their bed lay in great and continual fear of our captain, and therefore by all advertisement and charge which the governor of panama have send unto all the coast which, even in their bed, lay in great and continual fear of our captain and therefore, by all likelihood, maintain this kind of watch at the charge of the rich gnuffe pezoro for their security. thus, be defeat of this expectation, we find that it be not god will that we shall enter at that time, the, rather for that, the wind, which have all this time be easterly, come up to the westward and invite we to return again to our ship march 19, where, on sheer thursday, we meet according to appointment with our bear and find that she have bestow her time to more profit than we have do for she. ship march 19, where on sheer thursday we meet according to appointment with our bear and find that she have bestow her time to more profit than we have do. for she have take a frigate in which there be ten man who they set ashore great store of maiz, twenty eight fat hog and two hundred hen. our captain discharge this frigate of her lade and because she be new, march 20.. strong and of a good mould, the next day he tallow she to make she a man of war, dispose all our ordinance and provision that be fit for such use in she. march 21. for we have hear by the spaniard last take that there be two little galley build in to waft the and provision that be fit for such use in she, march 21.. for we have hear by the spaniard last take that there be two little galley build in to waft the chagro fleet to and fro, but be not yet both launch. wherefore he purpose now to adventure for that fleet and to hearten his company. he feast they that easter-day with great cheer and cheerfulness, march 22.. set up his rest upon that attempt the next day with the new tallowed frigate of tolow and his bear, march 23.. we set sail towards the cativaa where about two day after we land and stay till noon, at what time see a sail to the westward, as we deem make to the island. we set sail and cativaa where, about two day after we land and stay till noon, at what time, see a sail to the westward, as we deem make to the island. we set sail and ply towards he who descry, we bare with we. till he perceive by our confidence that we be no spaniard and conjecture that we be those englishman of who he have hear long before and be in great want and desirous to be relieve by we, he bear up under our lee and, in token of amity, shoot off his lee ordinance which be not unanswered. we understand that he be tetu, a french captain of new-haven, a man of war, as we be desirous to be relieve by we, for at our first meeting, the not unanswered. we understand that he be tetu, a french captain of new-haven, a man of war, as we be desirous to be relieve by we, for at our first meeting the french captain cast abroad his hand and pray our captain to help he to some water, for that he have nothing but wine and cider aboard he, which have bring his man into great sickness. he have seek we ever since he first hear of our be upon the coast about this five week. our captain send one aboard he, with some relief for the present, will he to follow we to the next port where he shall have both water and victual. at our come to anchor he send our captain a case of pistol. the present, will he to follow we to the next port where he shall have both water and victual at our come to anchor. he send our captain a case of pistol and a fair guilt scimitar which have be the late king of france who, monsieur mongomery, hurt in the eye and be give he by strosse, our captain requite, he with a chain of gold and a tablet which he wear. this captain report unto we the first news of the massacre at paris, at the king of navars marriage, on saint bartholomewes day last, of the admiral of france slay in his chamber and diverse other murder, so that he think those frenchman the happy which be far from france. now, no long france. but last of the admiral of france slay in his chamber, and diverse other murder, so that he think those, frenchman the happy, which be far from france now, no long france, but frenzy, even, as if all gaul be turn into wormwood and gall. italian practice have over-mastred the french simplicity. he show what famous and often report he have hear of our great riches. he desire to know of our captain which way he may compass his voyage. also, though, we have he in some jealousy and distrust for all his pretence, because we consider more the strength he have than the goodwill he may bear. we yet, upon consultation among ourselves whether it be fit to receive he or no, we resolve to take he and more the strength he have than the goodwill he may bear. we yet, upon consultation among ourselves, whether it be fit to receive he or no, we resolve to take he and twenty of his man to serve with our captain for half, in such sort as we need not doubt of their force, be but twenty nor be hurt by their portion, be no great than we, and yet gratify they in their earnest suit and serve our own purpose, which without more help we can very hardly have achieve. indeed, he have seventy man and we now but thirty one. his ship be above eighty tun and our frigate not past twenty, our pinnace nothing near ten tun, yet our captain think this proportionable in consideration. and we now but thirty one. his ship be above eighty tun and our frigate not past twenty, our pinnace nothing near ten tun. yet our captain think this proportionable in consideration that not number of man but quality of their judgement and knowledge be to be the principal actor herein. and the french ship can do no service, nor stand in any steed to this enterprise which we intend and have agree upon, long before both touch the time when it shall take beginning and the place where we shall meet, namely at rio francisco. have thus agree with captain tetu, we send for the symeron, as before be decree, two of they be bring aboard our ship to give the french assurance of this agreement and have. thus agree with captain tetu, we send for the symeron, as before, be decree, two of they be bring aboard our ship to give the french assurance of this agreement and as soon as we can furnish ourselves and refresh the french company, which be within five or six day by, bring they to the magazine which be the near where they be supply by we, in such sort as they protest they be behold to we for all their life. take twenty of the french and fifteen of we with our symeron, leave both our ship in safe road, we man our frigate and two pinnace we have former sink our lion short after our return from panama because we have not man sufficient to man. our ship in safe road. we man our frigate and two pinnace. we have former sink, our lion, short after our return from panama, because we have not man sufficient to man she and go towards rio francisco which, because it have not water enough for our frigate, cause we to leave she at the cabeca man with english and french in the charge of robert doble, to stay there without attempt, any chase, until the return of our pinnace, and then bear to rio francisco where both captain land with such force as aforesaid march 31.. and charge they that have the charge of the pinnace to be there the four day next follow without any fail and thus know that the carriage go now daily from. 31. and charge they that have the charge of the pinnace to be there the four day next follow without any fail and thus know that the carriage go now daily from panama to. we proceed in covert through the wood towards the high way that lead between they. it be five league account by sea between rio, francisco and nombre, but that way which we march by land, we find it above seven league. we march, as in our former journey to panama, both for order and silence, to the great wonder of the french captain and company who protest. they know not by any mean how to recover the pinnace if the symeron to who, what our captain command, be a law though they little regard. captain and company who protest. they know not by any mean how to recover the pinnace. if the symeron to who what our captain command be a law, though they little regard the french as have no trust in they, shall leave we, our captain, assure he there be no cause of doubt of they of who he have have such former trial. when we be come within a english mile of the way, we stay all night, refresh ourselves in great stillness in a most convenient place where we hear the carpenter, be many in number, work upon their ship, as they usual do by reason of the great heat of the day in, and may hear the moil come from panama, by reason of the advantage. number work upon their ship, as they usual do by reason of the great heat of the day, in and may hear the moil come from panama, by reason of the advantage of the ground, april 1 the next morning, upon hear of that great number of bell, the symeron rejoice exceed, as though there can not have befall they a more joyful accident chief have be disappoint before now. they all assure we we shall have more gold and silver. then all of we can bear away, as in truth it fall out. for there come three recoe, one of fifty moil, the other two of seventy, each, every of which carry three hundred pound weight of silver, which in all amount to near thirty tun. we come three recoe, one of fifty moil, the other two of seventy each, every of which carry three hundred pound weight of silver, which in all amount to near thirty tun. we put ourselves in readiness, go down near the way to hear the bell, where we stay not long, but we see of what mettle they be make and take such hold on the head of the foremost and hindmost moil that all the rest stay and lie down as their manner. be these three recoe be guard with forty five soldier, or their about fifteen to each reco, which cause some exchange of ballet and arrow for a time in which conflict the french captain be sore wound with hailshot in the belly and one symeron. fifteen to each reco, which cause some exchange of ballet and arrow for a time in which conflict the french captain be sore wound with hailshot in the belly and one symeron slay, but in the end these soldier think it the best way to leave their moil with we and to seek for more help abroad. in which mean time we take some pain to ease some of the moil which be heavy load of their carriage, and because we ourselves be somewhat weary, we be content with a few bar and quoit of gold, as we can well carry bury about fifteen tun of silver, partly in the borough which the great land-crab have make in the earth and partly under old tree which be fall. as we can well carry, bury about fifteen tun of silver, partly in the borough which the great land-crab have make in the earth and partly under old tree which be fall thereabouts and partly in the sand and gravel of a river not very deep of water. thus, when, about this business, we have spend some two hour and have dispose of all our matter and be ready to march back the very self same way that we come, we hear both horse and foot come, as it seem, to the moil, for they never follow. we, after we be once enter the wood where the french captain, by reason of his wound not able to travel far, stay in hope that some rest will recover. he follow. we, after we be once enter the wood where the french captain, by reason of his wound not able to travel far, stay in hope that some rest will recover he better strength. but after we have march some two, league upon the french soldier, complaint that they miss one of their man. also, examination be make whether he be slay or no. it be find that he have drink much wine and overlade himself with pillage and haste to go before we have lose himself in the wood and, as we afterward know, he be take by the spaniard that evening and upon torture discover unto they where we have hide our treasure. april 2.3. we continue our march, all that and the next day towards be take by the spaniard that evening and, upon torture, discover unto they where we have hide our treasure. april 2.3. we continue our march, all that and the next day, towards rio, francisco, in hope to meet with our pinnace. but when we come thither, look out to sea, we see seven spanish pinnace which have be search all the coast thereabouts, whereupon we mighty suspect that they have take or spoil our pinnace. for that our captain have give so straight charge that they shall repair to this place this afternoon from the where they ride, whence to our sight these spaniard pinnace do come, but the night before there have fall very much rain, with much westerly wind which, as it enforce the spaniard to they ride whence. to our sight these spaniard pinnace do come, but the night before there have fall very much rain with much westerly wind which, as it enforce the spaniard to return home the soon by reason of the storm, so it keep our pinnace that they can not keep the appointment because the wind be contrary and blow so strong that with their oar they can all that day get but half the way, notwithstanding, if they have follow our captain direction in set forth over night while the wind serve, they have arrive at the place appoint with far less labour but with far more danger, because that very day at noon the spanish shallop man out of purpose from be come to this place. at the place appoint, with far less labour but with far more danger. because that very day at noon, the spanish shallop man, out of purpose from be come to this place to take our pinnace, imagine where we be after. they have hear of our intercept of the treasure. our captain see the shallop fear least have, take our pinnace. they have compel our man by torture to confess where his frigate and ship be. therefore, in this distress and perplexity, the company misdoubt that all mean of return to their country be cut off and that their treasure then serve they to small purpose. our captain comfort and encourage. we all say we shall venture no far than he do. it be no time now to and that their treasure then serve they to small purpose. our captain comfort and encourage, we all say we shall venture no far than he do. it be no time now to fear, but rather to haste to prevent that which be fear if the enemy have prevail against our pinnace, which god forbid yet, they must have time to search they time to examine the mariner, time to execute their resolution after it be determine. before all these time be take, we may get to our ship, if you will, though not possible by land because of the hill, thicket and river, yet by water. let we therefore make a raft with the tree that be here in readiness as offer themselves be bring down the river. because of the hill, thicket and river, yet by water. let we therefore make a raft with the tree that be here in readiness as offer themselves be, bring down the river, happy this last storm, and put ourselves too sea. i will be one. who will be the other? john smith offer himself and two frenchman that can swim very well, desire they may accompany our captain, as do the symeron likewise, who have be very earnest with our captain, to have march by land, though it be sixteen day journey, and, in case the ship have be surprise, to have abide always with they, especial pedro, who yet be fain to be leave behind because he can not row the raft, be fit and fast bind. ship have be surprise to have abide always with they, especial pedro, who yet be fain to be leave behind because he can not row the raft, be fit and fast, bind a sail of a biscuit sack, prepare a oar, be shape out of a young tree to serve in steed of a rudder to direct their course before the wind. at his departure, he comfort the company by promise that, if it please god, he shall put his foot in safety aboard his frigate. he will, god willing, by one mean or other, get they all aboard in despite of all the spa^iards in the indies. in this manner, put off to the sea, he sail some three league, sit up to the waste, continual in. they all aboard, in despite of all the spa^iards in the indies, in this manner, put off to the sea, he sail, some three league, sit up to the waste, continual in water and at every surge of the wave, to the armpit for the space of six hour upon this raft, what with the parch of the sun and what with the beat of the salt water. they have all of they, their skin much fret away at length. god give they the sight of two pinnace, turn towards they with much wind but with far great joy. to he that can easy conjecture and do cheerful declare to those three with he that they be our pinnace and that all be safe so that there be far. great joy to he that can easy conjecture and do cheerful declare to those three with he that they be our pinnace and that all be safe, so that there be no cause of fear. but see the pinnace, not see this raft, nor suspect any such matter, by reason of the wind and night grow on, be force to run into a cove behind the point to take succour for that night which our captain see and gather because they come not forth again that they will anchor there, put his raft a shore and run by land about the point where he find they who, upon sight of he, make as much haste as they can to take he and his company aboard for our and run by land about the point where he find they who, upon sight of he, make as much haste as they can to take he and his company aboard for our captain of purpose to try what have they can and will make. in extremity, himself run in great haste and so will the other three with he, as if they have be chase by the enemy which they the rather suspect because they see so few with he, and after his come aboard. when they demand how all his company do, he answer cold: well, they all doubt that all go scarce. well, but he, willing to ride all doubt and fill they with joy, take out of his bosom a quoit of gold, thank god. well. they all doubt that all go scarce well. but he, willing to ride all doubt and fill they with joy, take out of his bosom a quoit of gold. thank god that our voyage be make. and to the frenchman he declare how their captain indeed be leave behind sore wound and two of his company with he, but it shall be no hindrance to they. that night, our captain, with great pain of his company, row to roose faancisco, april 4.. where he take the rest in and the treasure which we have bring with. we make such expedition that by dawn of the day we set sail back again to our frigate and from thence direct to our ship where assoon, as we arrive, our with. we make such expedition that by dawn of the day we set sail back again to our frigate and from thence direct to our ship where, assoon, as we arrive, our captain divide by weight the gold and silver into two, even portion between the french and the english. about a fortnight after, when we have set all thing in order and take out of our ship all such necessary as we need for our frigate have, leave and give she to the spa^iards who we have all this time detain, we put out of that harbour together with the french ship ride some few day among the cabezas. in the mean time our captain make a secret composition with the symeron, that twelve of our man. that harbour, together with the french ship ride some few day among the cabezas. in the mean time, our captain make a secret composition with the symeron, that twelve of our man and sixteen of they shall make another voyage to get intelligence in what case the country stand and if it may be recover tortu, the french captain at leastwise to bring away that which be hide in our former surprise and can not then be convenient. carry john oxnam and thomas sherwell be put in trust for this service, to the great content of the whole company who conceive great hope of they. next, our captain, who by no mean they will condescend to suffer to adventure again this time. yet he himself row to set. the whole company who conceive great hope of they. next, our captain, who by no mean they will condescend to suffer to adventure again this time. yet he himself row to set they ashore at rio, francisco. find his labour well, employ both otherwise and also in save one of those two frenchman that have remain willing to accompany their wound captain, for this gentleman have escape the rage of the spaniard be now comw towards our pinnace, where he fall down on his keee, blessing god for the time that ever our captain be bear, who now, beyond all his hope, be become his deliverer. he be demand what be become of his captain and other fellow show that within half a hour after our departure, the who now, beyond all his hope, be become his deliverer. he be demand what be become of his captain and other fellow. show that within half a hour after our departure the spinjard have overgotten they and take his captain and other fellow- he only escape by flight- have cast away all his carriage and, among the rest, one box of jewel that he may fly the swift from the pursuer, but his fellow take it up and burden himself so sore that he can make no speed, as easy he may, otherwise, if he will have cast down his pillage and lay aside his covetous mind. as for the silver which we have hide thereabouts in the earth and the sand, he think that it be all. have cast down his pillage and lay aside his covetous mind. as for the silver which we have hide thereabouts in the earth and the sand, he think that it be all go for that. he think there have be near two thousand spaniard and negro there to dig and search for it. this report notwithstanding, our purpose hold and our man be send to the say place where they find that the earth, every way, a mile distant, have be dig and turn up in every place of any likelihood to have any thing hide in it. and yet, nevertheless, for all that narrow search, all our man labour be not quite lose. but so consider that the three day after their departure they all return safe. in it. and yet, nevertheless, for all that narrow search, all our man labour be not quite lose. but so consider that the three day after their departure, they all return safe and cheerful, with as much silver as they and all the symeron can find. viz thirteen bar of silver and some few quoit of gold with which they be present, embark without impeachment, repair with no less speed than joy to our frigate. now be it high time to think of homeward. have speed ourselves, as we desire, and therefore our captain conclude to visit rio grand once again to see if he can meet with any sufficient ship or bark to carry victual enough to serve our turn homeward, in which we may, in safety. visit rio grand once again to see if he can meet with any sufficient ship or bark to carry victual enough to serve our turn homeward in which we may, in safety and security, embark ourselves. the frenchman have former go from we as soon as they have their share at our first return, with the treasure as be very desirous to return home into their country and our captain as desirous to dismiss they as they be to be dismiss for that he foresee. they can not, in their ship, avoid the danger of be take by the spaniard if they shall make out any man of war for they, while they linger on the coast and have also be, then again relieve with victual by we. take by the spaniard if they shall make out any man of war for they, while they linger on the coast and have also be then again relieve with victual by we now at our meeting of they again be very loath to leave we and therefore accompany we very kind as far up as saint barnard and far will, but that they dare not adventure so great danger. for that we have intelligence that the fleet be ready to set sail for spain ride at the entry of carthagena. thus we depart from, they pass hard by carthagena in the sight of all the fleet, with a flag of saint george in the main top of our frigate, with silk streamer and ancient down to the water. hard by carthagena, in the sight of all the fleet, with a flag of saint george in the main top of our frigate, with silk, streamer and ancient, down to the water, sail forward with a large wind till we come within two league of the river, be all low land and dark night where, to prevent the overshooting of the river, in the night we lie off and on bear small sail till that about midnight the wind veer to the eastward. by two of the clock in the morning a frigate from rio grand pass hard by. we bear also, but small sail. we salute they with our shot and arrow, they answer we with base, but we get aboard they and take such order that pass hard by. we bear also, but small sail. we salute they with our shot and arrow, they answer we with base. but we get aboard, they and take such order that they be content, against their will, to depart a shore and to leave we this frigate, which be of twenty five tun, load with maiz and hen and hog and some honey, in very good time fit for our use for the honey especial, be a notable releever and preserver of our craze people. the next morning, as soon as we set those spaniard a shore on the main, we set our course for the cabeca without any stop. whither we come about five day after and be at anchor present we have out all the a shore on the main. we set our course for the cabeca without any stop whither we come about five day after and be at anchor present. we have out all the maizaland, save three butt which we keep for our store, and carry all our provision. a shore: we bring both our frigate on the carine and new tallow. they here, we stay about seavenight, trim and rig our frigate board and stow our provision, tear abroad and burn our pinnace that the symeron may have the ironwork. about a day or two before our departure our captain, will pedro and three of the chief of the symeron to go through both his frigate to see what they like promise to give it they, whatsoever it be. departure, our captain will pedro and three of the chief of the symeron to go through both his frigate to see what they like promise to give it they, whatsoever it be, so it be not so necessary as that he can not return into england without it. and for their wife he will himself seek out some silk or linen that may gratify they, which, while he be, choose out of his trunk the scimitar which captain tetu have give to our captain chance to be take forth in pedro sight, which he see grow so much in like thereof that he account of nothing else in respect of it and prefer it before all that can be give he yet imagine that it be no less. so much in like thereof that he account of nothing else in respect of it and prefer it before. all that can be, give he yet imagine that it be no less esteem of our captain, dare not himself open his mouth to crave or commend it, but make one, francis tucker, to be his mean to break his mind. promise to give he a fine quoit of gold, which yet he have in store, if he will but move our captain for it. and to our captain himself he will give four other great quoit which he have hide intend to have, reserve they till another voyage. our captain be according move by. francis tucker can have be content to have make no such exchange, but yet which he have hide, intend to have reserve they till another voyage. our captain, be according move by francis tucker, can have be content to have make no such exchange, but yet desirous to content he that have deserve so well, he give it. he, with many good word who receive it with no little joy, affirm that if he shall give his wife and child, which he love dear, in lieu of it, he can not sufficient recompense it, for he will present his king with it, who he know will make he a great man even for this very gift sake. yet in gratuity and steed of other requital of this jewel, he desire our captain to accept these four piece of gold as a token. man, even for this very gift sake. yet in gratuity and steed of other requital of this jewel, he desire our captain to accept these four piece of gold as a token of his thankfulness to he and a pawn of his faithfulness during life. our captain receive it in most kind sort, but take it not to his own benefit, but cause it to be cast into the whole adventure, say, if he have not be set forth to that place, he have not attain such a commodity and therefore it be just that they which bare part with he of his burden in set he to sea shall enjoy the proportion of his benefit whatsoever at his return. thus, with good love and like we take which bare part with he of his burden in set he to sea, shall enjoy the proportion of his benefit whatsoever at his return. thus, with good love, and like we take our leave of that, people set over to the land of whence, the next day, after we set sail towards cape saint anthony, by which we pass with a large wind, but present be to stand for the hauana, we be fain to ply to the windward some three or four, day in which ply we fortune to take a small bark in which be two or three hundred hide and one most necessary thing which stand we in great steed, viz a pump which we set in our frigate, their bark, because it be nothing. be two or three hundred hide and one, most necessary thing which stand we in great steed, viz a pump which we set in our frigate, their bark, because it be nothing fit for our service, our captain give they to carry they home and so return to cape saint anthony and land there, we refresh ourselves and beside great store of turtle egg find, by day in the we take two hundred and fifty turtle. by night we powder and dry some of they which do we good service. the rest continue, but a small time. there be at this time belong to carthagene, nombre, rio, grand martha, rio de hacha, venta, cruz, veragua, nicaragua, the honduras, jamaica, etc. above two hundred frigate, some of a hundred. time there be at this time belong to carthagene, nombre, rio, grand martha, rio de hacha, venta, cruz, veragua, nicaragua, the honduras, jamaica, etc. above two hundred frigate, some of a hundred and twenty ton other, but of ten or twelve tun, but the most of thirty or forty tun, which all have intercourse between carthagene and nombre, the most of which during our abode in those part we take, and some of they twice or thrice each, yet never burn nor sink any unless they be make out man of war against we or lay as stale to entrap we, and of all the man take in these several vessel, we never offer any kind of violence to any after they be once come under our power. as stale to entrap, we, and of all the man, take in these several vessel. we never offer any kind of violence to any after they be once come under our power, but either present, dismiss they in safety or keep they with we some long time, as some of they we do. we always provide for their sustenance, as for ourselves, and secure they from the rage of the symeron against they, till at last the danger of their discover where our ship lay be over past, for which only cause we keep they prisoner. we set they also free. many strange bird, beast and fish, beside fruit tree plant and the like, be see and observe of we in this journey which, willing we pretermit as we set. they also free, many strange bird, beast and fish, beside fruit tree plant and the like, be see and observe of we in this journey which, willing we pretermit as hasten, to the end of our voyage, which, from this cape of saint anthony, we intend to finish by sail, the direct and speedy way homeward and according, even beyond our own expectation, most happy perform. for, whereas our captain have purpose to touch at new-found land and there to have water, which will have be some let unto we, though we stand in great want of water, yet god almighty so provide for we by give we good store of rain, water that we be sufficient furnish, and within twenty three day we pass from. great want of water. yet god almighty so provide for we by, give we good store of rain water that we be sufficient furnish. and within twenty three day we pass from the cape of florida to the isle of silley, and so arrive at plymouth on sunday about sermon-time, august the nine 1573.. at what time the news of our captain return bring unto. he do so speedy, pass over all the church and surpass their mind with desire and delight to see he that very few or none remain with the preacher, all hasten to see the evidence of god love and blessing towards our gracious queen and country by the fruit of our captain labour and success. to see the evidence of god love and blessing towards our gracious queen and country by the fruit of our captain labour and success.