advice for make of convenient room to lodge silkworme in, and for the most commodious plant of mulberry tree to have the best leaf to feed they, because that these two thing, first, the make of lodging for the silkworme, second, the abundant plant of the best mulberry tree, in a requisite distance one from another, whereby to have the best leaf to feed the worm, require some good time for the due preparation of they. therefore, that no time be lose for so great and so gainful a business, the profit whereof will be most certain, and that with small charge after that, these two provision be once for all well accommodate. we send you these necessary instruction aforehand, till you receive a book which short shall. be purposely print for you and store, send to teach all there the exact usage and order of silkworme, the skill whereof may soon be learn and present, put in practice the lodging of the silk worm. of these two preparation, then, which require some length of time to fit they, the first be that you must make the lodging and room for the silkworme so commodious and convenient for they, as they may easy do their work to yield you abundance of silk, which be but a vain hope if you lodge they in a place unproper and contrary to their nature. the chamber for to lodge and bring up the silkworme in must be make spacious, lightsome, pleasant, neat and wholesome, far from ill scent, damp. fog and humidity, warm in cold and cold in hot weather. they must not be lodge in the low room near the ground, nor yet in the uppermost room near the tile. because of the distemper of these two contrary situation, the low room may be too moist and the uppermost too windy, too hot or too cold for they, according to the season. nevertheless, the low room be the better of the two and may be bear withal if the floor be dry and board and that upon it you erect one only single stage for the worm, three or four foot high from the floor for the avoid of cold, damp and moisture, and so, as there be too one room above it, close board to the end. the silkworme may be still place far off from the tile which be near they, be always hurtful to they because that the wind and the cold pierce through they and the heat of the sun be there also insupportable when it light upon the roof in his full force. thatch leaf naught, thatch roof be also naught for they, because they harbour mouse and rat in they which be great devourer of the worm. the most proper and commodious room for the silkworme then middle room, best be middle chamber, which must be spare for they two month only, in the spring, or else if your houseroom be too straight, you must build new lodging express for they in which they will soon quit the cost and that durable after. but otherwise to expect profit of they in bad room will not be worth your labour. you must cast the proportion for their room after this manner, the proportion of the room the silkworme come of, ten ounce of seed to be keep and feed well at. ease for the best profit, must have a middle chamber of forty two foot in length, eighteen foot in breadth and twelve foot in height, and for more or less worm you keep ground yourself thereafter upon this proportion. the house wherein you keep they situation of the house, for they will be situate in a good, clear, dry air, for moisture be a great enemy unto they. the chamber wherein you feed they must have casement, window to open and shut. on both side. the room be opposite, one against. be black, be great and better to taste than that of the white, which be luscious. beside all this, the black be of far slow growth than the white mulberry tree. three sort of white mulberry tree. of the white mulberry tree there be manifest know three kind which, nevertheless, be only distinguish by the diverse colour of the fruit, which be white, black and red, and several bring forth by several tree. all which three sort, notwithstanding the difference of the colour of the fruit, bear but one name of the white mulberry tree. these three sort resemble all one another, both in leaf which they bring forth, all of a mean greatness and a smooth feel, the wood of all be yellow within, and the difference only to be know by the fruit. as aforesaid, the white mulberry tree better than the black. the black mulberry tree leaf make gross and coarse silk, but the white mulberry tree leaf make fine and high-prized. for according to the fineness of the leaf will the fineness and goodness of the silk be. therefore, always where it be in your power to make the best choice, store yourself with the white mulberry tree which, as it be far better than the black, so also it spring fast, grow more in two year than the black in six. the white mulberry tree bear the black berry best of all. yet among the three sort of white mulberry tree, there be choice also to be make, for by the search of some, it have be find that the leaf come of that white mulberry tree which bear the black berry be (@) than any of the other white mulberry tree bear either the white or the. red berry, wherefore, if it be possible, furnish your ground only of this kind that the food of the silkworm, and so withal your silk, may be the more exquisite. next to this, be the white mulberry tree. bear the white berry which some, according as there be diverse fancy, hold to be the better. nevertheless, the former be general. hold the best. above all, a rule: keep no tree in your mulberry yard which bear leaf very much indent for it be neither of so great substance nor yield so much food as that which have less nick. but yet this tree will be make good by graft upon it. have, choose your best plant of the white mulberry tree. bear black berry soil of the mulberry. for good leaf, the next choice to be make be of fit ground to plant they in. second, to have wholesome and profitable food for your worm, you must plant they in such a soil as be best fit for your vine, namely not in too fat a ground, nor yet in too barren and lean, but in a middling soil, rather in a dry than a moist, in a light than a heavy, in a grave than a clay. for the quantity of the leaf, true it be, the far and rich ground be the best, but not for the quality, for the lean ground breed the leaf of the most profitable and perfect nourishment. the mulberry tree have that in common with the vine, which bring the best wine in the like soil to this, so than the light ground bring forth the more exquisite, delicate and savoury leaf for the food of the silkworm, and the fat ground, a more rank, gross, flash and unsavoury leaf, which, be a unwholesome kind, seldom fadge well with the worm, or never unless it be help by a excellent good season, whereas the leaf of the lean and middling soil never fail the effect of your desire purpose. the leaf of the mulberry will be then well qualify as be fit if you plant they in a indifferent soil, somewhat dry, far from spring of water and from bog and from watery and foggy. place what soil best, provide also that they be expose to the sun and keep as much as may be from the annoyance of the north and east wind. for with the vine too, the mulberry hate a cold, shady and watery situation. and though the vine and the mulberry bring forth more in a fat, strong ground then in a lean. yet so it be that the little of the fruit of the lean ground be delicate, be more esteem and of better price than the abundance of that out of the fat soil which, be course and gross, the three thing be to show the best time and order to plant and remove the mulberry tree and at what age the leaf be good, consider there. be such store of grow mulberry tree, small and great in virginia, to be take up. nothing shall be say now of plant the sucker or branch, nor yet of sow the mulberry seed which, though it be the slow yet it be, hold a sure and a good way. but we will only advise you to take choice of such well-grown mulberry as may soon bring profit by their forward flourish experience. teach the leaf of the old mulberry the best. that the leaf of the old mulberry tree be far more healthful for the worm and more profitable than those of the young one, in case they be still vigorous and not fall into extreme decay through age. the mulberry tree, as in many thing, be in this also like to the vine, which bring better wine old than young, and as the vine begin to bear good wine after the seven or eight first year of his plant, so likewise the mulberry tree in the same age bring forth so good leafage whereof you may be sure to reap certain profit. the time and manner of remove of the mulberry tree be much after the fashion of other. you may remove and plant the mulberry in september, october, november, december, february, march or april, and in january too, if it be not frosty weather. when to remove the mulberry tree, take they up in fair weather, be neither frosty nor hot, with such care and curiousness that you may have all the root whole and entire without any be break or bruise. if it be possible which to do, you must neither spare cost nor pain, nor must you want patience, which be necessary for this action, for fear lest through rude hastiness and carelessness your tree ill take up, prove, lose charge and labour. before you take they up, head they, cut off all their branch, leave some fork arm of they only with snag of such length as be fit for new growth. as usual, be do in remove of other tree. how to remove mulberry tree and to prepare. the ground for t^em to do well, three month at least before you remove they you must make hole in the earth ready. dig for they where you mind to set they. the long the hole be dig before you set they, be it a whole year, so much the better, for the more the earth be season and prepare by the weather, the easy the tree take root and draw, the better nourishment from the earth. but if necessity constrain you to dig the hole at the same instant that you be to plant they, then must you burn some small wood, bush or straw in the hole that the fire may supply the want of the sun and the frost for the fit prepare of the earth. if otherwise, you must not fill up the hole with that earth which be take out of they, but with other season earth pare and take only from the very top of the ground which be better season by the sun than that raw earth which lie deep. the hole must be make very large and wide for they for to contain the root at full ease. you may be sure you can make they too. big, the root must be set as deep in the ground as they be. then when they be take up, so shall you plant they after their natural manner, which be best: neither too deep, not too shallow. there must be leave half a foot of small, loose earth in the bottom of the hole to set the root, upon which earth, if it be not well prepare before by the weather, must be take from the top of the ground, and by this mean they will the easy and soon take root downward. the root must be set down easy and put into the earth as near as may be to the same site and natural posture that they be when they be grow. take heed that. in place. they, you make not the root to press and cross one upon another. wherefore, see that you cover the root well and handsome, put between they all soft and fine earth, press it down and cover they by little and little, patient with the hand, and not tread they with the foot or use rammer and beater, as some do, which spoil they, but fill they up rather and knead the earth about they. gentle with the hand, as be say, begin first from the low root and so go on to the middlemost and then at last to the high, till the ground be level. so shall all the root be cover without any hollowness be. leave between they for this closeness, keep the root. from take wind and from water stand about they which rot. they, if in the negligent take up part of the root, be unbark, bruise or break, that part must be cut off before you plant it and you must put earth close about that place which be thus hurt that water and air come not between it and the earth to rot it. for mulberry tree to spread and grow big. to have your mulberry tree grow big and fair spread you must shred off some two inch of the top of all the branch round about and especial to cut the master bough of the stock in. lop the top of the tree so as in the whole height of the growth the tree be not above six or seven foot high from the ground. for keep your tree always at that height. by shred they they will spread the more. for the substance go back will be employ in nourish of the stock, whereas if you let the branch grow at will there will be much rank and unprofitable wood. in what space to plant the mulberry tree? the four point requisite for the goodness of the mulberry leaf be the regard to be have in the plant of they in fit distance and space one from another, whereby the sun may come every way free to they, to give you a well-concocted and wholesome fine leaf for your silkworm. the more space of ground the mulberry tree have free by himself and the more frank the air and sun come to it, the great it grow and bring the better leaf. therefore, if you will make, as it be, whole forest and wood of the mulberry tree, you must plant they in a straight line and comely figure of a every tree, be distant one from another every way, at least four and twenty or thirty foot, or otherwise have such store of mulberry tree as you have somewhere in virginia. you may take up all tree between they that hinder this distance from thirty foot to thirty foot that the sun may come thorough to they. but if you will plant they in rank in the hedge and out-border of your ploughland or other ground, then may you plant they near together, yet always without press. they too near one another, for that be ever to the hurt. of the tree and the loss of the owner. but consider that the only out-skirt of arable land, vineyard and other part of your demesne land, though indifferent large, be not sufficient to contain mulberry tree in so great a number as be fit to feed the worm in abundance, and for that, on the other side, the leaf of the tree which be in the thicket and wood be not so good and wholesome for they, as those that be set in due space in the out-border because the other neither have sun nor wind at will a mean between these two extreme be, find convenient to plant the mulberry tree for the profit of good leafage and yet without much hinder the tillage and use of. good land, and this be to plant the tree amid your ground by line and level in double row. one single row be even distant from the other sixteen foot, and so likewise every tree to be set in the same distance from one another, which be thus: plant the two row on each side, make one fair alley, the best way to plant mulberry tree in good order, like to the first of more field walk. and you must dispose these ally on this manner, namely both along and across the field, the one alley thwart and intercross the other. leave on the outside, on they great empty square of ground. every square contain a acre or more, as a man please for to sow corn there. which may be reap without be tread down by the gatherer of the leaf. for when they gather the leaf, they shall tread only on the ally or near they, which ally take up but small room. there will be, but little loss of ground, either for your come or for other use. you must also plant the tree in these ally in such sort that they be not set just right over one against another, lest they be pester together, but set a tree of one row still against the empty space of the other row. so shall they have room and air enough to grow lusty and fresh, have thus the benefit of the sun, which will always come most free upon they, especial upon the open side of the great square, in which square you may, if you will convenient, sow corn, special o^es and field pease or such like which, though they be tread down in the gather of the leaf, yet can they have no great hurt by reason that the blade of these grain will be then backward and they will rise again, though they be beat down to the ground. so will not wheat, rye nor barley, which for that reason will not be sow in your mulbery-yard. but upon necessity there be another commodity: come also of plough your mulberry ground, for the mulberry tree prosper much better in the loose plough or dig ground, then in the hard cloddy meadow and pasture. so as you take heed lest in plough or dig about they you hurt not the root. in the same square you may also plant vine where they will profit as be not much hinder by the shade of the tree, or you may, if you have rather, have meadow or pasture in they after the tree have have four or five year root. so as you dig the earth loose about the root, and sometime dung they in this sort without hinder, your demesne better than any other way near to your house. for so be most fit, may you plant your mulberry yard with great profit, both for the goodness of the leaf and for the pleasure and beauty which will be in the walk, in which also, if you please, you may sow or set somewhat that may be for use and profit, and quit the cost of labour the ground. now you must not content yourself in plant a few, for the mulberry tree be the main foundation of this revenue. that must be the chief thing whereat you must aim for to plant so great a quantity. of they, and so soon that in a short time you may reap the sweetness of this rich profit to your contentment. those that be perfect experience in this business advise a man by all mean to have as great abundance of mulberry tree as be possible, and for one that be a good husband to reap good profit. they prescribe the quantity of two or three thousand tree. one man shall have two or three thousand mulberry tree in hi^ yard for good profit, for with a less number, a man that will be a master of this work ought not to enterprise this business. for here be no question of good profit, which must grow out of a sufficient number of tree. therefore, it be necessary to employ this work here in a great volume, or else the play will hardly be worth the candle. it be only for woman wanton to keep a few silkworme with a few mulberry tree, more for pleasure than for profit. so then, if you mind to be very rich indeed in this commodity, you must not stay at that number of tree abovenamed, but always still augment your mulberry yard. add thereto certain hundred of tree yearly, both for feed, plenty of worm, and also for the succour of the tree, whereof you shall do well to let some part of they, every year, rest unleave as land that be fallow to have they in better heart. now the profit rise by the leaf be. thus estimate: a thousand weight of leaf feed a ounce of seed, a thousand weight of mulberry leave be sufficient to feed a ounce of seed in silkworme. and a ounce of seed. if the race in goodness, the convenience of the lodging, the perfectness of the leaf and the seasonable time for the work of the silkworme and the careful diligence of the governor all agree together- for there must be a consort of all these- then i say: a ounce of good seed make easy, five or six pound of silk, which, what it be worth, every one know, and this thousand weight of leaf, some twenty or five and twenty tree of a mean size, will always bring forth yea. a much less number of tree suffice for so much weight if they be old and great, as there be some mulberry tree in some place near avignon, so large and so abundant. in branch. one great tree sometime bear in thousand weight of leaf. that one tree will furnish leaf sufficient to feed a ounce of seed. the cost and charge of the business yearly be thus rate. in france a four of the total defray it all, and so there remain three part of clear revenue to the owner. beside this profit of silk to be make of the mulberry tree, which be of infinite commodity alone, it be also good for many other singular use. by trial make it have be find that the bark of the white mulberry tree make good linen cloth. other profit of the mulberry tree: and cordage the wood also be good to make hoop for tub and barrel. and it be fit. for all joiners work and for any use that be yield and pliant. it be also good about ship and boat. the bough shred off be excellent for coney, the berry be much desire of poultry and be good feed for they and the leaf all that fall of themselves to the ground in the end of summer, be lay by in some place and take thence, day by day, as you need, and give boil to swine, keep they in good state and begin to put they into flesh. these and diverse other commodity come of this excellent tree which, above all other, therefore, you must preserve and multiply still in virginia. to this abovesaid shall be add and teach the way how to make silkworme, which be report by some, the experiment whereof be so much the more necessary to be try because there be great danger in carry of the silkworme seed. so long a journey by sea to virginia. the sea, by contrary quality, corrupt the silkworm seed, for the sea be much contrary to the nature of the silkworm seed and easy corrupt it by reason of the moisture and cold rawness especial carry in winter time and therefore it be very hard to send it by sea in his perfection now then, beside the gather together of the natural silkworme say to be in virginia, which, out of all question, must needs be the best. both for work and for to have good race of seed from they. you shall do well to try this experiment, commend by some author in the spring time, how to make silk-worme^. shut up a young calf in a little dark and dry stable and there feed it only with mulberry leave some twenty day, mean while let it not drink at all nor eat any other thing. at the end of this time kill it by strangle and put it whole into a tub to rot there and cover it all over with mulberry leave. out of the corruption of this carcase come forth abundance of silkworme which you may take up with the mulberry leave. they fasten themselves unto. they these feed and handle according. to art and common fashion in their due time, bring forth both silk and seed, as other some, to lessen this charge, take only the leg of a suck calf and cut out of it as much flesh as weigh seven or eight pound and put it in some wooden vessel with mulberry leave about it, leave it to rot, take the worm, come out of the flesh from the mulberry leave to which they cleave, and so use they in like manner as other consider that bee be make, but of the rottenness of a young bull or heifer, and according to the scripture of the lion and that we see daily, many creature come of putrefaction. this be no improbable thing and therefore be worth the. trial to save the labour and danger of send silkworm seed by sea which, to do well, will be change every four year as you use to do your grain that you sow. other thing concern the order of silkworme you shall know by another book which be to be print. mean while, with all speed, make these timely and necessary provision aforesaid for the groundwork of the business, as to plant store of the best mulberry tree in a good air, in proper soil and fit distance, and dig store of hole in the ground, betimes for the prepare of the earth the better to plant the tree in. provide also fair and fit middle lodging for the silkworme, for this delicate creature which clothes prince and pay his charge, so bountiful, can endure to be lodge in base and beggarly room but in those that be large, sweet, neat, well air and lightsome, it be a thing well know that a few silkworme feed at large and ease, make far more silk than a great number pen in narrow and ill-savoured room. no ill smell must come near they. they must be keep sweet and oft perfume. therefore have such store of sweet wood in virginia as you have there. you shall do well to make their room and table of those wood sweet scent be a thing most agreeable to they. be careful to do. thing curious and thorough. well, for they at the first, for your more plentiful and certain gain after, consider the charge to you, be all one and a thing once. well, do they say, be twice do, which will thereby also bring you twice double profit with long continuance.