a sermon preach at paules-crosse the day of may hosea, chap ver. they be all hot as a oven and have devour their judge. all their king be fall. there be none among they that call upon i. ephraim have mix himself among the people. ephraim be like a cake on the hearth, not turn stranger. have devour his strength, and he know it not. yes, gray hair be here and there upon he, yet he know it not. and the pride of israel testify to his face. and they do not return to the lord, their god, nor seek he for all this. ephraim also be like a dove, deceive without heart. they call to egypt, they go to ashur, but when they shall go? i will. spread my net upon they and draw they down as the fowl of the heaven, i will chastise they as their congregation have hear right, honorable, right, worshipful, dear beloved in our lord and savior jesus christ, if the worth of this prophecy of hosea can be right value, we shall find that herein be embark as great riches of grace as ever. yet the word of god, the silver stream of the water of life, have land unto our soul, since first we, sinful man, have traffic with that renown king, a, a zach, who dominion be from sea to sea and from the river unto the end of the world. among all the prophecy, especial this of hosea. among the chapter of this prophecy, this, the, and in this, these verse that i have read unto you, do aim principal: at the kingdom of israel, not of judah. at the tribe, commit to the government of, not unto the two tribe, leave with rehoboam, the son of solomon, in the handle of which word i desire your mind as well as your body, and that my word may rather dive down into your heart, then swim in your ear. therefore, i will not entangle you in the maze of any curious division, but, plain, i will observe these three thing: the sin of ephraim and all israel which be breed at home, all like a oven which sin. have effect the devour of their judge, slowness in not return their not call upon god, borrow abroad ephraim mix himself, etc. which borrow sin have one effect and that wss this: he be as a cake on the hearth, not turn the dullness of ephraim, of which dullness i observe the argument or evidence, which be willfull. ignorance in not know ver. slowness in not return ver. simplicity and credulity in be overreach the aggravation, and that be by these circumstance or for these cause, stranger devour, their strength, grey hair be here and there upon he, the pride of israel, testify to his face. god alarm to rouse they out of their slumber and awake their dullness ver but when they shall go, etc. where i observe these five thing. god providence, he will see they as they go. his wisdom, he will spread a net. his power, he will draw they down. his justice, he will chastise they. his truth, he will make good what he have say in the congregation, as if the prophet shall have say: you, man of israel, especial you of the house of ephraim, concupiscence boil within you have, make you hot as a oven. king and judge have be your fuel. you have not call upon the lord by reason of the mixture of yourselves among the people. you have be taint with idolatry, partly raw and partly roast. you have have a knee for god and a knee for baal. you may have be. warn by the invasion of stranger and by the approach of old age. yet you have be possess with blind and lame and lumpish spirit, for i observe your dullness and your slowness and your simplicity. you have be without eye, not know, without foot, not return, without heart and as a dove deceive. yet say god by the prophet, when you go, i will see you by my providence and spread a net for you by my wisdom and draw you down by my power and chastise you by my justice and make good the truth of that which you have hear affirm in your congregation: they be all hot as a oven, which be a borrow oven. speech imply their sin breed at home there be. a fire wherewith christ baptize matth and wherewithal the apostle be enrich act. i mean the virtue of god, holy spirit, which, when it take possession of a man, it make his heart hot. within. he psalm and while he be muse, the fire kindle and he speak with his tongue, but his word be like the word of nepthali gen, who, be like a hind, give good word. they be either praise unto his god, or charitable comfort unto his brother, or holy meditation unto himself. yet the same devil that have a flood of water to send out of his mouth to drown the church and her child revel, have water also to quench this holy fire and in stead thereof he hurl ball of wildfire. into our soul. he fan they with the blandishment of the world that the soon james lust may conceive and bring forth sin. that sin, when it be finish, may bring forth death. such be the form of a oven that, by reason of the vault and damn up thereof, the inward part thereof be black and unclean and the fire work more vehement then in ordinary place. so it be with sin. it take possession of the heart. the strong hold vncleaut, which be the throne of the mind, and by degree, surprise the other part of the body, psalm. the tongue by drop the poison of asp under it. the hand by make they the hand of iniquity. the foot by make they swift to shed. blood the eye, by make they swell with lust, the way, by make they exorbitant, from the way of peace, so that when god see the garment of righteousness which he have bestow, rend and tear the work of sanctification out of reparation and his own image cancel, he may say, as his son, our savior, do, once say, of the roman coin mark who image and superscription be this, it be caesar, then give unto caesar that which be caesar and unto god that which be god. who image and superscription, be this, it be the devil or the world or the flesh, then give unto they that which be they they be not stamp with my seal. i acknowledge they not to be my own. when, plut and suct caesar be wound unto death by the senator of rome, it grieve he much, but much more when he perceive himself to be hurt by brutus who he love above the rest. therefore, his doleful tongue copy out of a more doleful mind these word: and thou, my son also, so no doubt. but it grieve god to be pierce through with the sin of atheist and irreligious man. but it grieve i more. may god say when thou, that be my child, rebel against i thou, who, as my own son, i have create, who i have redeem, who i have justify, who i have sanctify, who i mean to glorify for where the more. debt be forgive. there the most. love and obedience be due, say christ to simon luke. the world be old and very sickly, and one we see be distemper with a consumption of envy, a other with a hot fever of malice, another with lunatic and rave fit of swear, a other with a tympany or swell of ambition, a other so lose himself by drunkenness that a man may seek a man in a man and not find he. yet if you in this sinne-sicke world can avoid the tincture and stain of concupiscence and make wrack neither upon the rock nor upon the sand, neither upon open nor secret sin psalm, than neither the arrow that fly by day nor the pestilence that walk in the. darkness, nor any evil that destroy at the noon day shall do you any harm. i exhort you, therefore, unto that warmth of the holy spirit which soften the heart of the. i i luke two disciple as they go unto emmaus, or, if you will, to that high degree of zeal for god and god house, john psalm that eat up david. so may your soul, salamander-like, live by that spirit of burn which purge the blood of jerusalem, isaiah chapter. so be free from stain and blackness. by that smoke of that other fire, you may be clean and fit to stand before the lord. your god say therefore, unto concupiscence, i will not nurse thou up, harbour, not that smooth face, enemy which will not. only pollute, which first i note, but it will make your own affection rebel and mutinous within you. it will work violent. witness the three effect of this home-born sin. violent, first, their judge be devour. second, their king be fall. three, they do not call on god. behold how they be infatuate in all their difficulty, whether be they to fly to their judge. yes, but their judge be devour, their judge be. go whither then to their king. yes, but their king be fall. their king be fall whither then to god. there be their high court of appeal. yes, but they call not upon. i say god lo, here, with their own hand they have pull down all the sanctuary they have and their judge, judge and judgement, a a ex to avoid confusion. be blessing, give unto kingdom by god, who be the god of judge, order and not of confusion. therefore, micheas groan in spirit when he, regina, see all israel as sheep without a shepherd, and our prophet hosea think it a curse unto israel when they shall remain many day hos, without a king and without a prince, and without a offer and without a image and without a ephod, and without teraphim machivel who, for his villainy, be exempt from comparison though he have long since spawn in the world and dip in his opinion, much of. christendom set down a rule how a conqueror may weaken a subdue kingdom, unjoint the sinew thereof and make they fall by their own weight. that be see simon patrichs answer to mach part maxim. by take from they order and government, by lay the reane on their own neck and allow they to live lawless. but lift you up your voice in praise and thanksgiving among such as: keep holy day. because you live in a kingdom where corinthian one star differ from another in glory, where the judge in their several rank have their mouth as oracle and their bosom as treasury of good counsel who, when they see hos blood, swell to touch blood. they give it job, bar and door. say hitherto shall thou. come and thou shall come no further. here shall thou stay, thy proud wave. they be vine and olive and fig tree judg. they leave their fatness and their sweetness and their wine to reign over the tree of the forest. both ease and pleasure. for the good of god, people prize at no low rate these jewel in your own ground. let not your sin serve as broker to embeazle these commodity and convey they from you, but rather by good meditation and endeavour, husband your grain of mustard, seed that from the less you may grow to more grace and become so lovely in the sight of god that your case may never be as ephraim be, who, for their sin, have their judge devour and zecha the staff of beauty that be comely government break among they and you, the reverend judge of this land, who be ordain to lance the impostume and prune the luxury of this kingdom, weigh well your high stand. look upward and downward. upward and consider that i, i psalm, you be god. downward, and consider also that you shall die like. man there be two sin who forge and anuil. be never cold, but like pioneer they be ever. undermine your seat of justice. they be bribery and partiality brother in evil gen into their secret. let not my soul descend. bribery be mark in the forehead for a sin and therefore bribery dare not approach near your seat of justice. but i pray god it play not the usurper and take possession of some about you by unlawful intrusion. if it be true, which be common receive in the world than there have be, many belong unto man of great place who have deceit and nimbleness of wit and bribery and other sin like as many porter to bring they in the price of blood. yet have they? cry like the silversmith in the act. act the great goddess diana. great be diana of the ephesian. the great goddess justice. great be she when their care be not for justice but for their own gain. by pretend justice as the silversmithe intend their own thrive. by make image in diana temple. these thing i have hear, but i hope for better thing in you and you else. may the servant break the master head with precious balm and make they like rehoboam regina, whip with scorpion in stead of rod, and by turn amos justice into wormwood. become like soph, the wolf of the evening. that leave not the bone until the morrow mean, while the client find his physic worse than his disease, poor seafaring. man. he come toward the judge who, like a goodly promontory or land mark, give assurance of calm and harbour. make wrack unaware upon the sand- secret, by the way, before he can have audience in open court. whosoever they be, that by such under-working do abuse their lord and master and tire out the poor subject, let they know that their hand take bribe. be like the wind arist metor, cap caecia, which draw cloud of witness against themselves. now, though, bribery dare not be see in the place of justice. yet partiality be not such a stranger to flesh and partiality blood. and the more acquaintance, the more danger the mother of all law that be the law of moses will have. judge, the master of. their affection. neither exodus fear the rich, not favour the poor, and therefore justice, the mistress of the law, be describe blindfold as discern neither friend nor enemy, and be too holy to consult with flesh and blood in matter of so great consequence. which rule while pilate do not observe. he will but can not matth wash the filth of his impiety from his hand. peter, martyr regina, allegorize upon the seat of solomon. say that the height and the gold and theivory of the seat must put the magistrate in mind of his eminency, purity and spotless innocence. wherefore, let your hand be ever at the stern and your eye be fix on the star, the bright morning star, and consult jehesophat chr, who tell his judge that their judgement be the judgement of god and not of man, and be it ever to be. remember, write upon your wall that you be the nursing-fathers of the commonwealth and therefore aught to hold out to the king subject the breast of consolation to have such judge. it be a blessing, indeed a blessing which this people of israel be not worthy of, for by their sin, they devour their judge. whither, then, can they fly for succour? up to their king. no, for their king be fall. it be much to tell you how and how. many king of israel fall. but if you look unto the of king, the king chapter, you shall see it describe by a better pen. you shall see a rank of many, whereof one supplant and spread a net for a other by treason and conspiracy. one of they inherit a other impiety. eze, the father eat sour grape and the child tooth be set on edge. with a false key, they open the door for vengeance unto themselves. ezech, why will you do house of jacob? why will you die? have they please god? he will have. clip the wing of peace and plenty and prosperity and victory that they shall not have. fly out of their border. they have peace, the child of heaven and plenty. the child of peace and the daughter devour the mother. their opulency break their peace and make they rebel even against their king. their confuse state make i remember the blessedness that overshadowe our own in the time of queen elizabeth, our sovereign of bless memory. several pope authorize several disloyal subject to reach at her crown and person. be all, as it seem, of that opinion that cardinal baronius be of when, of late, upon a controversy between the pope and the venetian, he make a foolish gloss upon a good text, a book call variance between the pope and venice. pag. tell paul the five that whereas the vision come to peter of thing clean and unclean and a voice that he shall kill and eat. it be a warrant to peter successor that he shall first kill and then eat his principal office be to kill, to excommunicate, to depose. how this be rack above the high pin and beyond the meaning of the ghost, let divine judge. i insert this new occurrence with matter that be far ancient because i will have the world know that though there have be a change of pope, yet there have not be a change of the mind of pope. this that now be, be animate to kill, and so be those in the time of queen elizabeth, but yet she outlive many of they to prove: in they, that of the prophet david, that the bloodthirsty shall not live out half their day, and in she, that of solomon prou, that wisdom which she embrace carry length of day in her right hand and in her left hand riches and glory. the minister of the word of god, be command to baptize and preach those pope. baptize not in water but in blood, and their preach be nothing but a denounce of war unto christian prince. plant and root out. plant, but their own opinion and root out those king and prince which god have plant witness. cardinal comensis his letter unto doctor parry, for kill that gracious queen. who be ever a mark for the envenom arrow of they who forget that say of solomon ecclesiastes: curse not the king, no, not in thy thought. neither curse the rich in thy bed. chamber, for the foul of the heaven shall carry the voice, and that which have wing shall declare the matter. the pope command, and they obey cruel father and too, too forward son, virg ecl a. she live for all their plot till she be old and mellow for the kingdom of god. and when we lose she, though many wish their eye may be close up before they see a change yet of our commonwealth, we may say, as do the prophet isaiah, before she travel she bring forth, and before her pain come she be deliver. of a man child, we change almost nothing but the sex. after a david we have a solomon after a david, the young of isha, son and ashepheard. elizabeth the young of king henry, daughter not a shepherd but one that desire to be a milkmaid in woodstock park. we have a solomon who have speak and write many parable and wise sentence and can skill. witness all the learned of the land, of all the regina plant from the cedar of libanus unto the hyssop that grow upon the wall. and now i speak of thing pertain to the king. for such a argument, psalm. my tongue shall be the pen of a ready writer, god no doubt, say unto he. well, do good, steward, luke, jacobus, steward, thou have be faithful in a little, i will make thou ruler over much. thou have well govern one country. thou shall be governor over a other. so he be bring unto we, with acclamation, as it be upon the shoulder of all the kingdom, not ferry over upon the wave of blood, so that, if ever march, come in like a lion and go. out like a lamb. it be then when, in the begin of that month, the sickness of her majesty make we fear her death and, after her death, lion-like devouring by our enemy. and in the end thereof, the inauguration of our gracious king and his hopeful issue give we assurance of a everlasting lamblike calm. the authority that run like less stream through all court and office of this land fill up the bank in he yet have his anoint person since popery be a mint of treason, be a mark for traitor. when i recount all their hellish machination, the thought of the powder treason take up all the room. that that may say with the devil possess the man in the gospel, a a mark. my name be legion, for we be many, many devil, many treason, many head, many device. be in this one device which shoot at the king, the anoint of the lord, the queen, the mother of our hope, the prince, the branch of our hope, the council, the brain of the kingdom, the bishop, the charet of israel and the horseman of the same, the nobility and gentry, the flower of our country and commonwealth. they, they of that confederacy, be like to regina jehu, the son of nimshi. they march furious, they march as they have be mad, and how can it otherwise be? they must needs run. who the devil drive? wonderful, close be this snare lay by the prince of darkness. ps the plower will. have plough upon our back and have make long furrow. but one deep call a other, the depth of god, mercy call danger. out of the depth of the vault, his love be. cant a banner overu we be, not bury in the bowel of confusion. misery, scarce knock at our door, scarce touch the hem of our garment. mercy have embrace we on every side, whereas ephraim be compass about with the iniquity of their own heel. for by their sin they devour their judge. by their treason, their king be fall king and judge be. go whither can they fly for succour? up unto god. no, for it follow. there be none among they that call upon i, the language of the prophet. be all and none. all be like a oven. none call upon god. they go all with one accord down the stream. they be either possess, with none call upon god, a dumb spirit. they do not call, or with a frantic spirit. if they call, they call not upon god. they do not. but we must call and call upon god. we must call, or else we be sluggish. call on god, or else we be foolish in the name of christ, or else we be presumptuous for thing lawful, or else we be impious, zealous or else we be. but like warm christian, we must ask if we will have seek, if we will find luke, for the blessing of god, be not the tul off li spoil of salmacis. call without sweat and blood, though they be cheap, yet they come, not always without our own endeavour, which endeavour of we. if they be use, with what joy may we expect god blessing upon we, james as the husband man, wait for the former and the late rain. israel sin, as they do often. god be angry, moses. pray, god say unto he gen. stay i, not moses, as if prayer have be a cord to bind the hand of god that he can not smite. mark well the word. stay, i, not moses, but let i smite the people. james be any man afflict, let he pray, yes, but god, many time seem not to hear, but make his child like they that go down into the pit. yet tarry thou the lord leisure, be strong, prescribe he no time, but as i, i number moses, strike the rock twice and the water gush out. so be not you weary of prayer, but with your prayer, beat at the rock of your defence again and again, and if not at the first, yet in god good time, the water of comfort will issue out and make your soul like unto a water garden. you shall be change from gen jacob to israel. that be prevail with god. pray you must, and not be sluggish. and when you pray you must be wise and call upon god. upon god. such be the practice of constantine the emperor, when his enemy licinius begin his war with exorcism and charm, he undertake eusebius const all with prayer and holy meditation and therefore, the lord of heaven, make he lord of the field. and he find such comfort by prayer that he stamp upon his coin the const image of himself. kneel unto his god, pray to god. you must, and not be foolish in the name of christ and not be presumptuous. for philipp, the name of he, be the only name whereby we must be. save jacob in his journey toward padan aram, as he in the. name of christ. dream see gen, a ladder rear from earth to heaven which, by the see doc willer, upon gen judgement of divine, be a figure of christ who, by his human nature, touch earth and heaven by his divinity. upon this ladder there be angel that pass up and down. at the top of the ladder there stand almighty god whereby we may be assure that if we or our prayer pass by the ladder by christ jesus, we have god, the father, at the top of the ladder, ready to receive we and our prayer, whereas we have no such assurance if we go by saint or angel or any other bypath. save only the king. high way, regina, the. ascend to the throne of solomon, be by six stair or step, and at the end of every stair be engrave a lion. ascend you unto the throne of a great than solomon by the six petition of the same prayer that the son of god compose, and you shall find, annex to every petition, a lion, even the lion of the tribe of judah, who by his meditation will procure you both audience and favour. john, when the wine fail at the marriage at cana of galilee, christ, take six water pot full of water and turn they into wine. though those six petition deliver by our heart and tongue by reason of the mixture of our vanity, be. full of water, weak, wallowish and not season with that salt which every man shall have in himself, mark uer. yet by his power and mediation he can make they strong as wine and we so strong that by wrestle with god we shall be call no more jacob but israel. that be prevail with god. yet for all this, the devil will lead jere from the fountain of live water unto pit which have no water. when demand be make of the oracle in daphne, near unto antioch theod, history why it cease to give answer as former it have, do the devil make answer that he have no power because in that place the bone and relic of the martyr babylas be bury, insinuate some extraordinary. holiness and power in the dead martyr and by consequent invite the simple to call upon they. but you have otherwise learned, christ. you know that your high priest, who have feel your infirmity, hebrew say: come unto i all you, that be heavy lade and i will ease you. mat ester, when king ahashuerus wave his golden sceptre towards any man he may bold, come unto he into the inner court without use the mean of any courtier. what need we use the mean of either peter or paul, or the virgin mary or any saint? see the of king have. call we unto he by his word, the sceptre of his kingdom, john. what soever you ask the father in my name, say christ, he will. give it you. you must pray in the name of christ and not be presumptuous for thing lawful and not be impious, for otherwise you may ask and not have, because you ask amiss. if you ask either for thing unlawful or for thing for thing lawful, lawful to be, spend, unlawful upon your lust, i be. if you pray for thing unlawful, rom, how can the spirit help your infirmity? clemens, alexandrinus, strom, lib, observe of the pythagorean that they cry loud in their prayer, not because they think their god do not hear they, but because they will have the world hear that they pray for nothing, but for thing justifiable. let not impiety dead a thing that be so lively of itself as prayer be. happy be they that have their quiver full of these arrow. it be not every man, but a, a i be the prayer of a just man that prevail, much if it be fervent. moses be, allow to ascend up into the mount to confer with god, but say god, exodus. if any beast shall touch the mount, that beast shall die. so you may send your sanctify thought up unto the throne of god. but as for the beast, let not they once touch the mount. away with all beastly cogitation, away with cruelty, that tiger, away with deceit, that fox with lust, that goat with drunkenness, that swine. in your prayer, consult not flesh and blood. pray not for satisfaction of your idle, vain, carnal and sinful imagination, but pray for thing lawful and be not impious. zealous too and be not lukewarm christian. for as a pot full of water in the heat of summer, be trouble zealous and pollute with many fly. but if the same water be boil upon the fire, the fly neither dare nor will come near to pollute it. so while our soul in prayer be cold and lifeless, we be perplex with vain and idle cogitation, whereas if our mind be inflame with zeal, it will abandon all those vanity and so rectify our prayer that we shall not offer ecclesiastes the sacrifice of fool. this care. have not the man of israel in their prayer, for either they call not or not upon god. king and judge be their fuel. they devour, they both. the high in place, be the deep in sin, for whereas god have, take away regina, ten tribe from rehoboam, the son of solomon, and give they to of regina, the kindred of ephraim. even the house of the fountain be corrupt. the root of the king, the blood royal, they that look high in the court, they that sit at the stern of the common wealth, be corrupt. against these especial, the zanch in prolegom sup hos, prophet hosea speak in this prophecy. so do amos too, whereas isaiah and micheas direct their prophecy against judah not. israel, not one meddle with a other charge, as though they be all rule by the form of their commission. here i may just tax our wander planet ephraim, wander levits who, though paul, make profession against boast of a other man, line and labor, yet they be never well, but when they have their scickle in a other man harvest as though they will rob all the minister about they of their thes crown of rejoice, like ivy wind about the oak, that it may stand itself, but yet suck the juice out of the oak they flat, so that they wind themselves into favour with great one, thereby stand themselves in credit and suck no small advantage. i call god to record. i aim at no. particular man in the world. neither be i so uncharitable as to repine at any minister of god word who necessity force to take pain in many place now in this hard heart age, neither so uncourteous as to disallow that usual exchange of labor in this kind among friendly minister of the word. but i think those worthy of reproof who willing for advantage sake hold this unsettle course, presume that the citizen of london be like they of athens: act itch and long for novelty and loathe manna itself, especial if it come from they, to who they pay tithe. thus these oily mouth absalon, speak plausible thing to bring the people out of love with their true father, their true governor, their david, their true shepherd, i, i sam. thus they steal away the heart of the weak sort. in who brain there be many forgery mean, while those minister and pastor of parish who, like candle, spend away themselves to give light to other who have bear the heat of the day, be disgrace. and the other sort suggest that beside what be among they, jeremiah, there be no balm in gilead, there be no physician there, and the people come to hear their own parson. or vicar fox in mark, as bilney, a godly martyr, say, the people come to hear he, like malchus, have. their right ear cut off, they bring their left only sinister, interpret whatsoever they hear. so the nurse of schism do invade the possession of many painful labourer. there have be in time past some about this city, pedlar of learning not engross whole volume by read, but glean and deflower print book and sermon pickpurse of other man wit mere banquerupt if every man have his own. they have gen esau hand though they have jacob voice, and whether there be any such now a day or not i can not tell. but if there be, i fear it be still the sickness of this city to admire they and disesteem your own shepherd. they say, your house be the corinthian house of cloe, your household, the tim household of one siphorus, that house, that household will never be draw to forsake their own paul for tim, a heap of teacher. i desire you of this honorable city, even in the bowel of christ jesus, that you will not be willing to entertain you care not who, so it be not your own minister, that you will not gad. you care not whither, so it be, from your own parish church, but rather think that god in his wisdom have place your own minister over your own parish, hear their voice. if you will not hear they, but rather choose unto yourselves other place and hunt after other man, you go about. preposterous and saucy to break that order which the god of wisdom have set. your own minister, like exodus aaron, have the name of the ten tribe upon his breastplate, shall have his parishioner near and dear unto he and gala. you shall even pull out your eye to do he good, as the galatian will have do for saint paul. your own minister, be the man who prayer and preach be countermure for your defence against the enemy. say then of your own pastor: regina, my father, my father, the chariot of israel and the horseman of the same corinthian for the weapon of their warfare, be not carnal but mighty in god, through christ, to cast down. hold they be the perfumer of the world, and though they be earthen vessel, yet they carry that in, they that sweeten you. such love, i say, shall you carry towards your own minister. so shall ephraim ever have have a ear for their prophet hosea, for the prophet level, his speech against israel, which be his butt, and in the midst of this butt, his fair white be the house of ephraim. ephraim have mix, etc. there be a time when gen jacob lay his right hand upon ephraim, the head of ephraim, the young son of joseph, and his left hand upon manasses, the elder, from who he give the superiority. which prognostication begin to be fulfil, judg when one cluster of the grape of ephraim? be. think better than the vintage of abiezer, whereby gedton intimate that the man of ephraim in pursuit of oreb and zeb have the wheel of their chariot like the whirlwind and in surprise they be. so, pursue their strength, be as the strength of stone, but how be the brawn of the arm of that ephraim fall? ephraim be degenerate. which ephraim? ephraim that be sometime godly and in god favour, ephraim that be now pompous and of the kindred of the king, this ephraim be become degenerate. i will draw blood out of these two vein and brief handle these two. point apocrypha. he that have a ear to hear, let he hear. jerusalem, as you know, be the choose cedar among all the tree of. the forest. it have the birthright from all the godly city in the world, and so long as holiness keep residence in it, it be the cistern into which the fountain of all grace, pour his blessing by many, conduit, pipe and mean apocrypha. but she leave. she first love matth. she cry loud for christ blood to fall upon she and upon her child. and so it fall upon she. and now how be the gold become so dim? the prophet complain in diverse place that the house of god be turn into the house of vanity and that the isaiah valley of vision be turn into the valley of the shadow of death. therefore, trust no undermine jesuite, though he cry loud. the church of rome. as ever, the jew do a, a jeremiah, the temple of the lord. i confess that which no man can deny, that in paul rom time the faith of rome be famous over all the world. but now i fear that mother be not much more than a church. she be so gaudy trap with the invention of man, though like one claim a monopoly from god, she engross holiness and arrogate more unto herself than her sister church. yet i fear she be one of those star apocrypha which the dragon with his tail have sweep down from heaven. she deserve to lose her praise when she lose her piety. lamen, how be the gold become so dim? such be the case of ephraim which, first and which, second, i note ephraim that be a ruler among the people be become out of measure, sinful, a inconvenience indeed. see that great man, action, great among the people be, make precedent among their inferior, who suit themselves after the fashion of their governor that know the devil well enough when he say: unto god, i will be regina. a lie spirit in the mouth of achabs prophet. he know the prophet can lead achab and achab the people. if he can guide the leader than he know he shall win the field. be never meet withal in the book of god, but like a captive with a chain at his heel and, as one do, public penance. with a plate of impiety upon his forehead, he be call regina, the son of that cause all israel to sin. if a little shrub or twig fall to the ground, it fall itself only. but if a cedar fall, it fall not only itself, but with the fall it break down the little tree that grow about it. so the sin of private man be only bane to themselves, but if great man fall into impiety they be accessary to the ruin of many other, whereas regina, josiah, serve god himself, be a mean to put down the hill altar, destroy the chemarim and utter to abolish idolatry. his goodness be like psalm aaron ointment flow from the head to the beard and so by degree unto. the skirt of his garment. there be a dispute among the philosopher, as plutarch report, whether a army of lion, a hart be their captain, or a army of heart. a lion be their captain, be more powerful. i i plut in apotheg. it be determine for the army of heart follow the lion to show what virtue be infuse into the follower by the leader. if then the inferior be the image of the superior and, like a image in a glass, look upward or downward, to heaven or hell, as the body, i mean the superior, do then give i leave to advise you that sit at the stern, whether of little bark or great ship, whether of house, city or of country, that your evil. conversation. be not thorn in your child eye and other who you command, if they perceive your eye to be swell with lust, your heart to be as hard as the neither millstone, your tongue to be envenom with slander, your whole life to be job, a compass of the earth by deceit, as satan be, they will deem straight their warrant seal for commit the like offence and then sam you, mountain of gilboa. upon you be neither dew nor rain, because upon you the shield of the mighty be fall you, great one of the world. there be a curse upon you because, if not upon you yet, by your mean virtue, the blessing which shall clothe the child of god and as a shield defend. they from the stroke of god vengeance, for they be safe. that appear in their savior righteousness. virtue, i say. be cast down, tread under foot and make of none account among the less sort. because of the example of the great, so math evil do come, and woe be to they, by who it do come. how much better be it for a man of worth to say with nehemiah: neh shall such a man as i flee his meaning be. not i by any mean, lest other shall be discourage by my flight. how much better be it to have the say of joshuah for a motto ever to be remember. josh, i and my house will serve the lord ay, and because i, therefore my house, you superior, then who, with a respect grace, sit the stern of example. how can you escape a double death? have their blood upon you as well as your own, for be accessary to their guilt. such be the case of ephraim, who, be great in israel, cause israel to sin, as may appear by the first verse of this chapter, for when god will have heal israel, he be lead by the hand from the stream to the spring, from israel to ephraim, who example. be the bane of israel, which ephraim have. mix himself among the people. so by that mean he have not only sin breed at home but also borrow abroad. ephraim have mix himself among the people. ephraim be as a cake upon the hearth, not turn. if you ask who mix, ephraim mix himself. if you ask where? among the people. if you ask what be the effect, he be as a cake on the hearth, not turn ephraim. and so all mankind be poise down. the ephraim have mix himself wrong way, by his own plummet and the by as be set upon the left side of we all. we be of ourselves, natural, more prone unto evil than goodness. jeremiah, our father have eat sour grape and the child tooth be set on edge. eve our great grandmother be beguile by the serpent, see and like and eat the fruit of the forbid tree. well, may that in the poet be fit unto she virg eclog. her eye be accessary unto the sin of her soul. adam commit treason and we that be adam heir, forfeit our estate. we have our will fetter and our understanding the candle of our soul put out. there be a dash in our coat for ever. the world be like a well tune instrument. all the creature in their kind give praise to god. there be no jar till man who be the chief of the consort strain a note beyond his reach. ever since the son of adam have have their meditation, brackish and impure. saint paul, become our herald and tell we in many place, corinthian, that of ourselves we can think a good thought and the best of we luke. when we have, do all that we can. we be but unprofitable servant. and like a impartial christian, he begin at home with himself and say: rom, wretched man that i be, who shall deliver i from this body of death? if you believe not, he yet melt at the lamentation of our mother, the church, who iron heart, make her lumpish and unfit to go to god without god spirit. like a adamant to draw, she cry out in the first of the canticle and say: draw i and i will run after thou. and yet the papist do so. much flat flesh and blood that they make man soul as a bird in a cage, have wing to fly if the cage be open and, like a lame man, go upon chrutche need perhaps a little help, as though they will make he cooperate with god, whereas weak man, god know we want both wing and leg, both will and power unto goodness for philipp, from god come. trust paul rather than bellarmine himself. lactantius, who be the hammer of gentilism, instit, plead against the heathen and say that their god be not the author of corn and wine and oil. he say he can prove these thing be in the world before either ceres or saturn be bear, but if these thing be invent by they. who, but only god, give they wit to invent such thing. we be all of we, of the metal of a stone. we can roll down a hill by ourselves, of our own nature, but up to heavenward we can go without the help of god, holy spirit, we be like a spring-locke of ourselves. we can shut and keep out the grace of god. we can open ourselves to receive they in, but by the help of thou, lord, who be the only key. but bless be god who take away our heart of stone and give we heart of flesh. aug ench laur, who at the first, by his prevent grace, do work in we to be willing, and after, with his subsequent grace, he deny. we that be willing, we shall not will in vain. therefore, aug pers cap, we must boast ourselves of nothing, because nothing be our own. we be star. we derive all that we have from the father of light, james eod lib cap. give therefore, lord, what thou command, and then command what thou will, for goodness, be a flower that grow not in our garden, it become we all to look upon our trail, wing and confess that we can fly, for no spice can flow out of our garden, no virtue out of our soul, unless god, holy spirit, enrich our soul cant, unless the north and south arise and blow upon our garden, for of ourselves we be natural incline to evil, as ephraim be. so if you ask who mix, he mix himself, if you ask where he mix himself among the people, what ephraim have all israel as a train to follow after? they all make, by many degree, the mayor part of among the people, the son of abraham. they be ten, tribe and judah, but only two be join with the people too. be not they a goodly company, even as the morning spread upon the mountain? yes, their multitude be great, but they be not therefore holy because they be many. and therefore, instead of wine, bellarmine broach, that which be worse than water, when a a, not a, eccl, secund bel, for one of the mark of the church, he set down multitude as though there be. not a broad way that lead unto hell and many passenger in that way math. what glory do multitude bring unto the church regina, when elijah mourn because there be so few that profess true religion, as though he have be, leave alone as a sparrow upon the house top in the day of trajan the emperor, the church of god be like a dove in the hole of the rock and therefore the christian in his time be except against for their conventicle plin ep. trajan be apologize by pliny the second, who write unto trajan and tell he that he find no fault with the christian, unless it be a fault to pray and praise their god in their antelucane hymn: ecclesiastes, history, soct and soz. there be a time when the arrian heresy spread so fast that there be athanasius against all the world and all the world against athanasius. god choose, be a pearl in the rock and a vain of gold, hide in the earth, hard to be find. the wilderness be great, where the goat do range. the fold of god, but small, luke, yet fear not little flock it be. your father will to give you a kingdom. ephraim have mix himself among the people. they be a irreligious and idolatrous people which be as thorn in the side of ephraim and mean to draw people they unto evil. out of which word do arise this second observation that we must avoid evil company, for with the froward we shall learn frowardness. the wicked be like stick one unto a other. kindle the heat of concupiscence, midwife they be, by their persuasion, help monstrous birth in the world. bring to pass that james, the soon lust may conceive and bring forth sin, and sin, when it be finish, may bring forth death. they reach out one unto a other the hand of error, say not ps, come, let we go up into the house of the lord, but amos, let we go up to bethel and transgress to gilgal and multiply transgression. a wicked companion be like unto daniel i i gen a adder in the path. which bite the horse and make the rider to fall backward. he make those who he work upon by his persuasion to become retrograde tim with demas, to forsake paul and embrace this present world and, with apocrypha, the church of ephesus to leave their first love and become apostate. in matter of christianity, it be a perilous conflict between the fire and the stubble. even iron lib soliloq, say isidorus, will melt at this fire. the most stay man. see, all man have such flaxen soul and so apt to take fire, will thaw into vanity when he meet with evil company. as regina rear up golden calf in daniel and bethel to keep the people from go to serve god at jerusalem. so to draw those that be flexible from their good and godly purpose, they erect vanity and game unto bacchus and flora, which idol i mean. drunkenness and wantonness. be better client upon the sabbath day than the minister of god. word with a thousand lure, evil companion, provoke unto intemperate course and, like fimbria in cicero, plead for roscius, ros amer, who be angry with scaevola that he will not receive all his sword point and blade into his bowel. so these be angry that all other will not run with they into the same excess of riot. but it become you who have better learned, christ, to be like virg ecl ult arethusa, which pass through the sicilian sea and yet take no saltness philipp to. live as paul will have, man to live blameless in the midst of a froward and crooked generation. it be with the common corruption of the world as with a common plague, when no man may safe converse with these but the physician to cure they, nor any with those but grave and wise man to draw they unto goodness by their good counsel. exo over the ark of the lord. in the tabernacle there be portray cherubin and they have their face and wing, look and point one towards a other, but all of they towards the ark of testimony. so every one must aim at a other by their love, but all of they at the lord. they must love in the lord and ever maintain. that true love knot of the communion of saint. and here, for the use of this doctrine, i can not pass over a triple caveat which be meet to be give to three sort of man: the first, simple man. the second, man of wander conceit. the three, self conceit, simple be they who, upon a consideration that all simple, the world be wicked, do sequester themselves from the world, affect a monastic life. forget that god in the nonage of the world, say gen, it be not good for man to be alone. avoid perhaps some occasion of do hurt but forego without doubt all mean of do good. and here you have the pedigree of eremites who life be lead under math a bushel, whereas both life and doctrine shall have be on a candlestick. they ever quarrel with human society like candle, turn downward, choke the flame of themselves with the oil of themselves themselves, by their own peevishness, damn up the light that the world may have be the better for, and so retire themselves from all occasion of intercourse. in their dull judgement, become antipode and tread opposite unto the world. their life be a continual row against the stream, and their own house may seem to deserve the name and the inscription of their sepulchre. conform lib conf. franc, pag. francis. be one that leave the society of man and converse with. beast and bird and so much joy in solitariness and a private life that the papist take he to be a man that transgress matthew no one jot of the law, and therefore they have compile hymn and song in praise of he, as though he have have a maiden soul free from sin. yet for all these boast, no question, but he and all their darling be man and have their affection. they find many mutiny and rebellion in their little commonwealth. a second sort of man there be who think they can sufficient wander conceit, mingle themselves with evil company at home. therefore they affect travel abroad that have traffic with foreign country. they may borrow the sin of other nation. god, i confess, have enrich. several country with several commodity, that no country be absolute of itself. every country shall crave help of a other. so the wisdom of god have decree that the need of every country shall occasion love among all country. hence do arise the necessity of the merchant trade which triumph as a queen in this honorable city and make it like unto tyrus isaiah, have the riches of the river to be a revenue unto it and her merchant as the noble of the world. yet in my opinion the travel of many young gentleman be more ordinary then beneficial. i do not censure all, much less condemn they, for i know the use thereof have be and may be behooveful to our common mother. yet many i know, gen like dina, the daughter of jacob, have lose their virginity by go abroad and have return home impure. and our country, which in former age be plain and downright, they have make like arras full of strange form and colour, have in it, twist and weave, the fashion of all country that be inhabit, as though the four wind have conspire to blow their chaff and their feather and their dust among we and make a dunghill of our country. they imbrue their mind in the impiety and suck up the infection of other country and return home with stomach full charge. they vomit their poison in their mother lap. they practice in england what they have unhappy learn abroad. regina solomon, outlandish. woman bring in outlandish religion and condition and so much estate themselves in the bosom of the king that they draw, he and his people, to idolatry a, a regina. the same solomon send his ambassador into strange country for gold and silver and ivory. so they go over and bring they and withal. they bring ape and peacock. i fear it be the case of many who, friend, send they abroad to learn knowledge and experience whereby they may better the church and commonwealth, which perhaps they leave behind and bring home only the ape and peacock. i mean proud and fantastical condition. else. what mean this revolution of fashion when man that shall be mere english, be not themselves but compound man, spanish, dutch, italian and what not? i will therefore, in the bowel of christ, exhort all you, young gentleman that intend this course of travel, that you will strive to bring home not the ape and peacock, but the gold and silver and ivory, viz that learning and those manner that be precious. so shall you make a save voyage unto your own soul and gain that good experience whereby your country shall be enrich. a three sort of people there be, who pretend such a man of proud conceit, abhor of evil company, that they look asquint and disdainful upon all man as be not holy enough. to converse with themselves. they be so tasty that they quarrel with the order of the church. repute they as old hair which superstition have shake off. they be brownist and barowist, peace-breaker of the church. though our country now be not much molest with they judg yet for the division of reuben. there have be great thought of heart. it be with our soul while we live in these house of clay, as with man while they live in house. neither can they enjoy the full benefit of the sun, but both light and heat be abate. neither can our soul of the sun of righteousness there be find such imperfection, both in the warmth of love and in the light of understanding, though the prophet reprove. they that say one unto a other: isaiah, i be holy than thou. though christ say that math, tare will grow among the wheat until the harvest. though saint paul say that, corinthian, if we will depart quite from the wicked, we must depart out of the world. yet for all this, the brownist and the barrowist hold opinion- see their writing, gifford and other against they- that we of the church of england be not true member of the church, nor our church, the true church of god. because stain, say they with irrelligion and impiety, the varnish of their own hypocrisy, delude they so that they make love unto themselves and grow amorous of their own virtue, which they draw far beyond the staple, that of it they may weave unto themselves a garment of righteousness. what can the pharisie have do more? who plead his own merit, say luke, i fast twice awecke, i give alm to the poor and give tithe of all i have. if you look into their conversation and observe their vaunt with judicious eye and ear, what a rank shall you see of barren figtree and ps green bay-tree to who david compare the wicked? what a noise shall you hear of tinkle cymbal, to which paul compare they which have a show of religion but no love, corinthian. so little love to their equal have these man that when the rod of god be shake over our head, i i gifford against barrow pag. they make themselves the only man that be fit to stand in the gap. they blaze the honor of their own preach as though it be so full of life that they only know the blood and marrow of the scripture of their own. prayer, as though they be so effectual that elijah his spirit be only redouble upon they and that every one of they be a second. so little obedience have they to their superior giff^rd against barrow pag that the reverend father of the church, who may well borrow that say of the church in the canticle, cant the son of my mother be angry with. i be by these man, scorn disobey, resist father. forgive they, for they know not what they do. luke tull, the son of sophocles, be desirous to rule, implead the father for dotage that they may have. all matter commit to themselves. but sophocles present to the judge his oedipus, a tragedy which he have pen in his old age, and bid they. judge whether that be the work of a dote man or not, which they all esteem to come from a wit full of nimbleness and activity. condemn the son and justify the father. so these fiery spirit long to have the staff in their own hand. have, by their word and in their writing, traduce the father of our church. but if we look upon their oedipus and mark with what discretion they govern and how behooveful their government be for our time, we shall sure find they not to be dote father, but their accuser to be wicked son. and here my brother bemoan with i the estate and calamity of our mother. the church which rebekah, like have diverse opinion, strive in her womb, must not. her pang needs be great plin nat history amphisbena-like. two head one against a other, strive for the sovereignty. be not the body then like to break. how well do it become the son of oil to nourish peace, a fruit of he which be anoint with the oil of gladness above his fellow. when wind blow against wind, schism against schism, the church may say, as jocasta sometime say: weep over the malice of her two son, eteocles and polynices sen in thebay. thou fear he and he fear thou, and i fear you both, because i fear the destruction of you both. you then that be too prodigal of enmity one towards a other. sam, let not the street of gath and ascalonring your disgrace nor. the daughter of the philistine. tune your shame to their tymbrell. be not the nail and tooth of the church to scratch and bite your brother. howsoever. your sail swell with a favourable gale, yet lipsius in his five book of politic, advise you to take in at the harbour of peace. it become not member of the same body to interfere and work one upon a other, corinthian, when there be jar among you, be not you carnal. yes for peace. become those spirit which relish and taste of he who birthday song: be luke. peace upon the earth better bare epistle, say a learned father, and therefore with enlarge bowel. i speak not now unto brownist and barowist, but unto those who be near friend to our church man for their diligence and other good part worthy of much praise, and yet so impatient at the ceremony of our church that they be scarce willing in the observe of they to join with we. i will pray they to remember that in the canticle where the church be compare unto can a army with banner display. now, if there be ever army without order, let they judge. if there ought not to be order in the church, let saint paul judge. who say corinthian, let every thing be do decent and in order. see then there be one god, the father of we all, one church, the mother. of we all, one christ, the elder brother of we all, one baptism, the seal of we all, one faith, the hand of we all, one salvation, the mark whereat we all shoot. let we strive, ephesian, to maintain the unity of the spirit and in the band of peace. let we not be so conceit of our own holiness as to distaste all man company, nor yet so lavish of our company as to mingle ourselves among the wicked. but be cautelous, lest we be like to ephraim, who mix himself among the people, and the effect of this mixture be lamentable. he be as a cake on the hearth, not turn, raw on the one side and roast on the other. partly a cake, not turn. religious and partly idolatrous apocrypha, lukewarm fit to be, spew out of god mouth. a sin indeed to halt between two opinion, to have regina a knee for god and a knee for baal, and for regina rimmon, in the house of rimmon, to profess two religion, to woo the flame of persecution, lest they shall endure the punishment of either a a sam. if dagon presume to stand by the ark of the lord, it be well worthy to fall corinthian. there be no communion between christ and beliall. euseb history, lib cap. saint john can not endure to be with cerinthus in the bath. saint jerome pen like a lance be charge against uigilantius and many other. austen, in his disputation, speak hot word coal of. juniper against the arrian, the pelagian, the donatist and the manachee regina. before all these, josiah, who name remain upon record in the calendar of the just, who soul be bind up in the bundle of life and his life, hide in christ with god, can not endure idolatry while he reign. ecclus, therefore, his name be like a perfume make by the article of the apothecary philip camerar. in it be remember of a certain sultan which die at the siege of that be persuade by the muphti who hold the place of a bishop or patriarch among the mahumetan turk, not to suffer so many religion as be in his dominion. he answer that a nosegay of many flower smell more sweet than one flower only. which i confess to be true, but the case with religion be neither the same nor the like, for in a nosegay they may be all flower, but among religion they must be all weed, all heresy, except one only flower which be the truth. apocalip cap, the spirit of god. blame the church of ephesus for embrace the doctrine of the nicholaitan. the church of smyrna for embrace the doctrine of balaam. the church of thyatira for embrace the doctrine of jezabel. religion be the jewel of the ring. neh, therefore, the same mouth that speak the language of canaan. why shall it speak the language of ashdod? the same chair of state which hold religion stamp with the image of the most high? why shall it? hold the i i apocrypha, purple harlot, the whore of babylon, with all her paint and complexion upon her face and the cup of fornication in her hand. there be two reason to the contrary, the one political, the other theological or divine. the reason political be draw from the mutiny and political uproar that be make where there be two religion profess there be in the church of germany the opinion of, and what rupture those meteor breed in that sky, what breach in that church, i will not tell you, but i refer you unto epistle, and epistle bezaes epistle, where you shall see the judgement of calvin and many other against the toleration of they. when martin luther, under the countenance and conduct of fredrick the duke of saxony, hold a candle in the dark before god, blear child and awake antiquity for his succour open a door unto the truth. there be a book publish by authority for the allowance of interim germanicum, pag. that be till. matter of religion be settle among they, man shall enjoy what religion they will, in the interim or mean time, it be mislike by many great divine, among the rest by gasper aquila, a minister of great account at that time, by the lubicenses, the lunebergenses, pag, the hamburgenses, the, and for the most part by all the low saxony. the relation of these thing will require a long time. therefore, i refer you, for your better knowledge, unto diverse part of sleidan commentary, where you shall find the stir be great and the consequent have like to have be bloody. if god, in his wisdom, will set a mark of distinction upon all, such as: do not mourn for our zion in her widowhood, nor pray for. the peace of our jerusalem. what a show will the rank of our hollow heart english make? who will pull down our culver house, our little church? how often have thou hear they, god, though they whisper unto themselves, say of the enemy of our peace judg, why be the wheel of his chariot so long a come? i thirst not after their blood or trouble their vein shall ever be spring of blood for i but see they will not be charm. not hear. then, if the house be shake about their ear, it be but justice. if the liberty of they say unto the conscience, i be restrain for thou. if the wealth say unto the conscience, i be impair for thou. if the strength of the body say unto the conscience, i be, bring low for thou justice. i say upon they, of who our enemy may say unto we, jud, if we have not plough with your heifer we have gain no advantage against you. the reason, theological or divine, be, draw first from the weakness of man, second from the commandment theological of god. the weakness of man be such that the devil, who can weakness of man turn himself into a angel of light, play upon that advantage. and therefore it quick come to pass that all the eastern church, soz eccl. history almost be corrupt with arianism and the world wonder that it be so sudden turn. arrian heresy be like a rainbow it have. a thousand colour, glorious and seem celestial, but virg it be ever against the sun, malach, the sun of righteousness. therefore, it be fit for no man to mingle himself among the heretical, but rather to get out of babylon. that there may be, recover out of the jaw of the devourer a leg or a piece of a ear, amos, the and the, some one or other silly and miscarry soul. beside the weakness of man, there be the commandment, the commandment of god, of god also enforce the tenor whereof be that levit. no ground shall be sow with two seed, that no garment of linsey wolsie shall be wear, that no ground shall be plough with a ox and a ass together. all which be. shadow of two religion, whereof there ought not to be a mixture. for to join old ceremony of superstition with god, truth be to stitch luke a piece of a old garment unto a new vesture, which will make the rent or breach the great, the sin more odious unto god. it be observable that noah pray for his son and say: gen god, persuade japhet to dwell in the tent of sem and let canaan be their servant. he know how well it please the holy trinity to see the union of the godly and their loathe of the ungodly. it, please, god. indeed, else will the prophet david never have hang up a table of statute for his own house, his little commonwealth psalm whereby he chase away all the wicked who, as the same david, testify elsewhere. god himself, love not the ungodly, and he that delight in wickedness do his soul abhor psalm. happy be we then in who land popery be not enfranchise and make free denizen. so god will have it mat. he will have the offend eye or hand cut off. therefore, cant tell we still, lord, where thou feed and where thou lie at noon. we will only cleave unto thy truth and not hunt after the opinion. that be heretical. the invention of man brain cant, for why shall we? be as she, that turn aside unto the flock of those companion. i will conclude this point with the testimony of the cappadocian by gregory, nazianzen in his who see they live in safety and peace when all their neighbour country about they be mud with contention, say that sure they be preserve by the holy trinity, because they do without rent, with one accord, so zealous, maintain the trinity against the arrian. i hasten to that which follow among religion, luke one thing be needful, and so from the sin of ephraim i come to the punishment of ephram, which, out of these word, the interpreter say be this: that as man be hungry and come with a ravenous desire unto a cake that be upon a. hearth devour and eat it up, though it be not bake but raw on the one side. so shall the enemy of ephraim, like those hungry devourer, come with violence against they hasty, make spoil and prey upon they. the handle of which point of their punishment, though, i will not adiourn until another time yet, i will square it and make it fit unto another place of this text, namely the verse follow, upon which this doctrine may more suitable be graft, for it be say: stranger have devour his strength, and yet he know not, etc. which punishment, without doubt be deep, if not the bottom of the cup of tremble. deep indeed, whether we respect the devourer, they be stranger, or the thing devour which. be the strength of ephraim, many time in the book of moses joshua the king, and chronicle it be aver unto the child of israel, stranger by god, who be only true that if the people of israel will serve the lord they shall enjoy the land. if not, than they shall be dispossess by stranger deu, a people of a stern countenance and a unknown language, which admonition of almighty god be knit together like as many beam of the sun in a burn glass may serve, like those beam, to kindle a fire, to inflame the heart of man, to make themselves zealous for the lord of host. that by their obedience, the daughter of that zeal, they may prevent the invasion of strange devourer of. jere babel, who be a golden cup in the hand of the lord, as the prophet jeremy say, to make the nation drunken with vengeance. and then they rage, as it be the prophecy of god who know before. so be it the case of israel, who feel it when it come upon they, for psalm by the water of babylon, they down and weep when they remember thou zion. as for their harp, they hang they upon the willow that be thereon. while they that lead, they captive, say: come and sing we one of your song of zion. but, alas, how can they sing the lord song in a strange land? this be their first captivity after the law, but they be, surprise, the second time. anon after the death of christ, like man who be willing to bear neither the hard yoke of the law nor that of the gospel, which be easy matth though in the judgement of james, i be it be call a law of liberty. for the eagle in the roman ensign that be their arm, tower aloft with incredible majesty and couch all the nation of the world under it, like less bird, and make they tributary unto caesar, among other country, the land of jury, be dead in sin and trespass and therefore, as one say, become a carcass or a smell carrion and therefore fit to be prey upon by that aeagle. they endure the devouring of a stranger, but by who? but when? but how? by who? a? a josephus, by vespasian the emperor and titus his s^n. when, about year after the prophecy of christ of the destruction of jerusalem- how that i may tell who, give i the pen of esdras, the scribe or the tongue of some fluent orator- there be diverse apparition in the city, beside voice from the east and from the west, all as prognosticatious of their ruin. within the wall, they be divide into diverse company under diverse captain. they turn their sword upon themselves, as though their own hand have be ordain to be their executioner as well as their soul be malefactor and rebel against their god, josephus. then come hunger and pestilence and the sword, like god good servant, shoulder out one another. and strive. which of they shall first revenge their master quarrel? famine make mother eat their child, and those womb that give they harbour be now become the place of their burial. one cut a other throat that he may catch the morsel before they fall into his belly. extreme hunger make their practice lamentable and monstrous, both to be pity and abhor. when famine have play his part, then come pestilence and layed-along whole herd of they grovel upon the ground. which misery when they feel they gasp and gaze upon the temple, as the story say. which misery when titus, the delight and honor of mankind, behold. he lift up both hand and eye together to heaven and call god to witness that it be not. his cruelty but their impiety that do thus awake. he who hand hold vengeance for to repay when famine and pestilence have pour out their vial, than come the man upon the red horse: apocrypha blood and war and the wing sword fly with triumph. among they there be slay, as the story say. very many there be take prisoner. many, the roman in scorn, sell jew for one penny, because among they their master be sell for thirty penny. euseb eccl history, lib cap aelius adrianus, have a purpose, if it can have hold, to have re-edify the city and to have call it aelia after his own name. lib cap julian, the, in his blasphemous imagination, think to build up the city again as glorious as. it be before, because he will have disprove christ, who have prophesy of the utter dissipation thereof. but he that sit in heaven, laugh, he to scorn his workman and his work be hinder by the fall of lime and sand and a great gate, by the flash of fire and by the quake of the earth and by other mean, as if god have say of jerusalem, as sometime he say of jericho josh: curse be the man before the lord that rise up and build this city. he shall lay the foundation thereof in his elder son and in his young son shall he set up the gate of it. thus, jerusalem, thou who, like gen reuben, waste the begin of god, manly strength thou be. unstable as water and do forsakethy god. therefore, reuben jerusalem, thy dignity be, go senec in troa, seneca describe the misery of captivity, where by the chorus he say that priamus now be happy, for he see not the burn of troy, his victorious hand be not bind behind he, he be not drag at agamemnon chariot. and sure they who eye be close before they see the woe of their friend and country, may have that apply unto they, which be say of crassus in cicero, orator upon the like occasion, lib orat, life may not be so fit, say to be take away as death. give for a special comfort, zach. give they lord, what will thou give they? a barren, womb and dry breast a. favour. indeed, better to be barren then to bring forth child to the murder. but why shall i spend my time in search record for evidence in a matter so plain as this? you know as well as i that foreign invasion and captivity open the door to murder and rapine and oppression and mutiny and liberty far from christian, and confusion more than barbaric. good governor, be depose the incendiary of the world. be enthronize in stead of many year crown with gladness, in stead of the thickness of corn which shall have make the valley laugh and sing. there be see a blur countenance of the commonwealth. weed the brood of negligence, the ensign of poverty do stain the face of the earth, the land howl. and be abash i, i hos by, swear and lie and kill and steal and whore. they break out and blood touch blood. yet in the end, psalm, these lion lack and suffer hunger, when they that fear the lord want no manner of thing that be good, psalm. bless be the people, therefore, that have no lead into captivity, nor no complain in their street. yes, blessed be the people which have the lord for their god. this doctrine may serve as a spur and as a bridle. as a spur: spur to drine we forward unto praise and thanksgiving, and as a bridle to keep we back from run inordinate course. it may well stir we up unto praise. yes, praise the lord with understanding for. we have not as yet be scare with the bark of any uncouth wolf, but under our own vine and our own fig tree we have quiet repose with our wife and child. our land have be a treasury and a storehouse for god blessing, whereas our neighbour country have be the cockpit for all christendom to fight their battle in. we have be raise up unto our labor by the noise of the cock who, in his chirp so merry, can greet the morning, whereas other have be rouse up with the sound of a trumpet unto battle. we have have the light of the gospel and they the light of beacon. we have have peace, the child of heaven, and plenty, the child of peace, while they have be measure with the line of samaria and have have stretch out upon they the plummet of the house of achab. we have live on the lee side of the world. we know not what a storm mean, as upon alexandria, it be say, the sun shine once every day. so we have not want our daily comfort, but, like god minion, we have have daily cause of rejoice, both great and small. our mountain have skip like ram and our little hill like young sheep levit. if we do well, all our feast shall be feast of tabernacle, in remembrance that our forefather live unquiet in respect of our settle. estate psalm oftentimes. may england with israel now say: from my youth up, have they fight against? i psalm the plower, plough upon my back and make long furrow both gebal and ammon and amaleck with they that dwell at tyre, do they not even write? and, in grave victory, upon their own ship, assure themselves of the conquest before the encounter. but how they speed the sea, the narrow sea can tell. ask of the wind, ask of the whirlwind, and they will tell you. beside the attempt of our foreign enemy, our country have be gnaw and wring with the gripe of home-born traitor. look still for the trouble of the stream that they may fish, they say in their heart, as esau say, gen the. day of mourn for my father will short come, then will i kill my brother jacob. the day of mourn for queen elizabeth will come short. then will we make havoc of our brother and either kill they or drive they like owl into the desert and like pelican into the wilderness, whereas, ignorant man, their simplicity will have betray. they unto their enemy, who know how to love the treason but hate the traitor and their malice. be like the duke of alnaies or the guise sword which, after the victory, will know neither english nor french, nor spanish, nor dutch, nor any friend nor any hire favourite. what? no return of thanksgiving for all these blessing. valerius maximus, lib cap say. scipio africanus, have i get? so many victory for you, my countryman, and not so much as my bone remain among you, have i get so many victory for you, may god say, and no remembrance of i leave among you luke. where be the nine, but one among ten, but one among ten thousand, that return to give praise, all like the moon which darken that sun that give it light. do we all take that cup of salvation with the left hand, which god have reach out unto we with the right hand of his bounty, have we not all cause to call upon the name of the lord? let not god blessing fall upon we as pure water upon sink which return nothing in stead thereof but annoysome smell again. jacob can cast his account and remember what before he want and what now he have, can say out of a thankful mind: gen, with this staff, come i over jordan, job, do, job serve god, for nought it be the speech of the devil. the devil himself can tell that where god bestow his blessing, man ought to pay tribute, praise and obedience. aug in med. unthankefulness be a parch wind. damn up the fountain of god, blessing realdus columb. there be give unto man. as the anatomist do observe one muscle in the eye more than in the eye of a beast to teach that man be bear to look upward in token of thankfulness rather then beast therefore abak. let none sacrifice unto their net. nor burn incense unto their yarn, but let every one of we, like a bird, leap from branch to branch and sing as she leap. leap by our meditation, from one blessing unto a other, from our creation to our redemption, to our justification, to our sanctification, to our glorification, from branch to branch, and ever as we leap, sing out that hymn of david psalm: praise the lord my soul, and, as though that be too little, all that be within i praise his holy name. as this doctrine be a spur to stir we up to thankfulness, so i tell you, it may serve as a bridle to curb those sin, which bridle be the occasion that stranger may devour our strength. god have plant we. as isaiah, a vineyard upon a very fruitful hill he have hedge we about with his providence. what can he have do for his vineyard that he have not do in stead of good grape? if we bring forth wild grape, iudgethen, judah and jerusalem, judge yourselves. can you have truce with any of his creature? will not god command the heaven to be as iron and the earth as brass unto you? will he not deny you the former and the latter rain? will he not give your fruit unto the caterpillar, your labor unto the grasshopper and your mulberry tree unto the frost? yes, he will meet you, zecha, as well. on this side as on that, though, a a jere coniah-like, you be a signet. upon the finger of god. yet if you wring the finger, he will pull you off. joel, that which be leave of the palmer worm, the grasshopper shall eat, and the residue of the grasshopper shall the cankerworm eat, and the residue of the cankerworm shall the caterpillar eat. though you escape the pit, you shall be take in the snare. jeremy, you shall fly from a lion and a bear shall meet you, or lean your band upon a wall and a serpent shall bite you. amos, regina, be it peace, lehu or not, quote the messenger of jezabel. what talk thou of peace? quote he again. see the whoredom and witchcraft of jezabel be great in nuraber. so how can we talk of peace with god? and ourselves, while our sin and impurity be great in number, for the which god be, the lord of host, can unmuzzle all his creature: fire, water, hail you snow, storm and tempest to be the portion for the wicked to drink. the world be old, and now in her dotage, but good god, what a wonder. be it though she be old, she be ever in childbed, in travel every month, of new fashion, of new sin, of new vanity, of all new thing, save only of the new man that have bring in so many uncouth disease as punishment for these new sin. that old man be in such request that the world be ready to say with the young man in the gospel, who christ. bid follow that she will follow, but first she must luke go bury her father. she have a old man at home that be not yet dead, a old man, the old adam, the man of sin. live and not dead. not dead, but live in her own loin. plu thales milesius, have a ass which be lade with salt, melt the salt in the water and so be disburden, and afterward be lade with wool and plunge. the same burden in the water, be more burden. we be all fraught in some measure with that mark salt which every man shall have in himself that we melt away by bathe ourselves in the pleasure of the world. then we be lade with vanity, far light than wool. which, while we plunge in the same stream, we be unaware so burden that we can climb unto the hill, not to the hill of zion, not up to heaven, not up to those hill. from whence come all our help? these vanity, these sin, these, these do lime the soul of man and hinder their flight to heaven. and with a false key, they open the door to vengeance. they wring the sword out of the hand of god. presume not, therefore, to sin, for that will make your sin sin of a whorish forehead, but rather be lead by the punishment to the sin, as by the stream unto the spring slander, not the frost and the hail and the wind and the weather they be. god pursuivant, send to call you home, though you think they unseasonable and unwelcome. rather, kiss the rod and submit yourselves unto his power and look into your own distemper estate. suppress those rebel within you. your affection, retain paul for your counsellor, who tell you that, gal, as you sow, so shall you reap. hos, sow not, say the prophet, the wind, for fear you reap the whirlwind for your harvest. so we not drunkenness, for fear you reap for your harvest the cancel of the image of god, which be upon you. bend not your knee to drink health and carouse, which shall be bend in your prayer and for the service of the live god. nor let that mouth which shall praise your god be. like idol, ever gape to devour much of that which will relieve god child, i, i philipp, stand in awe and fear. least those two can be sever, which saint paul have. link together the belly, the god and the end damnation. when the devil wound or kill by any sin except drunkenness, he pierce with a single bullet, one sin only. but when by drunkenness, then by chain shoot, many sin link together. it be never alone. it draw on swear and quarrel and ribaldry and word. what not save only they that be powder with salt and deed. what not save only the fruit of the spirit. levit mala. by the law levitical, there be no beast allow to be a sacrifice that be blind or lame or unclean. when man be so drunken that they can see, and therefore blind that they can stand, and therefore lame that they foam at the mouth and therefore unclean, neither god nor the world will judge they to be live sacrifice unto their god. beware of drunkenness. for sure there be, in regina, death in the pot if it be abuse. so we not blasphemy and swear, lest you reap for your harvest many plague ecclus. yes, that plague that never depart out of the house, zecha, yes, that fly book which will break into your house whether you will or not. the wheel of the clock. within be never in order. when the bell make not true report of the time of the day, the tongue be the index of the mind. apply it to yourselves. if the tongue sound not forth good word, the mind within without doubt be distemper. that man be scarce to be. think a temple of the lord but a nest for owl and ostrich. out of who mouth there come such a flight of unclean bird? sow not covetousness. let not the daughter of the horseleech yawn within you, cry, give, give with a desire as large as hell. let not your heap of wealth be your grave tim for than you be in danger to fall into many snare and be pierce through with many sorrow. but rather mat, treasure up your heart in heaven, where neither rust nor moth do corrupt, you will find this gain great than ten in the hundred. there be nothing but loss to be have by. be as ninive be- and i pray god you be not nah, a bloody city and full of lie and robbery, and one from who the prey depart, not she. be famous for the lion den and the pasture of the lion whelp, bloody by oppression, full of lie and robbery in bargain. famous for lion for devourer and for the lion den chest and coffer wherinto. many man good do fall and they be eat up while i touch this vein and speak of this matter. i doubt not. but some, and they none of the mean, can be content to say to i, at the servant of hezekiah, say unto rabsaketh, regina, speak, we, pray thou, to thy servant, in the aramite language, for we understand it, and talk not with we in the jew tongue in the audience of the people that be on the wall. i make no question. but you be loath. the world shall know much of your deal, and he that come to ransack among you must needs be a unwelcome guest. sow not idleness, lest you reap bramble and brier. it be a lethargy, it dull a man faculty. but many about this city be luke, like the lily which neither labor nor spin. yet whether by rob or swagger or coney-catch, i can tell they farewell and they be clothe like solomon in all his royalty. many of we, god know, be like he in the gospelso possess with a devil that math. sometime we fall into the fire, sometime into the water, sometime the devil tear we and we foam at the mouth. we fall sometime into the fire of concupiscence, sometime into the water and overflow of drunkenness, sometime the devil tear we with rage and anger, and then we foam at the mouth by slander and blasphemy. we have little sin, like little thief to creep in at the window unto our soul. and make way for great till. sinner be rob of their best treasure. like little wedge they make way for great till. in the end they be cleave for fuel unto the fire of isaiah, the valley of tophet that be prepare of old. be not infatuate with any sin, with any sickness. the great physician of your soul will discern your disease when he feel your pulse. but above all other, beware of hardness of heart and final impenitency, lest as she in the poet who ovid metamorph. so you may desire to repent but can have the grace because your breast, your heart, be harden and heb like esau. you can have repentance, though you seek it with tear. go not from spirit to flesh, from. flesh to iron, from iron to brass, from brass to adamant. lest god proceed from love to anger, from anger to a rod, from a rod to a scourge, from a scourge to a scorpion and from a scorpion to eternal fire, weave not. weave not your own calamity on your own loom, but rather say unto lust, i have no purpose to nurse and dandle. thou and unto deceit, i have no head to forge. thou unto drunkenness, i have no brain to try. thou unto gluttony, have no stomach to banquet. thou unto cruelty, i have no hand to execute. thou unto sin, i have no mind to commit thou tep. there be a time when there be a conscience in the world and be the world better for age, nay, for conscience, shrink unto science and under the full sail of man knowledge they fall to make wrack of good conscience. and now we live to hear every day the knell and see the die of good life and conversation. if we take a inventory of good work in this age, we shall find it not much worth. what be the remedy for this? to turn unto god when all the world turn? no, if the enemy be behind a army, say the learned in military discipline, they will be surprise afore the whole army be whirl about. how then let every one turn, one and the whole. army be turn. if you will avoid the assault of the devil tarry, not until the whole army, the whole world, turn unto god. but every man turn one and say, for his own part, luke, i will go to my father and say, father, i have sin against heaven and against thou, isaiah. altar, altar of the city of god, add year unto year and kill lamb. lest now, when a a john, the region be white for the harvest and we even mellow for the judgement of god. and amos, like a basket of summer fruit prove, like a bottle in the water that never sink until it be full. neither can we look for a downfall until we have fill the measure of iniquity. but when those water of mara, those bitter water, be brimful than god angel will reap the world with that, unperceived since the pestilence that walk in the darkness, the rest shall be gnaw upon by famine and the remnant glean by the hand of war, by the war of stranger. such be the sinne-sicke state of ephraim that need let blood by such a boisterous hand for stranger devour not the refuse and bran of his livelihood, but his riches and friend and credit and power and what not that be worldly, even his strength. where we may learn these two lesson: first, that we strength may have these worldly thing because they be the gift of god. second, that we ought not to be have of. they, or by they, because they be transitory and subject to the devour of stranger. my meaning be: we must have they to use, not let they have we, not let they fetter we in their love. if god send they, we must have they to use, not to abuse. in the of ezechiel, god give the people corn and we may have they wine and oil to use, but when they abuse they, he do expostulate with they, for bestow his corn, his wine and his oil upon their idol. god have bestow many blessing upon we. he must needs be angry if we spend the time he give we upon vanity, the strength that he give we upon lust, the power that he give we to. the oppress of other. the wit that he give we to the circumvent of other. the riches that he give we to the eat out one of another. his blessing to those inordinate affection which, like idol, we honor and worship herodotus in clio. when the river giude have drown one of cyrus, his white horse, he threaten to cut so many channel into which the river shall be derive that it shall lose both depth and name and glory if those flood and great stream of god blessing upon we drown and overthrow not our white horse but our soul which shall be white and spotless. god can derive that worldly pomp of we into many channel, convey it into many hand, dispossess we both of the. name and glory that we have by those thing, and therefore it be not without cause that god give the people of israel a caveat that they shall not forget: he, when they cawe deut into a land of corn, a land of wine and a land of oil olive, he know that these blessing be like fire and water. good servant but bad master, and though for your good, beloved in our lord and savior, jesus christ, amos the ploughman, touch the mower and the treader of grape, he that sow seed, yet you be but steward of that you have, and though it be not so cheap service as you will wish, yet i will advise you to bestow some portion of that you have to. these two use to the relieve of the poor god child and to the garnish of the church god house. for the first, there be many who heart be as hard as the neither millstone their hand be wither. they can stretch the poor they out. they live unto the poor member of christ as though the rock have father they and the wolf of the wilderness have give they suck. those shall one day find that their white, silver and yellow gold can draw black line, god blessing by they. abuse can pollute their soul. let i land this doctrine upon your own bank and exhort you not to give spare that you may reap liberal. for he that forgive the great debt that ever any in the world owe, lay claim unto that of charity and will not forgive it. therefore, he say, by his apostle rom: owe nothing to any man but this: that you love one another. a shooter, aymethat, a mark in the midst of a white: the white he see, the mark he see not. he can hit the mark that he see not unless he hit the white which he see. we must all, by our love, aim at god and man, man, the white which we see, god, the mark which we can see. we can never hit god, the mark which we see not, unless we, by our love, touch our brother who we see, john. make good that which i say, john, if we love not our brother, who we have see, how can we say true we love god who we have not see? if many line be draw from the circle to the centre, the near they come one to another, the near they come unto the centre. judge this by the spoke of a wheel, meet in the middle. compare the line unto man and the centre. unto christ, unto who all heavy thing tend, all those that be heavy lade with their sin. the near they be join one to another in love, the near they come unto christ. those that be fill with god blessing shall be like the full end of a hour glass. they shall empty. and evacuate themselves into those that want that those that have want may be. raise up you that be great in this world. you do not wind and turn those thing which be absolute. your own you be, but feoffee in trust with they, to the use of god orphan greg naz monod in basil mag, gregory nazianzen register the life of bazill the great speak of a xenodochium or house of harbour which he build for poor stranger. he prefer that goodly pile and monument of charity before the sepulchre of mausolus and the colossus of rhodes and the rest of the wonder of the world. if i shall not commend you, londoner, for much bounty and liberality towards house of learning and hospital, i shall do. you wrong. but if you rob and circumvent other that you may be enable to do good unto these, you wrong yourselves, as the former be, just to be term, a work of mercy. so the late can by no mean stand with good justice. in do so, rom, you do a great evil. that good may come thereof. let not your city, which be worthy account, the head of a kingdom, be make by your greediness the belly of the kingdom for devour the rest. i judge you not, but i, i m^th corinthian, judge yourselves that you be not judge of the lord. happy be you, then, if in your garden this sweet flower, this charity, be well blow, charity i mean, which be neither a. fool to give to the idle, nor hard heart to deny the needy, and as at all time and to all of the household of faith. so it become she well to have a open bosom unto the church, which be the house of god. yet many be loath in regard of the charge to be open church hand unto the lord treasury, but have rather make themselves rich, as they suppose, by steal from god. so they become church-mothe and chapman of soul, defraud god perhaps to give fuel unto their own vanity. so the church god cant dove be, now become a partridge, pursue and prey upon by tyranny and oppression, that religion that in time past want a eye, be a nurse, be a mother. unto the church and be our welsighted religion, become a stepdame. if it be not, what mean the cry of the church, jeremiah and math, like that of rachel in ramah: weep for her favourite because they be not? can those church-leeche imagine they macch see antioch, after his revel in the temple, kill in a strange land by a invisible hand, daniel or belshazzar pale and win breathe his last after the abuse of the vessel of the temple? or can they consider celsus, his disiwasive, that dissuasive use by celsus of verona unto the senate of venice, whereby he make it plain that since they meddle with the church good, they never prevail against their enemy? then will they cease to cry with judas, mat, what? need all this waste grudge at all that be pour on christ, minister, then will they not deut, muzzle the mouth of the ox that tread out the corn? they will let they live by the altar. who serve at the altar? they will not invade the inheritance of levi. they will not seek for those, minister, who be content to prostitute their worth upon any term judg for a morsel of bread and a few piece of silver, but they will bring their own offer into the storehouse of the lord. that god may not only rebuke the devourer but open also the window of heaven and power upon they. a blessing without measure, mal. if many in our age shall use for their daily prayer the prayer of nehemiah. nehem, remember i my god herein, and wipe not out my kindness that i have show on the house of my god and on the office thereof, i doubt they will pull every day much wrath upon themselves because the church find as little favour at their hand as at the hand of those mention in the first of aggai h^ggi, who dwell themselves in ceil house and let the house of the lord lie waste. therefore, lest the lord shall blow upon that which you have, use the thing of the world, use they well. have they yourselves. let not they have you, let not they fetter. you. they be but transitory. solomon, weigh they all in a balance and find they. they must not have we but vanity. therefore, he say: ecclesiastes, vanity of vanity and all be but vanity. we may say, unto laughter, what ail thou. and unto folly, what do thou mean, daniel? the image of nabuchadnezzar: be part of gold, part of silver, part of brass, part of iron and part of clay. resemble the several monarchy of the world, but there come a stone from the mountain that crush they all in piece, the square corner stone. christ, jesus, be able to beat to powder all the might of the world and to fan the mountain. isaiah, he be lord, paramount of all, he couch under he the potentate. of the earth like less bird. therefore, be not idle but seek. defer not the time but seek first. be not base mind but seek a kingdom. be not earthly mind but math. seek the kingdom of god, and the thing of the world shall be minister unto you like a retinue. they shall follow after the flesh do infect, the world, do forsake, but christ do refresh. luke the glory of the world be show to christ in the twinkle of a eye. it be a glide pomp of small continuance for all it seem to have like a glow-worm, yet it have neither true warmth nor light. that know aelius adrianus well, when have no hope in any thing but the world which he see to. fail he, he command his soul, the guest of his body for ever, to bid farewell to all comfort. that know they also, that admire the whore of babylon. when they feel that the apple which their soul lust after be depart from they, and all thing which be fat and excellent be depart from they, they find they no more apocalypse. riches that be so high rate in the world be but like thorn in a man hand, both when thorn come thither while they stay, and when they be get out, there be still pain. so riches be, get with care, keep with fear and not lose without great anguish. job the rich man. confidence shall be cut off and his trust shall be as the house of a spider. be he never so enamule with worldly thing, be they or the pleasure of the earth or the gut of the earth. yet he find for his inheritance but a a job, a month of vanity. they that rest upon a round thing, they sit unsure it be ever roll. rely not upon the round world. they that sit upon a square thing, they sit firm. repose upon christ, jesus, the square cornerstone. he will near fail you. the first be prove by the wicked who say: who will show we any good? psalm. the second by the godly who say: lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon we. psalm, the goodly thing of the world be like ship which be grace with the title of triumph and victory and honor and such like, yet be they subject to wrack. bern dom, which bernard well consider, say that the soul in the body be like a queen in a palace. she enjoy the pleasure of the earth by the sense, as by five window which window, as long as they be open thing of the world, bring much delight. and when they be shut up and decay, the pleasure decay with they. prepare unto thyself, thou soul, the joy of the holy ghost which will remain with thou when the window be shut, when the sense be enfeeble, even in the hour of death and in the day of judgement. there be no nobility like unto a new birth in christ, no feast to the peace of conscience, no crown to a crown of immortality, no life to a conversation which be in heaven and therefore call home your affection. that be set some on pleasure, some on profit, some on preferment. gather up their disperse limb and knit they all together that they may fasten on your god, so it become your house and your family. which be like house of cloe and the household of onesiphorus. so shall your strength not be food for the devour of stranger. you shall be yoke by the hand of no rehoboam regina who will whip with scorpion instead of rod, who little finger will be heavy than all his father. loin though the land of jewrie and the apocrypha. seven golden candlestick, which be the seven church of asia, be now grow inglorious for sin. yet the enemy have not shine with our gall. god have say of we as of his vineyard, luke, i will dig it and dung it and dress it and try it yet another year. only he have often come to we and find we sleep in our sin as sam. david, come to saul, sleep in a cave, cut a piece off our garment only, touch we by some small affliction when he may have. kill we, but leave peace within our wall and plenty within our palace and crown. many year with gladness unto we which make good, the say of a old writer, concern the rainbow, that god bow be without a arrow. he threaten, long before he suffer his whole displeasure to arise. what then, rom? shall we continue still in sin? that grace may abound, god forbid that will enhance and improve god wrath. see god, long suffer shall lead we to repentance, roman. rather, let we who thrice happy as look from the shore, have no venture in the wrack that we see. in other turn unto god that we may live. so do not ephraim, therefore, stranger have devour his strength, and yet he know it not. yes, gray hair be here and there upon he, and yet he know it not. grey hair be upon he and they be as interpreter. grey hair, say, sign of sorrow, or the forerunner of old age, or both. so the doctrine then, which hence be derive, be these: first, that sorrow cause hoarnesse. second, that hoarenesse, the messenger of old age, shall make man know and consider their estate. and first for sorrow and affliction, this doctrine be like demetrius ioh epistle, it have a good report. of affliction all man, and of the truth itself. lord, thy word be truth, john. what the word say. you may hear in the of hosea, where god say by the prophet: i will be unto ephraim as a lion, and as a lion whelp to the house of judah. ay, even i will spoil and go away, and none shall rescue it. if you look into the psalm and the of amos, you shall find two fortress for this doctrine. i pray you read they and hide they in your heart till you be true. learn the prodigal son have perish. if he have not perish, he have perish in soul. if he have not perish in state, he be force to go by weep cross to his father. i, i with an do john cover, gent, the king of france, can. not be persuade unto christianity by his wife crotildis, a religious burgundian till by the almain there be. give he a overthrow in battle which calamity wrought. so with he that he vow. if god will restore unto he what he have lose, he will bequeath and dedicate himself to his service while he do live, so he pray, so he prevail, so he perform apocrypha. this world be a sea, and therefore turbulent, of glass and therefore brittle, mingle with fire and therefore dangerous. we must go with a low sail if we do well and humble our self, but not be too much afraid because of the noise of the water pipe. for god church, be like exodus, the bush, that burn and be not consume. because the lord be. in the bush corinthian verse, paul pray thrice that he may be free from the buffet of satan. but god, think it meet that he shall not want temptation to scour he and make he bright, and therefore he promise not to free he from his wrestle but to back he in his agony. say my grace be sufficient for thou affliction. keep the soul of a christian in breath. it be the eyebright to make he see both his own weakness for david, before he be afflict go wrong, and the strength of god upon he. as be the fire unto the gold, a purger, as be the prune knife unto the tree, a pruner, as be the fan unto the wheat a. purifier, as be the thunder unto the air, a cleanser, so unto the soul. be affliction, which god do use as mustard to anoint the teat of this world. withal to wean we from it. affliction be like exodus aaron rod. if it be, use it be the rod of god, send for our good. if it be cast under foot and despise it. be a serpent. it sting we, it do we harm. to be brief, affliction be a part of the dowry of the church of god. now, therefore, when you be afflict, look not only upon the arrow that hit you, but up unto the hand that draw the bow. we may learn this lesson of the son of god and of the martyr of. god, the son of god, spread out his arm to embrace affliction. he die willing for our sin. now, as antioch, the young machab, pour out of the juice of mulberry upon the ground, that thereby he may enrage his elephant to battle. so that we may be encourage to wrestle with affliction, though it be unto blood, we must remember the pour out of the precious blood of he who become, for our sake, john, the slaughter lamb of god. we may learn it of the martyr of god also, for in the garden of god there have be as well rose as lily, as well purpur, as they be like rose, leave not wither upon the stalk and fall away, but distill with the heat of. persecution till they send out a water, a blood, a precious blood. psalm: right dear in god eye. be the death of all his saint. these be the primrose of the church which die quick after christ, their great shepherd, many year after. there be many who, when i remember socrat, eccl. history li cap, i remember also ecebolius, who recoil many time and start from his god and in the end, after his several apostasy he lay he down in the church porch and bid the passenger tread upon. he deem himself no better then unsavoury salt. his late end be better than his beginning. by christ and by these, his martyr, who have the soul of their soul for their comfort, learn to submit yourselves to. the correction of god that you may legitimate his wisdom in correct of you. lest as be in the prophet jeremy vision, jere after arod, in this life there come a seethe pot in the life to come then, then, unto the incorrigible, there will be a accuser, the conscience, a witness, the memory, a judge, the reason, all these within they, if there be none without similitude mund. but there shall be, as anselmus say, the heaven lower above hell, gape below the devil. accuse on the one hand, sin witness on the other. the conscience, burn within the world flame about these thing to fly, it will be impossible. these thing to endure, it will be intolerable. there will be a pain by loss and a. pain by punishment. it be a grief to adam to forego paradise, but a great grief, gen, to toil among bramble and brier, misery too much to forego the presence of god. psalm at who right hand. there be fullness of joy for evermore. but a great grief to endure, jeremiah. that my head be a fountain of water and my eye flood of tear. that i may weep day and night. for they that be in such a case to endure, i say hell, fire mark, where the worm ever gnaw, where the fire ever burn and never burn up, where death be ever live, alas, for pity that that everlasting fire bid welcome to his correction in this life. that you may avoid the second death. yet grey hair, cause by affliction, can not make ephraim know his estate. no, not gray hair, which argue the approach of old age and death, can make he know it. yet, as i note. second, the approach of age shall make we know ourselves. psalm to day. therefore, if you will hear my voice, harden not your, the messenger of old age heart. let not to morrow. to morrow be your note. a, a lib confess cap which saint austen mislike in himself when he be within the ken of the kingdom of grace, and therefore add: why not now, lord, why not now, neither flat yourselves, as those do who saint peter reprove, say: pet, where be the promise of his come to day and yesterday? be both alike, as though they can plead prescription for god: long suffer. true it be. you may have mercy when you can repent, but you can repent when it be your pleasure. therefore, remember though, christ, save one, the thief upon the cross at the last gasp, least man shall despair. yet we read, but of one only, lest they shall presume: jere moab be, not pour from vessel to vessel, but be at rest. therefore, moab, be settle upon the lees. therefore the prophet, shoot a warn piece unto they, because danger be at hand. say, give wing to moab, that he may fly away. you little know what loss you may have by security. therefore, lift up your head from dalila. lap let the world. charm you no long. when the gale be favourable, go and good luck. have you to heaven. ward upon your great adventure. stay not till the wind be contrary old age be attend by many impediment. lay not the heavy burden upon the worst horse. charge not your weakness with that high service. adjourn not your repentance. dedicate not the flower of your age unto vanity. appoint only for god the dregs in the bottom. rather awake thou that sleep, john. the night will come when no man can work. work while you have the twelve hour of the day. be persuade. let not your heart be unmalleable. persuade yourselves that as the tree fall, so will it lie. as be the life, so be the death. and as death leave, so judgement will find. in your memory. let ever be engrave as upon a tablet the picture of that rich man in the gospel who, when his barn be full, say: luke soul, take thy ease, but present there come a summons unto he thou fool. this night shall thy soul be, take from thou plu and val max. when caesar war against pompey, he have no care of manage his business while he be in his own territory, for there he can command help. but when he once pass rubicon, the utmost bound of his dominion, he say: the die be throw. there be no way but fight it out. so while we be in this life, we have power to labor for. ourselves if our sin plead against we. we may have the counterplea of prayer and holy meditation by hear of the word of god and pray. we may have parley with god upon condition of peace. but when we once pass the utmost bound of this life, there be no purchase to be make by trental or mass. galat. at man have sow, so must they reap. to dream of a serpent be a argument of felicity. philip camerar in do instance in the mother of george castroit or scanderbegge who, the night before her son be bear, dream of a serpent that lay his head in the kingdom of epyrus and stretch out his body over the dominion of the turk, which argue he shall be as. he become the vanquisher of they. be this observation true or false in nature, it serve i for your instruction to land this doctrine upon your own bank. our whole life be but a sleep in sin. in the depth of our slumber, let we, like dream man, have our imagination run upon the old serpent, satan and his sleight. so shall we be happy stand, we shall prevent a fall. but as for ephraim, he be not so refine, not so zealous. yet they know it not. for the lord of host, though stranger devour his strength, though gray hair be here and there upon he, yet he know it not. yet he know it not. his ignorance be redouble, out of which word i observe a. just imputation against diverse ignorant man. some know not because they can. those be the unlearned. some know not because they must not. those be the weak sort of papist. some know that which they need not know. those be curious questionist. some know not that which they need to know, and those be they which know not the thing that belong to their peace. i luke first: the unlearned know not because they can know they roll along with the stream of the world. all of the unlearned, they enact that learning in this age be not a thrive course, whereas bless knowledge. they that have thou live two life, whereas other live but one. the mind be exempt. their little all fall not with the unlearned. a prey into the land of forgetfulness. thou be the soul of the world, knit together these present time with age pass by thou, we that be live, call to counsel those that be dead and go. many huge dumb heap, many goodly pile and monument have be wrong by forgetfulness, but that by thou learning they survive. they be vent out unto we by antiquity which, for reverence sake, we must not count a liar knowledge. how much have thou win from the waste of time. the want of this knowledge, unsinewe the power of a man, and unmanne he quite learn, have no need, like a curresan, to open her breast whereby she may gain love, nor to beg a alm at the gate of fame. to have her gentry blaze. she be rich enough of herself and her glory be great. at home, though fame be tongue tie and can not speak. theodore history, lib, cap, julian, that wicked will have. abolish school of learning, article and science. because the christian use the help of these thing, wound they with their own quill, learn season, tender year, with grace and with virtue, key tune, the string of nature. therefore, prize at no low rate the two university of this land, psalm unto, who, instead of founder and father, god have give child, into which two, this and former age have empty themselves. they be the two plentiful breast of our mother england. they be deep, die and engrain with knowledge from above, like hercules pillar they may have engrave upon they, for there be no university in the world that go beyond they, no, not equal to they. and as hercules pillar stand by the strait of gibraltar, be the way from europe to the fortunate island, so these, if they be use, will serve as a direction for england to a place more fortunate where all happiness dwell. ovid meta lib, parent there, philosopher reign, and they that reign may seem to learn philosophy. second the weak sort of papist, know not, because second the weak papist, they must not know. it be the case of our forefather. the book be a book seal unto they and therefore they. have cause to weep much reu corinthian, the trumpet give a uncertain sound. how can they know when to go to battle? the sword be sheathe up in a unknown tongue? how can they fight mat? the candle be under a bushel. how can they see the land mark whereby they know their bound be? remove the law. say of this sin, deut curse be he that do so. and let all the people say amen. their cleargiemen be as hos snare upon mispah and as net spread upon thabor. they do entangle the people who hear their latin service, which they can not understand, may go home again and say with nabuchadnezzar: daniel, we have dream a dream and we can tell what it mean. and yet the weak one will not stick to say it be a good world in time of popery thing, be cheap and plentiful, much like to they that dwell in pathros, despise the prophecy of jeremy and say it be well and there be no scarcity when they burn incense unto the jere queen of heaven and bake cake to make her glad. but those and these love darkness better than light, when the truth of god, in despite of popery will needs, break forth as the noon day. and so, isaiah, the light of the moon become as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun, seavenfould, isaiah, salvation, become the wall of our church of england and praise her gate. they go. about to dim the star when they can not darken the sun, and by a malicious they endeavour to sophisticate the father of the church. praefat, expurg for philip the second king of spain, give commandment to christopher plantine, his printer at antwerp, to print a catalogue or index which shall give direction how to geld and purge the father of all such sentence as may make against the church of rome, which index shall not be public sell but shall serve for the use of the spanish inquisition that by their tyranny, all the old copy may be call in and the new one publish unto their mind. so with this one sword have pharaoh mean that those exodus midwife of egypt shall kill all the child. of israel. but see how psalm he that keep israel do neither slumber nor sleep it. please, god, that reverend junius have conference with a friend about this matter, have the whole plot discover unto. he get a authentic copy of their index and by the permission of john casimere, county palatine of rhine, he get it place in his library, where it remain, i think, until this day, to the shame of they who will have wrong antiquity so much. if they have effect their purpose they have have the father cry as loud for their opinion against god. truth as ever, a, a luke the jew cry for barrabas against the son of god. but to prevent this chr. there do arise thou, god, and the ark of thy strength. three curious questionist seek to know those thing which they need not know. they entangle themselves in three curious questionist genealogy and matter impertinent, and out of a desire they have of praise for launch into the deep, they pray into the secret of the thunderer and when they have see what they can, they say more than they have warrant for wise. they tell foolish tale and bring long lie very smooth to a end. to give you a taste of their vanity, some dive into the mystery of the resurrection. such be the persecute gentile in france, as eusebius witness, who, in scorn of the resurrection which the christian do. believe, do burn many of the martyr and afterward throw their ash into the river rhodanus with this foolish exprobration. let we see now if their god be able to revive they they be not. so well study in the schoolman as to know that which peter lombard have lib dist urge this point of the resurrection: that though a image be break in a piece, it may be make up again, so long as the image maker do live. so he that make all of nothing can much more of something make what he will. nay, which be more pity, they be such stranger in the book of god that they know not what be deliver. concern: the resurrection by ezechiel unto who be show great heap. of scatter bone which ezech the lord, yet put together and lay sinew upon they and make flesh grow thereon, and then cover both with skin and afterward breathe life into they. god chrysost, in corinthian, homily say: saint chrysostom, deal with the soul as a man pull down a ruinous house, do with himself. he retire himself into some other place lest he be annoy with dust and rubbish, and return into it again when it be build more firm and glorious. so, god, give the soul a repose in heaven. it be not annoy with the dust of the grave, but at the day of the resurrection, when the house be build more glorious than it be before corinthian, when this mortal shall put on immortality. then shall the soul take possession of the body again. but these thing be to be scan by faith. they be out of the reach of human reason. napier in apocrypha pro posit, part maxim: some again take upon they to tell the time of the day of judgement and ground upon the say of saint peter that a year with god be, but as one day, and one day as a year. have set down that after year shall come a eternal sabbaoth or rest. now, because, it be say for the elect sake, there shall be a shorten of those day. therefore they affirm, the time of christ second come shall fall out between the year. and some again be so impudent that they venture as far as human reason will lead they to prove incongruence in the book of god. and some belch their impiety so open that they will prove in justice in the design of god, as namely: see sim pat confut of machivel. machivel, who be not ashamed to say that moses and the israelite be as much usurper upon the land of promise as the goth and vandal be upon christendom. that desire of knowledge that, like a corn of salt distemper the taste of our first parent, be become a habitual saltness in adam. posterity, unto which malady saint paul apply a corrective when he advise man rome to be wise, unto sobriety four they that know not. the thing that belong unto four. some know not those thing that belong to their peace, their soul, health, know not what they need to know, and such be ephraim in this place, semblable unto ephraim. be many who know too much and too little. too much of other man state but too little of their own. therefore, pray not into other man, action and word. scour not your mouth upon they, as i, i lib bap donat petilian the heretic too much. do give saint austen occasion to tell he that his tongue be no fan for the lord floor to discern the wheat from the chaff. look not over other man. hedge, as they that have tender eye do when they complain that the sun be waterish and dim, when it be not so, but themselves be weak. sight such man as be ever comment upon other man action. make the godly psalm. woe that they be. constrain to dwell with mesech and to have their habitation in the tent of kedar. rather, turn your eye into your own bosom, as christ bid. they that judge the woman, take in adultery john. he that be without sin, cast the first stone at she. so they go away from the elder unto the least. pry not you too much into other man estate, nor too little too little into your own. you have husbandry enough at home. you have psalm. eye, look that they be not swell with lust. you have hand, look they be not hand of iniquity. you have foot, look they be not swift to shed blood. you have tongue, look the poison of asp, be not under they. you have member, look they be not weapon of unrighteousness. a gellius, but as polo, the tragedian act the part of electra upon the stage and be mournful to bring in the bone of her brother orestes in a pot. he bring the bone of his own son, late bury, that the sight of they may wring forth true tear indeed, and therefore he may act it more famous. so shall we, more true, express joy in the holy ghost and repentance for our sin. if we take a view of the estate, not of other man but of our own soul, that will breed true joy and true grief. indeed, when we say not, as the disciple say, when christ tell they that one of they shall betray he mat master, be it i, master, be it i. but master it be i, master it be i, that have sin, that have commit treason against thou, the king of king and lord of lord, let yourselves be the centre of your own circle thought and bend yourselves to know those thing that may serve your turn at the day of account. scipio can weep when he see carthagena a burn, because the like misery may befall rome, his native country. but, belshazzar, make not so good use of his father trouble. and therefore, daniel, say, daniel and thou, his son, belshazzar, have not humble thyself, though thou know of all these thing. god share out his stripe unto the ignorant luke, and many stripe unto they who have mean to know and will not. and therefore the prophet isaiah deliver a burden against isaiah, the valley of vision, as well as against egypt. where be ignorance and cimmerian darkness. saint barn sup sermon. saint barnard speak of some who know only because they will know, and that be curiosity. some know because they will be know, and that be. vanity. some know because they will edify, and that be charity. some know because they will be edify, and that be true christianity. that learned father. fan away as chaff the two former kind of knowledge, but as wheat he preserve the two late which tend to the edify of the soul. the word of god have flow among you like nilus or gihen in the time of harvest rom. god have stretch out his hand all the day, long his arm be. reveal the preacher of the word. have careful plant in this place, psalm verse. give not their fruit unto the caterpillar, nor their labor unto the grasshopper, not, as i may be bold, to compare it to the world, not to the flesh nor the. mulberry tree unto the frost, not unto the cold numbness of zeal, of charity, experience that have many relator see with the eye of all the world. tell we that. and therefore, they that know and do not use their own knowledge to their own good, they fall upon a wrong send and run counter after their salvation. knowledge and performance shall be twin of one burden. he that say john, i know he, and keep not his commandment, be a liar, and the truth be not in he. he offer no sacrifice but a lie unto the author of truth. learn that you may know. know that yourselves may better yoursoule. so do not ephraim, though gray hair be here and there upon he, yet he know. it not. and the pride of israel, his stubborness, his impudence testify to his face. and they do not return unto the lord their god, nor seek he for all this. they do not know their danger, they do not return unto their harbour, they do not return unto the lord, their god. when we have sin, we must return unto the lord, our god. first, by repentance for our sin. he be a jealous god. second, by reform of our sin. he be a holy god. three, by hope in god, who do pardon our sin. he be a merciful god. by repentance for our sin. for in the first and second, by repentance of amos, the language of the prophet be nothing but a volley of. judgement against damascus, tyrus, edom, ammon, moab and judah. under who sin, god be press as a amos cart be pressedwith sheaf, for they have thresh gilead with thresh instrument of iron. for three, transgression and for four, say god. i will not turn unto they. it concern they then, and we also to turn unto he by repentance. leave for transgression or for four, he come with the bosom of his wrath and sweep we all away. we be beleaguer and compass about with iniquity of our own heel. let we not hypocritical dote upon ourselves say jeremiah, peace, peace when there be no peace. let we rather, by the heat of zeal, distill tear from our eye for isaiah: there be no peace as my god. say unto the wicked, there be a woman in the of luke who, as one in travel of a new soul, have the grace to repent, she of her sin and therefore cant she wound christ with one of her eye and with the chain, the chain of grace, about her neck. she come into the pharisee house, bold, and stand behind he, shamefast at his foot, humble and mournful, she wash his foot with her tear and as one one neglect her best ornament in respect of christ, she wipe they with the hair of her head. love she kiss his foot and, bountiful, she anoint they with ointment. a a levit. when a woman come to be purify in the time of the law, she be. to offer a lamb which, if she be not able to compass than she be to offer a pair of turtle dove. the author of the heroglyphicke compare a lamb to innocence and a pair of turtle dove to a pair of mournful eye. if any be so poor in good work that they can offer the one, let they be so forward in repentance as to offer a pair of the other, and let they desire of god, as the wife of othoniel do of caleb and joshua that see they be parch with sin and with the heat of concupiscence. as she complain of a hot country there may be. give unto they judg. spring above and spring beneath, spring of tear in their eye above. and spring of blood, if it be possible, in their heart. beneath it be god will that, as jacob be, first marry unto gen leah that be blear eye, and after a other prenticeship unto rahel that be more beautiful. so shall the son of jacob, first unto repentance, blear eye and full of tear, and after the endure of that corinthian godly sorrow which will cause repentance unto salvation, they shall enjoy the joy of heaven which be beautiful like rahel, apocrypha for all tear shall be wipe away from their eye, grammarian derive. so why shall not man, who be earth and ash because he be, harrow up with a feel of his sin when the wind be enclose in the hollow of the earth? it? strive for passage and so make a earthquake. many time earth and ash thou tremble and quake at the remembrance of thy sin. but fear not that sorrow come of god. it be because there be within thou the holy ghost, john, that wind which blow where it list when thy soul, man, be trouble for thy sin, that garboil within thou be like the trouble of the water, john. be thou sure the angel of the lord have. be there. that sorrow of thou come from god. hope in christ, but sorrow for thy sin exodus. eat thy paschal lamb with sour herb. plut in vit syll. as they that look upon sulla ring can not choose but take notice both of sulla seal and the treason. of jugurtha, because that be grave, upon upon the seal. so consider and weigh both the i? i ephesians seal, wherewith you be seal against the day of redemption and the treason of your forefather also, which give occasion of the seal of such a pardon unto you. therefore, as the nightingale in the night time sing merry with a prickle at her breast, so in this valley of the shadow of death sing praise unto your god, but ever with a compunction, a feel of your sin and sorrow for they. neither must you only mourn for your sin, but you must abandon they also for fear of the divelles re-entry with luke seven, devil worse than himself, and then your latter end will be worse than. your beginning but, as i note, in the second place you must turn unto the lord by reform of your sin and observe god by reform of ourselves. commandment which injunction unto flesh and blood be for though we can be content to die the death of the righteous and say with balaam, numb lord, let my late end be like unto they. yet this live of the life of the righteous be hard of digestion, as hard as the gain of the land of promise. be to those spy which confess that the number land be a good land and full of fruit, but there be in it the son of anach and they be giant. the reward of a christian many think to be a good. prize, but they be loath to wrestle with the difficulty of christianity. those be the son of anach and they be giant. it be better for flesh and blood, wis, to crown themselves with rose bud before they be wither. then psalm to sit up late and rise early and eat the bread of carefulness, though god so give his beloved sleep. when they feel the pain that belong unto the service of god. they say with she who long for child but can not endure the pain of childbearing gen. see it be thus. why be i so lamprid? wanton florus can say caesar. i will not for any good be caesar to endure so many frost and watch among the britain and german, but caesar thirst. after victory, retort it thus upon he florus: i will not for any good be florus to spend my time in vanity. there be great difference between a carnal man and those that desire, through jesus christ, to be more than conqueror. the carnal, rather than they will lose their math swine, desire christ to depart out of their coast, whereas the other tim that they may reign with christ, be willing to suffer with christ. some of the ancient speak of a plea that shall be hold by the devil against the wicked before god at the day of judgement. glorious king, these that stand before thou, be thou indeed, by creation, but by their sin they have cancel that image of thou. that be upon they. they be thou by virtue of thy son passion, but i, for want of natural compassion, in all matter of difficulty, when the question be whither they will lean to thou or i. they forsake thou and yield to my temptation. therefore, great king, king of glory, give i my due. there be danger, you see, in wear the livery of satan. no less, isaiah, than tread upon the egg of a cockatrice, which be dangerous, and weave the spider web, which be fruitless. let it not seem evil and burdensome to you to serve the lord, for, though there be no condemnation to they that be in christ jesus, yet this privilege belong unto they that live after the spirit, not after the flesh. rom sam, when. the ark of the lord be draw by kine to bethshemosh, though their calf perhaps low unto they, and they, as the text say, unto their calf. yet they can not go because they be tie unto the ark. so do you resolve upon the keep of the covenant of the lord and then, though your affection, call you aside. yet you can, you will not go wrong, because you be tie by vow or by resolution, though not to the ark of the covenant, yet to the covenant of the lord. but if you will needs follow your own gen imagination, which be evil and that continual beware of joy. no better then, sick man, dream those joy. be for a while, charm and silence the cry. both of sin and punishment. but in the end, daniel, the vision of your head will make you afraid. if you be wicked pro, you will fly. cowardly, yes, sottish, when no man follow because you have love, iniquity and hate, righteousness. therefore, the devil, who you have serve, will anoint you with oil of sadness above your fellow. then can you never be merry, though all the pleasure in the world shall make you melody, a evil conscience when you have lose yourselves as job, lose job all his good and child will haunt you and say unto you: you have lose god favour and your own soul, and i alone be, leave alive to come and tell you to keep you wake at midnight when you. shall sleep. when there be many fiery picture in the air, a blast of wind, break and dispearse they all. when in your mind there be fearful and terrible cogitation, strange fright and amazement, there be no way to disperse they. but by god, holy spirit, that wind which blow where it list. when david understand that the water of the well of bethlem that be bring unto he a, a sam, be gain by the jeopardy of man life, he will not drink it, but pour it upon the ground for a sacrifice unto the lord. bethink yourselves that your soul be gain not by the jeopardy but the loose of the life of christ. dedicate not your soul and body unto lust and vanity, but rather. say: lord, they be dear, buy. i will offer they both as a sacrifice to thou. we must mourn for sin, we must abandon sin, and because sin will ever dwell in our suburb and be a borderer, it will hang on so fast and will never admit a from sin so long as we dwell in house of clay. we must, which i three note, appeal unto god by trust in god, for he be the high court of appeal. john, who be the lamb of god and can only purge the sin of the world. let this agnus be your choice ornament, plut in apothegm. for as the woman have a matter, hear before philip, king of macedonia, who be asleep, do not well apprehend her. cause but give wrong judgement. therefore, she say she will appeal from philip to philip, from philip sleep to philip wake. so must we appeal from god to god, from god just and angry for our sin, to god, open the bowel of compassion unto we. jud, out of the strong, come sweet. it be the riddle of samson, the meaning of the riddle: be out of the dead lion, come the honey comb which relieve he my application at this time. be out of the strong apocrypha lion of the tribe of judah, come the sweet comfort of our save health for that lion. corinthian be unto wisdom, justification, sanctification and redemption. gen. as jacob say unto his father, so we may say to thou, heavenly father. eat of our venison, of our flesh, the flesh of thy son that thy soul may bless. we, though man be, just do live as the prophet say once, and the apostle do canonize it once again. yet faith be the soul and breath of that life. hag. when it be resolve that christ shall do his father will, for the good of mankind, he be ready to say: lo, here i come to do thy will. he come, indeed, to shed his blood. he bleed not inward, for that may have endanger the body, but his blood be pour out for the good of other. the spear of the soldier that thrust he through the side may serve as a pen. his blood be ink wherewith be. write our quietus. we may now, with paul, not only challenge death, say corinthian death, where be thy sting, but with the same paul sing a requiem unto our soul, say that i, i, rom. neither power nor principality can make a separation between god. and we see, then, god have, rear up a standard of hope unto all believer. let we not be like reed, waver and shake in faith for than we please the devil, who by some of the ancient be compare to job behemoth that take his pastime among the reed, but rather let we be like a wall, strong that god may build upon we cant a silver palace that he may make we house for himself. let we acquit ourselves like man. we have, for our right hand, ephesian, the sword of the spirit. for our left hand, the shield of faith. for our breast, the breastplate of righteousness. for our head, the helmet of salvation. for our foot, the shoe of the preparation of the gospel. furniture enough for all part, save only the back, to argue that if we fight against the devil we may do well, but if we turn our back and grow faithless, we give he advantage against we. what need we turn back? see, like rahel, he die in travel of we, his child, and though to he, we be gen benony, son of sorrow. yet in regard of ourselves, we be benjamin, son of his right hand. he show his power and strength. to do we good. the deep we dive into the fountain of his mercy, the sweet we shall find the water. we shall find joel. he be gracious and merciful. if that be not enough, let we dig deep and we shall find he be of great goodness, plenteous in goodness and one that be sorry for any evil that happen unto we. our savior, open the breast of consolation unto we now. the more the breast of a nurse be draw by suck, the more ease it be unto she. by suck, therefore, these breast and call for mercy at his hand. shall we not please he? yes, as one desire a vent for his abundant mercy. he cry and say: math, come unto i all you. that be heavy lade, and i will ease you. he, our head be, ascend into heaven and now above the water. temptation may assail we, but they can overcome we, so long as the head be above the water, we, that be his member, can never be drown. therefore, let we, with a intemerate faith, make way through corinthian. honor and dishonor, good report and bad report and dismay, with nothing take hold on christ jesus. he, he will traverse the indictment, cancel the debt, suspend the rigorous doom, acquit our soul and this pardon will be ripen with a influence from above, with the best aspect, the trine aspect. the holy trinity will say: amen unto it. ephraim sin. well, have ephraim be if he have turn. unto the lord by repentance mournful, and by reformation holy, and by cleave unto christ jesus, hopeful. but he do not. he seek not the lord, as the text say, of which point i speak unto you out of the ver, and therefore now i pass it over. nay, ephraim be so far from cleave unto god. that ephraim be like a dove deceive, without heart. like a dove that be good mat. be you innocent as dove. a dove deceive that be nought. be you wise as serpent, also a dove deceive. but the devil take such order to infatuate that wisdom that he gain possession of the tower. the strong hold, the heart unto which all the affection owe suit and service regina, fight against neither. small nor great, but only against the king of israel. quell, the, the captain and all the soldier will be amate. the temper of the head spring be either the sweeten or the poison of the stream. the heart be surprise. the retinue of affection must needs, do their homage and follow after. but whither do the affection of the man of ephraim follow their heart? to egypt, to ashur, where there be the sinew of might and strength. the earth terror, ottoman have not great at this day, but see how unsure the foot of worldly pomp stand. they stand in slippery place, though they do call to egypt, though they do go to ashur. simple dove be well in their dove-house, the church of god where. they want neither meat nor nest, nor warmth nor the protection of god. they can not be content but, lure with the charm of egypt and ashur, fly willing into their net and there, change their gold for copper, forfeit their estate. in god providence, they want help and though be under god wing they regina, be more that be with they than they that be against they. yet do they call to egypt and go to ashur? i call to mind two kind of dove deceive without spiritual heart, the one in matter spiritual, the other in matter temporal. in matter spiritual, those that, in the quest and pursuit of their salvation, make not to almighty god the strong rock of their defence, but they make wrack. upon the sand, upon the unsure ground of mass trental indulgence- pardon the number, not the weight of prayer. nay, upon their own good work, which be no better than sin. pass the sand in number and there may they drown their isaiah sin. be as red as scarlet if god, in his mercy, do not make the sinner as white psalm as the snow in salmon. the spider have many leg and little or no blood. if you ask why the church of rome stand upon so many leg and lean upon so many help not warrant by the scripture, it be because they have too little confidence in the blood of christ, among other their reed of egypt. they stand to the mercy of the pope. who pretend to have the key of the church treasury and can sell or lend good work unto they that want, as though he be worthy to be of god privy counsel. i read of one lampr in se, verco verconius, in the time of alexander severus, who pretend familiarity with the emperor, take man money for, prefer their suit abuse. they do they no good at all. be convent before the emperor, he be judge to be hang up in a chimney and so perish with smoke for that. he sell smoke to the people. the man of sin make great boast of familiarity and power with god, though he take man money for indulgence. yet how little good he do they the wise can judge he. sell but smoke, and if god mercy be not all the great, he may perish by the smoke or by the fire of the valley of tophet. that be, prepare of old vid a little treatise of the description of the world. in the country of the abisanes, where prester john govern, there be certain mountain, call out of which the river nilus issue with such violence that it will overflow the low country which now the turk possess, if it be not receive into certain deep pit and dam in the country of prester john, to who, for that cause, the turk yield a yearly tribute. the deluge of sin be so great that it will overflow we body and soul, but that prester john, or presbyterian john, john the priest, christ, both king and priest for ever, do swallow up sin and bury it in the depth of his mercy. shall we not then yield a tribute for his favour? yes, and all too little. dubravius, lib as zisca, that valorous bohemian, do not only quell his enemy be alive, but command that, when he be dead, there shall be a drum make of his skin, thereby to terrify he. so, christ, jesus, for our sake, do not only, when he be alive, a a gen break the head of the serpent by his preach and miracle, but by his death and after. his death also, he wrought the devil woe and our good, he rom, die for our sin and rise again for our justification. so now, as reusner leor in symb, julius aemilianus say in his emblem or poesy: not only jew, but gentile also, if they fear god, find favour at his hand. while we walk through psalm, the valley of mulberry tree, or of misery, as diverse translation render it, we may use these meditation as pool of water to refresh we and learn to fly to god, not to ashur, not to egypt, as i have note unto you a kind of dove deceive without heart in matter spiritual, concern their soul. so i note another kind that be as much deceive in matter temporal shrink. from god and lean upon the break reed of egypt. daniel, thou ancient of day, thy mercy be as ancient. and from the beginning, thou who name, be wonderful. thy temporal love be wonderful. why shall man then, from the breast of consolation, fly and call to egypt or go to ashur? lean upon the world, lap as long as you will, she will prove. but judg a dalila to rob you of your strength, she will prove. like that cant, little sister, cant that have no breast. but christ be your true vine. john, a vine, grow near the house, so he be near to all they that call upon he. a vine, be a ornament to the house, so christ be to we. therefore, we must. cast all our crown down at his foot, the vine. keep the house from a storm. so, christ, keep we from storm and tempest, which be the portion of the wicked to drink but which be tremblable and monstrous. there be some who, when god smite, they, they fly unto a witch or a enchantress and call for succour as though job have be deceive. when he say job, god, thou wound and heal again, thou wound and kill again. or when he say i, i job the same god that take away, the same god do give. when ahazia be hurt, he send to regina beel-zebub the god of eckron. but god send eliah the thisbite in haste to meet the messenger on the way and bid. he say: what be there? never a god in israel. but thou must seek for help of beel-zebub, the god of eckron, because thou have do this thing. thou shall never rise out of thy bed. god favour, never be upon saul. after he leave, he and sam go to the witch of endor. therefore, it be say that chr saul die in his sin because he forsake the lord and ask counsel of a familiar spirit. let this doctrine serve as eyesalve unto all you, if there be any in this place, who for the love of your good and your body health, seek unto not the hurt witch- for flesh and blood, abhor she- but the good witch, as you call they common, who be more. seek unto. therefore, the more dangerous who assure yourselves be, the more saint the more devil. therefore, deal you with god by prayer. be in league with god. this bless league of love be not conclude between god and the man of ephraim, because they leave their first love and start aside like a break bow. but god be angry. his jealousy burn like fire. he find their goodness hos to be as a cloud and as the morning dew, quick come and quick go. their zeal short breathe in, go up the hill to heaven. he find their motion not to be natural, not from the heart because it be tardior. in fine, more flow in their latter end, then in their beginning, his family admit no. dwarf or unthrive soul, which grow not in grace, which do not corinthian run that they may obtain, but rather with demas tim, go back and embrace this present world. therefore, he, daniel, weigh they in a balance and find they too light and divide their kingdom. here, stand amaze with i and tremble at the angry word of our just god. but when they shall go, i will spread my net upon they and draw they down as the fowl of heaven. i will chastise they as their congregation have hear verse as if god have say: you, man of ephraim, though you be without a eye and see not your danger without a foot and return not unto i without a heart, like a dove, deceive. and go to ashur. yet i will see you when you go for zepho. i search jerusalem with a candle. i will spread a net by my wisdom and draw you down by my power and chastise you in my justice and make good my truth by perform that which you have hear in your congregation. he will see they when they go, where i note god all see. but when they go, providence watch over the godly and over the wicked: over the godly to protect they and over the wicked to restrain they, over the godly for their protection. and therefore, in godly, the of the proverb, wisdom that be christ, the wisdom of his father be, say to buildher a house that be the church. upon seven pillar, that be upon a sure foundation, and in the foundation of the church as of the temple of jerusalem, zach, there be. lay zecha, the stone with seven eye, god all see, providence which be. be so mount upon the wing of bird that mat two silly sparrow sell for one farthing, can fall to the ground without his permission. much less man who be of more worth than many sparrow. lest of all god elect for who good his angel be, appoint to be a guard and to all that be heir of salvation. heb the difference between the god of israel and the god of the gentile. be this: the god of israel hold his people in his hand, apocrypha, but the gentile hold their god in their own hand, gen. the wheel in the first of ezechiel, thing who motion be giddy and uncertain, resemble the round world and the thing therein which thing, like the ring of those wheel, be full of eye, full of god providence. for now jerusalem be without wall. have god a providence to be awall of fire about she and himself. be the glory in the midst of she for the good of his people. he hos, make the heaven to hear the earth, the earth to hear the corn, the wine and the oil, and they to hear the cry of israel. when israel cry, he must. be hear for he that keep israel, do neither slumber nor sleep, lest then we plough the sand and labor in vain. we must wrestle with all difficulty and business and overcome they, as the people of god do the with judg the sword of the lord and the sword of godion. neither be want unto ourselves nor yet depend upon our own endeavour without the blessing of the lord, who will say to the isaiah: north give, and to the south, keep, not back. it be a worthy resolution of jacob that he will not go into a strange country upon a great business gen unless god will be with he in his journey. let it be your resolution not to undertake any business for soul nor. body, but with a request unto god, before you undertake your work, that he will further your enterprise. when you come into the church to hear for your soul, health, or when you be about to labor in your vocation, remember this: god be the supervisour of his own will to see that it be perform by the godly and by the wicked. he help the godly that they may do it. if the ungodly do it not, he tear they in piece while there be none to help for. according to the position of the school in he, there be, and over the wicked, a power and that be good for the sake, wicked, of the godly, a goodness and that be powerful. let no man say. that when he be about to sin, tush psalm. god do not see it. what be there? knowledge in the most high those man be like to stage player personate man, they seem what they be, not their deed give their word, their lie, like idle housewife which sweep the dust behind the door. they have filthiness. enough though it be not to be see there be in this world a great, swell body of ostentation, both word and deed. it be the great physician of our soul who can only skill of the anatomy of this body. and therefore, though the jew cry: jere, the temple of the lord, the temple of the lord, yet he try what gold they be, not only by the ring and sound, but by the touchstone also. and when he find what they be, he say a, a mat. not every one that say unto i lord, lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that do the will of the father that be in heaven. when a man have a sore that be not cover by the judgement of the law, levitical it be but a sore, but levi. when it be cover over with a yellow lock, it be a leprosy. every sin may pass for a sin. but when sin be cover over with a fair yellowish lock, with a fair show or smooth excuse, as namely when pride be glorify with the name of cleanliness, covetousness, with the name of good husbandry, deceire of wisdom, drunkenness of good fellowship, than it be more than a sin a man may suspect himself for a leprosy, than he must proclaim himself before god as the leper be to do in the street. leu i be unclean. i be unclean now, in this seem age when complement go as far as one of the liberal science and to be a fashionable man be as high rate as to be learned or honest. josh, seven day and seven, priest and seven. ram horn, be all too little to cast down this sin, which be as mighty as jericho christ. be never so loud against any sin as against this sin of hypocrisy. cry oftentimes mat. woe unto you, scribe and pharisee. hypocrite. therefore, if there be any of you who give christianity occasion, virg lib geor, who seem to make account of isaiah, new moon and sabbaothe and of the church of god and of religion, and have your hand full of blood, grind, verse the face of the poor by hard bargain, have your mouthesfull of lie and yet wipe your mouth as though you be no such man, take heed, the vizard will be, pull from your face and godwil smite you. you white wall, act god. will see you. you can deceive he. he see the purpose of ephraim and when he see it he say: i will spread, i will spread my n^t and draw they down. my net upon they. there be his wisdom and draw they down as the fowl of heaven. there be his power. he spread his net and draw down nabuchadnezzar, that lucifer, that sun of the morning, while upon his turret he be, make a idol of himself and many other among the rest, corn and nero, who pile cruelty upon cruelty. witness: many villainy chain together at one time when, first he set rome on fire, second he play upon his lute and song. verse of homer concern the burn of troy. compare the two city. together. three: he charge the christian with the burn of the city. four, he clothe they with the skin of beast that be take for beast. they may be devour by dog. seemaster knowles his turkish history. in the life of amurath, the, though diverse, of the turk kill their brother to prevent treason and thereby to make themselves great in the world. yet god can put hook at his pleasure in their nostril and turn they back whither soever he will. he can spread his net and pull down the great oppressor of the earth and make their prou bread of oppression to be gravel in their tooth and make i i job the furrow of their land to complain against they which land be get by. the hurt of christ. member betray and sell, as judas betray. christ will prove no better than mat aceldamaes field of blood exodus. he that see the wrong offer by the taskemaster of egypt and hear the cry of israel will ever hear the groan of his distress. people cry apocrypha. how long lord, how long lord. holy and true. they that wind god child touch the apple of his eye. act saul, saul, why persecute thou, i saul through the side of the church, wound christ benhadad be deceive when he say: the god of israel, be regina, the god of the mountain and not of the valley, as though the lord care for the high and mighty and not for the lowly and deject. there will. be a time when god will no long suffer the wicked isaiah to spoil upon his holy mountain. psalm. but for the comfortless trouble sake of the needy, and because of the deep sigh of the poor, i will up, say the lord, and when he arise, who be able to resist? herod be a king, and as the great be he be, but lord over a little corner of god footstool. yet he grow impetuous, and when he sit upon his royal seat, he remember not he that sit upon the circle of the heaven. when he stretch out his hand, he remember not he that, with the span of his hand, reach from the east unto the west. when he speak, he remember not he who? voice be like the sound of thunder when he be clothe with royal apparel. he remember, not he who be clothe with righteousness as with a garment. therefore, he find that act he be eat up with worm. it be god that can visit isaiah, leviathan, that pierce serpent, yes, even leviathan, that crooked serpent, and can slay the dragon that be in thesis. and as for those who be any way displease unto he, he can take they, though they hide themselves, amos, in samaria as in the corner of a bed, and in damascus as in a couch. for god, in this place, say of ephraim, i will draw they down as the fowl of heaven. this may seem harsh to flesh and blood, which out. of weakness, may even seem to plead against god and say that god be the cause of their ruin and perish in their sin. see, he show his power in punish of they for those sin which himself, by infuse grace, may have. prevent dust and ash. dispute not thou with thy maker, hos israel. every reprobate be choke with his own venom. god can touch, pitch and not be defile, as for example, job the sabaean and the chaldaean. spoil and rob job the devil. cause they god suffer, they nay, in some some sort. he be a agent for act by he man, live, move and have their be author, i say, of the action, but not of the obliquity of the action, when impiety be. once afloat, god by his wisdom, ordain a channel for it that it may turn to his glory and the great good of job. when a skillful musician play cunning upon a lute, that be out of tune. the jar, if there be any, come from the lute, not from the hand. when man life be out of tune, ought they to blame that wise and powerful finger of god without which they can work? no, no, sinner, all that jar come of thyself. it be not god drunkard, but thyself that drink. thou drink, not god thou murder, but thyself that stain thyself with blood. not god thou blasphemer, but thyself that fill thy mouth with ecclus, word that be clothe with death, build not thy sin. upon the back of god. thou mock thyself when thou think to shift thy burden from thyself unto his shoulder. ezech, the same soul that sin, the same must die unless god mercy be. all the great. as the devil bring darkness out of light, so the manner of god be to bring light out of darkness. thereupon, saint origin speak of a great pedigree of blessing derive from that unnatural sin of the sell of joseph into egypt, which blessing after many year, return plentiful again unto his father house. a a aug in fau^^um manich, saint austen, in few word, determine this question. the devil tempt man consent. god forsake. let god be true and all man liar. let god be just, esteem, pure and all. the world be taint with impiety. god in his wisdom show his justice oft and many a time upon we, as at this time upon ephraim, that by his correction he may call we home. unto he hos. he draw we gentle with the cord of a man, even with the band of love, lest we shall be draw from he by egypt, or by ashur, by little sin, or by great isaiah, by the cord of vanitic, or by the careropes of iniquity. and therefore, in the word follow, he call they chastise. chastisement, which chastisement? when man be incorrigible, deaf, adder and stop their ear against the wise charmer, be the best mean to cast salt upon affection and give eye unto reason, he say i. will chastise they. the chastisement of god lay heavy that my discourse may bear. date then, and not before the come of our savior in the flesh, upon the son of god himself, the rod wherewith god do suffer, he to be chastise, be his enemy and his friend. his enemy be like psalm as many dog that come upon he and as the sun enter into the constellation. call the dog argue a hot season. so the conflict must needs be hot when the sun of righteousness fall among so many. dog, his friend, the flock, be so amaze the shepherd, be smite that he be like a tree, have all the leave beat of, not only the wither leaf, those which follow he for his bread. and for his miracle fall away. but the green leaf also, they which love he best. his own mark, peter, both deny and forswear he luke. if these thing fall unto the green tree, what shall be do unto the dry tree? the church can not escape sorrow but have hen isaiah as a lodge in a garden of cucumber and as a besiege city. when the devil try he try with a luke, satan have desire to winome thou as wheat. when god try heetri with a sanne, i i luke with a fan, will he purge his floor. a keep the bad and send away the good. a fan, keep the good and send away the bad. therefore, the trial of the devil, do rob we. of our virtue and the trial of god. by affliction, do dispatch away all our vice. be not afraid, say petr, fortune, petrarch. though the house, the body be, shake, so the soul, the guest of the body, fare well. affliction be the whetstone of zeal which make god, sometime let his church taste of it and lie among the pot, though her wing be of silver and her feather of gold. god do come with love or with a rod, inter, changeable as it please he. he have pipe unto we by many earthly blessing. have our heart dance for joy and in our song. have we pray, say he. he have mourn unto we by the shake of diverse rod and calamity over our head, and have our mourn for sin be like the mourn of the mother for the loss of her first bear. if we will be reconcile by neither mean, he will do unto we as he do unto ephraim mat, for when he pipe to ephraim by his love and by his word, they will not tread right measure by their obedience, therefore, he tell they they must address themselves to weep, for now he mean to mourn unto they and to chastise they as their congregation have hear, such be the confluence of opinion for the exposition of these word so diverse and so justle the crowd of interpreter as their congregation. have hear that i can, without wrong you overmuch, marshal they into their several rank, therefore, zanchius, and i will at this time build upon that which be subscribe unto by the best and except against by none, which i take to be the quick of these word, and that be this that they have often hear in their congregation by thelaw and the prophet, that the chastisement and the rod of god will tread upon the heel of their sin if they continue in they happy be the man of ephraim, if they have know their own happiness. yet, be as they be. they be happy for be forewarn, they be forearm. so be niniveh for the noise of destruction. jon, after forty day, make the turn. unto the lord, and so prevent the danger arise. quote elijah to a^^^b, and regina, prepare thy chariot, for i hear a sound of rain. unless thou pass quick, thou can not pass there. the sound of rain prevent the danger that may have come by rain. so though, the justice of god require the cut down of sinner. yet god in his mercy, first mat, put the axe to the root of the tree to see if that repentance and amendment of life may prevent that cut. see, then, you have so many warning in the congregation to forearm you against danger. make use of they and be better by they. lest they prove a cloud of witness against you, i will chastise they as their congregation. have hear out of which word i observe? first, that the preacher, who be the tongue of the congregation, aught to tell the people of their danger to come. second, the people who be the ear of the congregation aught to yield their obedience unto the voice of the shepherd, a well compose body that have such a tongue and such a ear. the preacher shall tell the congregation of the danger to come. but some can, some dare not, some will not, some, though they do it, do it to no purpose. some can, for they run before they be send, not have. some can eat apos ezech, the little book that saint john and ezechiel be command to eat. they give counsel before they receive it. of the lord they preach, without meditation, they only turn the cock and let the water run, whereas fisher of man shall be as the apostle be when they be fisher, who be not always cast in their net but some time mend their net. so if these man be always feed other by their preach and never feed themselves by read and meditation, they will prove but dry nurse in a while and unfit to give the sincere milk of the word to other. what then, jeremiah? be there no balm in gilead. be there no physician there. yes, but some dare not, some dare not forget that when occasion serve, they must be mark, son of thunder as well as of consolation. woe unto they that. gild over ragged wall and rot post. ezech, who daub with untemperedmorter and sow pillow under the elbow of sinner, say peace. peace when there be no peace. ps. let such a tongue cleave to the roof of the mouth. let such a daub right hand forget his cunning. in the gospel we read of mat, a woman that season three peck of meal till all be leaven. i compare the three peck of meal to three sort of man: our superior, our equal, our inferior. some preacher can be content to put leaven sharpnesseinough into their equal and inferior, but when they shall come to season their superior, they dare not. they hatter in stead of leaven they bring honey. they be in some sort like surgeon. though they have not lion heart courage to lance and pierce and cure the sin. yet they have lady hand, which they say be enure to complexion and paint. they have complexion for every vice, both will and skill to justify the balance of deceit and wickedness, be it never so great in a friend or in a man of power. they be like cipher, which be nothing of themselves but serve to raise the figure to a high number. so these be man of no worth. only they serve by their flattery to puff man up with a opinion that they be more than indeed they be. hotto in his treatise, call the ambassador hottoman. a learned lawyer say that a ambassador shall not be like a stage player: to change his person. he must stand constant upon the will and pleasure of his king. if a ambassador must be so, than god ambassador must be so and more than so. deliver neither more nor less than the counsel of god. john baptist, that day star before the sun, the forerunner of christ, do not stick to tell that mat. it be not lawful for he to have his brother philip, wife though a a amos verse. amaziah say unto amos, go thou seer into the land of judah and prophesy there, but prophesy not in bethel. it be the king chapel, it be jeeroboam court, such agent for the devil that breed. sing in the ear of great man and make their head giddy, vould persuade that those great man of the world who have their authority, give they as a talon whereby they may punish other, shall become sanctuary for sin, and that no man shall dare to meddle with any vice that they be give unto deut. when the hatchet of any man hew timber do, by chance, fly out of his hand, hit, hurt or kill a man, there be allow he a city of refuge. if any preacher hew timber for the build of the lord, touch or wound any of his auditor, shall there not be allow unto he a city of refuge. yes, the necessity that lie upon he to discharge his own conscience. and deliver the lord counsel will be sufficient to plead his pardon. some again will not, though they can and dare they be. some will not, like gen issachar, who be a strong ass, couch down under two burden, two or three. live, say, rest, be good. such a one, be alexander the six, who be more fit to keep the castle of pageant of pope saint angelo against charles the eight, king of france, then, to tend the flock of god against the invasion of satan. he, i say, have son, who he especial advance unto honor, viz, the prince of sicily, caesar borgia, first a cardinal than duke of valencia, first caesar than nothing, according to his own speech, and the duke of spain, who be murder and cast into tiber and drag for by his careful father. make his father then, and perhaps only then, worthy to be account a fisher of man, christ, if you mark they well with many work, word do enforce, minister, to be careful guardian of their congregation. though peter himselftel, he thrice that he love he. yet he will not take his love to be sincere unless peter will john feed his sheep, feed his lamb, by all the term of love that may be he. plead and become a advocate for his people, lest the sheep of his fold shall wander in the wilderness without a guide. minister, be call, shepherd, watchman, laborer, their name be not still bear, but have their signification and teach they their duty. yet some will not, though their office be to be orator for the people and ambassador from god. some again, though they do it, do it to no purpose, as some do it to no purpose when they give good oracle out of moses his chair and yet have not consecrate hand to perform what they speak, which make the people think of some great mystery of atheism that be never yet impart to they. it shall be with the minister, as in the vision. that ezechiel see ezech a hand under a wing, they shall not only have knowledge to mount upward, but a hand also to perform that which they know be meet. therefore, in the old testament there be not only aaron that have upon his breast plate exodus and thummim, perfection of life as well as light of understanding, but in the new testament also, there be john baptist, who be i, i, john, a shine and burn candle. not only shine with knowledge, but burn also, such be his zeal. it be a argument of the call of moses when his rod number bring forth both blossom and ripe almond. no man will deny that minister to be lawful call who have both the goodly blossom of learning. and the ripe fruit of a lively faith. those that have the one, be like saul sam who overcome his thousand. but those that have they both, be like david who overcome his ten thousand and be make keeper of the vine, they may rejoice that they keep their own vine also. cant. some can. some dare not, some will not. some, though they do it, do it to no purpose. these word, i doubt not be drink up into the ear of many with as long a desire as job behemoth will swallow up jordan into his mouth. but what be there? sin only in the house of levi and not among the rest of the tribe. no, not only i may not silence the sin, nor. the duty of the people. the people also shall hear the threaten that be deliver in the congregation, but some will not come, some will not mark when they come, some will not be please when they mark. some, be they please or displease, will not obey. some will not come but, like beetle, who care more for the dung of the earth then for a rose they esteem more of not come, that which be philipp loss and dung rom, then of christ, the flower of the root of jessee, they can abide the savour of he, though his word be corinthian, the avour of life unto life, though his word turn lion into lamb. make the soldier say: luke, master, what shall we do? the subtlety. of the serpent into the simplicity of a dove. make the publican say, master, what shall we do? many head into one tongue. make the people say, master, what shall we do? all this when it be put into the mouth of john the baptist? luke, judg curseye meroz, say the angel of the lord as junius and render it, curse it with a everlasting curse because the man of that city will not come out to help the rest of the tribe in the day of battle. when we come all to the church of god upon the sabbath day, we come like a army to join together to war against the devil by our prayer and holy meditation, if there be any, that be either idle. or drunken or wanton or worldly or for any cause, unwilling to come to join with and help their brother in this high service, shall i curse they? i pray god they be not curse with a everlasting curse. while we blaze the glory of the word there, come unto the ignorant a jesuite or a seminary or perhaps a pupil of they, and beguile they with a show and pretence of antiquity, as the gibeonite beguile joshua by tell he a tale, josh verse, of old shoe and old bottle and old mouldy bread. they tell they the old good world. be then at the best when they live under the latin law and know no scripture but believe as the church believe, and so by this mean, many simple man have be draw to make a league with they, as joshua do. josh, without ask counsel of god, i do, with reverence, ascribe all convenient authority unto the church who, beauty within be far more than i can comprehend, marshal the church, the house of god be glorious and even the gate of heaven. but the church, especial those hoodwink church in those sickly time whereof i speak before, be far inferior to christ, the lord of the church and his holy word, which be his will whereby he govern this house of he and therefore despise the. word of god corinthian, which be yes and amen. we must not only eye the church, which may err while she be militant here on the earth. those that travel southward have the northern pole for their direction till they come beyond the hot and burn zone or part of the world which, when they have once pass they lose the sight of the northern, and the southern pole arise to be their guide. so, while we pass to heaven ward through apocrypha, this glassy sea mingle with fire, which be the world. we be direct as by a star, by the word of god, but when we be once past the hot fit and pang of death, than we lose that direction. we need it no more. a other light be our comfort, even apocrypha, the light of the lamb for ever and ever. josh. no fall of manna unto the child of israel when, once they have get a crop in the land of promise, so long it fall, and no long. no more the word, no more. the bread of this life shall nourish we. we need it, not when we have the blessing of that place which flow with better thing than either milk or honey. some will not mark when they come. yet both strong, some do not mark when they come, and weak christian shall mark for the word of god be a, a, a greg in mor river, where the elephant may plunge and the lamb may wade in. the church, chrysost homily in, when the priest pray and bless, i see one talk and another laugh. when thou sit and kneel there, do thou not know that thou be in the company of angel, and yet do thou laugh or scorn? if these thing be not worthy of a thunderbolt, i know not what be august donatistas. to pollute a common well where the whole city fetch water, be a thing that can be endure. how much more to abuse the church where god people come for the water of comfort, tertull, apologet, cap coit. the people gather together and like a band of man, they set upon god with their prayer: god be please to have such violence. offer unto he when you come then. unto the church, mark well the use of the laver in the sanctuary, the and the verse, and wash yourselves before and when you offer your sacrifice. levit no beast. be clean but that which chew the cud. if you will be clean and please unto god, hear not only, but mark and chew the cud by serious meditation. god care not so much for david sacrifice as for his obedient attention unto his word. the former he need not, for his be the bullock upon ten thousand plain, but the late he require, and give david power to perform it. whereupon david say: psalm, sacrifice and burn offer thou will not have, but my ear have thou open. he make account, he shall hear and attention will. be more, please unto god than any sacrifice exodus. if a man, for love of his master, be willing to be his servant continual, he must, by the judge of the city, have his ear bore. if you vow yourselves continual servant unto the lord, you must desire the judge of quick and dead to bore and open your ear that you may hear and know his wil. when you come up, they with the tribe into the house of the lord, bring your bucket with you unto the well, your ear and heart that they may be fill mat grudge not to watch with god one hour. let no temptation of flesh, the world or the devil steal away your heart like child dote not upon baby. while you shall learn your lesson, be not miscarry by worldly show and vanity. say unto every evil suggestion: mat, turn thou behind. i, satan, know that. exodus the ground where you sit and kneel and stand, be holy ground. let god, in his own house, be the emperor of the field, and by his word he will hammer you so that if he find you lactantius, lib divin institut like lion, he will make you lamb. if he find you weak, he will make you resolute never to be outface by the flame of persecution. i, i corinthian, who be sufficient for those thing for the message of god. yet ephesians, god have give gift unto man whereby they deliver the word of god, as vincentius vinc. ler cap lerinensis say, but not after a new manner, but no other word then, that which be from the beginning. and they stand upon the watch tower in your church to descry the danger and give you warning. hear, they, and by their preach, together with the power of god, holy spirit, a beam of the sun of righteousness, you will quick perceive your soul not to be virgin. you will see your own sin and corruption that you may amend. as the beam of the sun shine in a house, discover many mote which before be unperceived. will thou not be catch by the hook of satan? then let not thy mind leap out of the pool, out of the well of the water of life. at every fly, at every worldly vanity. will thou have thy affection deep. die in religion so that thy mind clothe with they may be. take to wear the livery of god. then let they stay long in the liquor. let thy body stay in the church and thy mind besetled upon the word that be read and preach. so by the hammer of god, word without, and the fire of the holy ghost work within, thou will be beat and fashion into a signet near and dear unto god. but if jeremiah coniah like thou, be a signet on god finger, do rebel against he. he will pull thou off. but some will not be please when they mark but like, not please ape and monkey, which. break every glass they look into, because every glass do show they their own deformity. so they quarrel with all preacher and preach, because the truth deliver can choose, but show they their own ugliness. they have their gall in their ear. whatsoever they hear turn into the gall of bitterness. they love to have their ear sheath for flattery. they relish nothing but if there be any sin that rule in they as who have not one or other that be predominant than they acknowledge. no king but caesar, no ruler but that evil affection, the word of god, shall not overrule they by their good will. how much better be it for man, when they be touch by sermon, to give god thanks for it, because god have send a special messenger that day to take they above other as brand out of the fire and like sting spirit, to bring they unto god. for such word, psalm, bind king in chain and noble in link of iron. they carry not away the ear unto god for a present, but a heart pro, which he himself require of all his son. god may they say who be touch for their sin. i thank thou, luke. this day be salvation, come into my house. some again, be they please or displease, will not obey. not obey though the word of god, like the josh sun. stand still in gibeon and the moon in the valley of aielon have be a long time at the noon point and height, that by the benefit of it we may be revenge of our great enemy. yet i fear the devil may still walk mat in dry place as he delight to do among those i mean that be not moisten with this well of live water or, if they have hear the word yet math, it take little or no root because it have fall in stony or thorny place. when naaman murmur at elisha, say that regina verse abanah and pharphar river of damascus be better than either jordan or any river in israel. the servant of naaman say unto he: if the man of god shall bid thou do a great matter, will thou not do it much more when he bid thou wash thyself seven time in jordan and be clean, so shall we do any thing that god command in his word, even because he command much more when he bid we obey and be save. the assurance that we have for our salvation be in the word of god. we know in who to trust, but god keep a counterpane thereof. he be not ignorant, but know who we must obey, as he. will on he, so must we, on our part, perform condition, chrysost in math, if have go astray and be in danger of herod, of the devil worse than herod, we will not, with the wise man of the east, return home another way than god may say, as david say in the pang and burden of his soul: sam, my son, absalon, absalon, my son, my son, you will needs be rebel, but as he be, hang in his own hair, so your lot be to perish by your own rebellion. hear the word then, as though the very message: bring you wing to fly to god. let not sin that shoot without noise, wound you unaware and possess you so strong that you be loath to. leave it till it leave you, so that you say of it, as abraham say of the son of the bondwoman, gen, that ishmael may live in thy sight. and sure such be the nature of man that every one have a sin, which i may call a peculiar beloved, with a extraordinary love for which he desire a dispensation, though he can be content to forego all other sin. but that, as let say of zoar gen, lord, spare it it be but a little city. so every man say of his be love sin, lord, spare that it be but a small sin. i be natural incline unto it and therefore to be bear withal from other sin, i be content to be wean. thus, every man will be so sawey as to pass a faculty with god if he be not both wise and just. the devil be like nimrod, a great hunter. lord, keep we out of his chase. yet man, like the pleasure of sin, and though they be in danger to be molest with many spirit and terror who come within the compass of sin, enchant circle, yet be they never willing, out of the devil bypath to follow their mother, the church, by the step of the flock. cant not, from virtue to virtue, from grace to grace, which be the progress of christian? to who christ say: cant arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. moisture in the foot, strike up into the head. the sin of the mean member. dishonor our head, christ, let they the girdle of verity be straight. gird about your loin. i mean: observe strict that which god command. he say: prepare yourselves for heaven, say you a, a psalm. god, my heart be ready. my heart be ready. he say: seek you my face, answer you again and say: thy face, lord, will i seek. lay your nose open unto the sweet savour of life, unto life, your eye unto the daystar that be spring from on high, your ear unto the charm of the wise charmer and see god, by his word, knock at your door, psalm. lift up yourselves, you gate and be you. lift up you everlasting door that the king of glory may enter in. let not the minister of god word row any long against wind and tide, but see they be appoint to raise up seed to their elder brother, christ jesus, by preach lib pastoral cap, as gregory do, moralize that levitical decree. be flexible at their persuasion, our eng chr fox and other. then shall that of pope gregory be more fit apply to you than when it be speak, not for the beauty of the body but for that beauty which be the beauty of your mother. the church who be alglorious within pro coney, be a people not mighty, yet they make their house in the. rock, howsoever many of you in this world be but mean. yet be wise and build upon the rock of your defence. do it in deed, by your obedience unto the word, if you will stand against all temptation. if you do, but in show only, it be but a sandy building and will fall. krolles his history of the turk, uladislaus, no less than a king of polone and hungary, and therefore a christian king. be punish with a great overthrow at verna for break his promise and oath make to amurath the, who be no better than a cruel and a irreligious turk. how shall man who be base far worse than king and yet christian by profession, escape god? fearful judgement for break their promise. and vow make in their baptism, not unto a turk, but unto god, not irreligious, but the author of all religion. therefore, remember your vow and yield your obedience. if ever it be a time to hearken to god word in god congregation, it be now. when exodus, the wicked swarm, like the fly in egypt, apocrypha, the star call wormwood, be fall into this glasly sea and have poison the world. quote one i seek, antigonus. so may we, where be the innocence of former age? now the wicked i i gen, like the lean kine which pharaoh see in his dream, eat up the fat one, the good man. yet be they never a whit, the fat themselves, but as ill favour as they be before. in this age one may see zecha, jehoshua, the best man, stand before the angel of the lord in the best place, and presence and satan on their right hand hinder their best action. the lord, reprove thou, satan. even the lord that have choose jerusalem, reprove thou especial. now see the end of the world be. draw near unto we. it be in respect of we. long since christ say: apo sure, i come quick. and now, by the forerunner of the end, we may guess the beginning of sorrow unto the wicked. but as for you that have better learned, christ lu, lift up your head for your redemption. draw near one forerunner be carnal security man shall, as they do in the day of noah. put. far from they the evil day. even now, man pamper the flesh their belly have no ear. zech, the man among the myrrh tree, say most. true, then, so may he. now that all the world be at rest, such be the security and sleep in sin that with the world it be midnight. but beware, mat. at midnight will the bridegroom come. he will once more hag shake not only the earth but the heaven also. look you be, not take unaware in your bloody feather. unbrace not yourselves, as though the armour of a christian be no wear for you. you be yet in the militant church. the devil, so long as the world endure, will never dislodge his camp, but be up in arm. against you. yet bless be your god who lead you against he, with the zech, two staff, beauty and band, a beautiful and comely government, and with the band of love. do not all the other forerunner follow after with zech, their wing matth? war abroad, rumour of war at home, a general conflagration among private man by strife and envy. the pestilence knock at our door. so luke little faith among man that the wise, sort and more nimble head be pioneer and underminer of other which make david in his time say: have the choice of three plague. and we have now much more cause. sa^ lord, let i not fall into the hand of man. antichrist thes, the man of sin, sit as god in. the temple of god who, mystery of iniquity beginning to work in paul time, have now fill the world brim full of poison. many false christ, if you look into our chronicle, have lift up their head many year ago. how many jew be convert to christ we can tell, but we be to hope that gods privy seal have mark many among they who live in italy, france, germany and other place of christendom. we have see sign by fire, many, and fearful sign by water. when god do let it loose to the spoil of whole country the next year, he bind it up with frost and give it bar and door, say an hither to. shall thou come and thou shall come no further here. shall thou stay thy job proud wave. there have be sign in the star set by he who guide job arcturus with his son, as there be a blaze star, see in cassiopaea for the judge of who, place and altitude. our mathematician write two book, the one call ala, the other call, but they can neither fly so high nor clime so high. but they find that the finger of god be above they. these sign and token beloved, be not limetwigge to catch you, but rather mark to direct you. let all your kowledge of these and other thing end at home. your best geometry be to measure the length and the breadth and the depth of god mercy. your best arithmetic be to learn to. a, a psalm, number your day, your best grammar, to learn to know the property of that name, which be a name above all name, whereat thil, all the thing in heaven and earth do bow themselves. these sign be past and go. when, ma, the sun will be darken and the moon turn into blood, we can tell, but for the publication of the gospel over the world, it may be prove by many instance, one most pregnant, most fresh, be that of virginia, which now, by god grace, through our english, shall hear news of christ. the gospel of christ shall be publish, no doubt rom, the sound of the preacher will go out into that corner of the world and make it as a isaiah. well water garden there be a people of the like quality with the natural inhabitant of virginia- poor and naked thing i call they so- the more to endear your affection when they be conquer. there be that cruelty. use unto they that scandal be. give unto the name of christ. the name of christianity grow odious unto they by reason of that cruelty. they will let it have no room in their thought. it will require a just volume of itself to tell you what benzo and bartholomeus a casa write of this argument. but i hope our english be of that metal that have in their hand the key of the kingdom of god. they will not keep those weak one out, but rather make way. for the gospel, as i hope they may by their gentle and human deal. you see, many of the forerunner of the end have already run their race mat. as the summer follow the blow of the figtree, so the end follow these thing. it be the application of christ himself that i have the tongue of the learned that i may clothe and enrich with due light of speech this point, which be ever acknowledge by as many philosopher as look upon the sun of righteousness through the cloud of nature, hold the immortality of the soul and not now deny by any, but by psalm, that fool that say in his heart: there be no god, he be a fool. scorn he. he say in his heart he be a dissembler. trust he not. he say there be no god, therefore he be a blasphemer. abhor he and rove not upon these thing in the tempest of your judgement, but let zeal, the careful nurse of christianity who warmth, do much, help the blow of virtue. maintain in you these meditation. prudent hymn, so do it in prudentius, who frame a song unto the crow of the cock, who noise, resemble the last trump which shall awake man, sleep in their grave and give warning of the great day. jerome mat, so do it in jerome. who, whatsoever, he do think he hear in his ear the sound of the last trump say: arise you dead, and come. unto judgement, the pilot who govern the ship sit at the stern, which be at the hinder end of the ship. if a man will govern his life well, his meditation must be settle upon the late end of his life, who i, i ecclus. so remember his end can never do amiss, and god know it be a needful thing to be remember, for there be a thousand way to die and but one way to die. well, when christ come first, he come to vanquish the devil, that sam goliath, that brave, the host of the live god. when he come the second time, he will come to be revenge of those churlish nabal who have unkind render unto he hatred for his good will examine. yourselves of what rank you be and, as christ, advise the man of war in the gospel, luke, to sit down and take counsel whether he be able, with ten thousand, to meet he that come against he with twenty thousand. if he be not, then while he be a great way off, if he be wise, he will send ambassador and desire condition of peace. so think and know that you be not able to answer god one for a thousand. therefore, while he be yet afar off, before the end of the world come upon you, send your ambassador to entreat a peace. cast out the dumb spirit and pray unto he. the deaf spirit and hear his word, the lame spirit and walk unto he. in your life and conversation the fearful spirit, and believe in he that you may sing victorious, as deborah do. jud my soul thou have, march valiant. let your thought be sublime by the, the spirit of god. arise unto yourselves, arise in yourselves, arise from yourselves and arise above yourselves. unto yourselves, by know of your sin in yourselves, by acknowledge of your sin from yourselves, by forsake your sin and above yourselves, by have philipp, your life, a conversation in heaven. god will have you, his son, to be ps as goodly plant, and you, his daughter, to be as the polish corner of the temple. therefore, he do, in his congreation, oft and many a time, persuade by his word. therefore, for the light of the gospel sake, suggest by his spirit. therefore, for the sake of the spirit of god, act that wind, that be rush and mighty god justice. do enforce, therefore, virg aeneid, for god the father, sake the mercy of christ. do allure, therefore, for the sake of god the son, in who you hope, i desire you that you will meditate upon your day of account, and while i sound out unto you these thing, it become, i like a cock to clap my own wing upon my own breast and rouse up myself out of my slumber, before i give you and other warn of the approach of the great day that you with i and i with you may all upon. angel wing be, carry up to heaven and, like lark, sing merry. while we be mount, then and there, that at length i may take my work out of the loom and conclude, shall we have joy of ourselves, joy of our friend, joy of the king of heaven and joy of the joy of heaven. joy of ourselves, for though corinthian one differ from a other in glory, yet we shall be like pot full of water, one being great than another. he that have least be brim full shall have as much glory as he can have or desire joy one of another, for if the rich man in hell, lu, know which be abraham and which be lazarus in heaven, and if, at christ, transfiguration be but a shadow of immortality, math, peter, james and john know moses and elijah, though they have never see they before. much more shall we- i take it in the fullness of glory- know one another who have be acquaint upon earth. joy of the king of heaven, who shall be our light for ever. at who right hand, there be fullness of joy for evermore. joy of the joy of heaven, where we shall not hunger. there be the tree of. life, nor perish with thirst. there be the water of life, nor be perplex with melancholy. there be a choir of angel and archangel ever sing and make melody, which melody that we may be partaker of. i desire of god and let all the people say amen. and let christ, jesus, corinthian, who word, be yes and amen. apocrypha, that faithful witness in heaven, set to his seal and say amen unto it. even so, lord jesus, amen, amen.