sauls prohibition, stay, or the apprehension and examination of saul act 9.4. saul, saul, why persecute thou? i? i fear to speak of judgement- it make foelix tremble- or of mercy, for then the wicked will not tremble. i can speak of piety, for piety be sick. nor of faith, for faith be dead. nor of work, for work be bury. not of devotion: it be become ostentation. nor of religion: it be make a vain speculation. nor of prayer, for prayer be contemn. nor of alm, for alm be neglect. nor of fast, for fast be banish. nor of charity, for charity be outlaw. hope be become a vain presume. holiness, hypocrisy, zeal, fury, the commonwealth, oppression, safety, virtue deprivation, hospitality, depopulation, the church, simony, possession, schism. be banish, nor of charity, for charity be outlaw, hope be become a vain presume. holiness, hypocrisy, zeal, fury, the commonwealth, oppression, safety, virtue, deprivation, hospitality, depopulation, the church, simony, possession, schism, division, atheist expectation. this world a wilderness, a dry, heathy, thorny, bare, barren wilderness, wherein satan, the serpent, sin, the satire, wrath, the lion, lust, the leopard, zi^m and the ostrich and the screech-owl and the vulture do inhabit, wherein virtue be a exile, conscience a hermit, honesty, a stranger truth, a prisoner. a wild wilderness wherein all thing be most miserable, the way rough and crooked, the wealth base, the pleasure false, the hope vain, the promise lie, the delight light, the glory short, the sta^e a banishment and a dungeon of condemn, person scrawl. rough and crooked. the wealth base, the pleasure false, the hope vain, the promise lie, the delight light, the glory short. the sta^e a banishment and a dungeon of condemn. person scrawl about the globe of the earth, the theatre of their misery and mortality. in a word, all thing be in such confusion by reason of the catechlisme and inundation of sin that if ever, even now, we may take up the speech of esay unto god, o that thou will break the heaven and come down, either in merci to pardon or in judgement, to punish the sin of the people. in the lion there be sweetness and strength. in the cherubim, the face of a lion and the face of a man, jud 13.. with to punish the sin of the people in the lion. there be sweetness and strength in the cherubim, the face of a lion and the face of a man, jud. 13. with god, there be and eze. 1. and he have send down a commission from the kings-bench of his judgement, austen, and another from the chancery of his mercy. his fountain have send forth sweet and bitter water. his mouth curse and blessing. it be the speech of david in his 32. psalm that join both these together. many plague be provide for the ungodly, but he that put his trust in the lord mercy shall compass he on every side. behold in that one verse, olive and prickle upon one tree, punishment and pardon in one. but he that put his trust in the lord, mercy shall compass, he on every side. behold in that one verse, olive and prickle upon one tree, punishment and pardon in one breath, life and death in one word. gerezim and eball in one place, winter and summer in one day, the fall and spring in one season. mercerus, the red ensign of the wrath of god and the red ensign of the blood of christ. a army of misery, sorrow, punishment, anguish, and a army of comfort, promise, hope, mercy, deliverance. not so many dart on the one side, but so many shield on the other. justice, not such indignation, but mercy have as much. compassion if plague compass, yet mercy shall near compass if there be. on the one side, but so many shield on the other. justice, not such indignation, but mercy have as much compassion. if plague compass, yet mercy shall near compass. if there be bitter water of marah, there be sweet wood cast in to season it. if a red sea, yet moses rod to divide it. if the canaanite pursue israel, yet a joshua to defend it. there be mercy and judgement together, and yet not together in one verse, but not in one place. there be a distance between they, as between and lazarus, but in the text i have read unto you, there be both in one place. person, action transient in god, immanent in paul. judgement so sweeten mercy, so edge that sweet and sour life. the text i have read unto you, there be both in one place, person, action, transient in god, immanent in paul. judgement, so sweeten, mercy, so edge that sweet and sour. life and death, love and fear, allure and terrify never come near together. then in this text, saul, saul, why persecute thou i? for if ever mercy and judgement meet together, here may you behold august in psal: the judgement of mercy and the mercy of judgement, a voice and a stroke, the one strike down to the earth and the other lift up to the heaven. a light shine from heaven, and a light shine to direct he to heaven. a light shine to he that be in darkness and in the shadow of death, to the heaven. a light shine from heaven, and a light shine to direct he to heaven. a light shine to he that be in darkness and in the shadow of death, to bring he from the snare of darkness to the glorious liberty of the son of god. he that be the way, meet he in the way. he that be the light, meet he with a light. he that be the word, meet he with the voice of the word. saul, psal 29, 3. saul, why persecute thou i? it be a voice, indeed, it be the voice of the lord. mighty in operation. the voice of the lord be a glorious voice. the voice of the lord, break the cedar. yea the lord, break the cedar. be the voice of the lord, mighty in operation. the voice of the lord be a glorious voice. the voice of the lord, break the cedar, yea the lord. break the cedar of libanus. the voice of the lord, shake the wilderness, yea, the wilderness of cadesh. it be that voice that make jonas mariner to shake, foelix to fear, herod to tremble and the devil to roar. it be the voice that strike the soldier with amazedness, elimas the sorcerer with blindness, zacharias with dumbness, ananias and saphira with deadness. job 31. and of this voice, johs, epiphonema and acclamation serve. who can understand the fearfulness o^ his power or hear the voice of his thunder? the wall in can not stand. the c^da^ in l^banus can. voice, johs, epiphonema and acclamation serve. who can understand the fearfulness o^ his power or hear the voice of his thunder? the wall in can not stand. the c^da^ in l^banus can not but shake. he wilderness in cadesh can not but tremble. the army at mount olivet can not but fall. the auditory of s peter at jerusalem near stab to the heart with this voice. and then how shall paul, a weak, single, simple, abortive birth, but fear and tremble and become terrify, amaze and astonish at the echo of this voice. o it be a powerful voice, the voice that josephus speak of. cry joseph bell, judai, a voice from the east, a voice from the west, a voice from the four. wind it be. be a powerful voice, the voice that josephus speak of. cry joseph bell, judai. a voice from the east, a voice from the west, a voice from the four wind. it be no more powerful than this voice, and yet the voice, not so powerful as merciful it be. observe, chrysost in act, that they that come to betray christ in the convoy of judas and be strike to the earth with christ, his word, be now in the company of paul when paul be strike to the earth by the word of christ. if it be so, the miracle be the great and their sin the great. but as my saviour, so my text, single out none but saul and strike saul to the earth. it be be so, the miracle be the great and their sin the great. but as my saviour, so my text, single out none but saul and strike saul to the earth. it be the heavy fall and yet the happy fall that ever any have it be, his fall and his rise, his funeral and his resurrection, his burial and his birth, his kill and quicken. i divide the little body of this, my text, into the form and matter thereof. division: the form: a interrogation. the matter: saules violence in persecution. in the form: observe: first, a question, secondy a ingemination. in the matter: observe: first, soul persecute, second, christ persecute. thus be these word divide that divide the soul and the spirit and the joint and the a question, secondy, a ingemination in the matter. observe: first, soul persecute. second, christ persecute. thus be these word divide that divide the soul and the spirit and the joint and the marrow of saul and of these in their order, first of the question, the lord that in deuteronomy be a physician in job, a bonesetter, 32.39 job, 16.11, esay, 5.1, joh 15.1, luk 2.46, mat 8.25, mat 2.30, exod, 15.3 in esay, a vine-dresser in john, a husbandman in luke, a moderator among the doctor in matthew, a pilot amid the flood in mark, a lawgiver among the lawyer in a man of war among the army. he be here, a justice to apprehend and a examiner to questionize with saul. saul, saul, why persecute thou? a lawgiver among the lawyer in a man of war among the army. he be here a justice to apprehend and a examiner to questionize with saul. saul saul, why persecute thou i? he be in esay a prince of peace and here be a justice of peace, though he be sometime put out of the commission of peace to work our peace. the lord may, without any expostulate, have pour down vengeance upon he, and so he have never come to his answer. he may have turn he into hell with all the people that forget god. he may have summon out some punishment or other to have serve the execution of wrath against saul psal 11.. his arm be not shorten. he have his great army. forget god. he may have summon out some punishment or other to have serve the execution of wrath against saul, psal 11.. his arm be not shorten. he have his great army and his lesser army. joel 1, he may have send out the least of his great one, or a great army of his least. he may have send the fire he use against the sodomite, or the sun with which he fight against the ammonite, or the star wherewith he plague the canaanite, or the sea wherewith he drown the egyptian, or the earth wherewith he swallow the murmurer, or the bear wherewith he devour the mocker. but he take another course. he send out no outlawrie before saul come to his answer. no castigation, nay. wherewith he swallow the murmurer or the bear wherewith he devour the mocker. but he take another course. he send out no outlawrie before saul come to his answer. no castigation, nay, no expostulation, but a mild and merciful speech. i shall have expect burn coal from his lip, coal of fire from his nostril, vial of wrath, the furious servant and sergeant of indignation. against such a rampant raven wolf, a merciless tiger, a insatiate (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). 1. tim, 1. chrysost, breathe out, threaten and shughter, nay, a murderer, oppressor, blasphemer, as he confess himself. yet (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). in correction, moderation, in reproof, compassion, the doctrine that the lord be slow to anger and, in his indignation, ready to show compassion. he confess himself. yet (@), (@), (@), (@), (@) in correction. moderation in reproof, compassion, the doctrine that the lord be slow to anger and in his indignation, ready to show compassion. doctrine, when the lord in micah have call a congregation of the mountain to hear his quarrel, as in esay, a convocation of heaven and earth, man and angel to be witness against his people, mich 6.. yet hear what his speech be: o my people, what have i do unto thou, or wherein have i grieve thou, esay? 1. testify against i, no threaten, no curse, no fire or brimstone, storm or tempest, when his prophet jonas have flee from his presence and rebel against he, not only in fly, but in murmur and fume. threaten no curse, no fire or brimstone, storm or tempest, when his prophet, jonas, have flee from his presence and rebel against. he, not only in fly but in murmur and fume, fret in a querulous, contumacious and contumelious contest with god. god, relpy, only this do thou well: to be angry, he rage that god will not destroy niniveh, a great and glorious, spacious, populous city, the lady of the east, queen of the nation, metropolis of ass^ria, beauty of the world that have so many 10000 noble, rich, honourable inhabitant beside infant and innocent. and jonas to be angry to the death that niniveh be not destroy and afterward that a guord, jon 4.9, a weak creep sprout, fade, guorde of no conti^^^nce spring in one. and jonas to be angry to the death that niniveh be not destroy, and afterward that a guord, jon 4.9, a weak creep sprout, fade guorde of no conti^^^nce, spring in one night, die in the other. and yet that jonas again be angry with god, very angry even to the death, for the death of this guord and god, reply unto he be only this: jonas, do thou well to be angry, saul here, that have his hand in so many murder, in so many bloody, tragical, barbarous execution against who the blood of the martyr cry for vengeance? yet god, merciful and favourable, in as kind and as familiar sort, with as much indulgence as if the spirit of eli or the soft voice in elias. martyr, cry for vengeance. yet god, merciful and favourable, in as kind and as familiar sort, with as much indulgence, as if the spirit of eli or the soft voice in elias have speak saul saul, why persecute thou i? if john baptist speak to the pharisee, he cry out: o generation of viper. if peter to ananias and saphira, why have satan fill thy heart to lie? mat 3.3, acts 5.10, acts 13.10. why have you agree to tempt the spirit of god? he strike they dead. if paul to elimas, the sorcerer, o thou, full of all subtlety and mischief, the child of the devil- acts 7.5- and enemy of righteousness. if stephen to the jew, o you of stiff neck, heart and ear, nay, servant. full of all subtlety and mischief. the child of the devil, acts 7.5, and enemy of righteousness, if stephen to the jew o you of stiff neck, heart and ear. nay, servant with their fellow servant, brother with their brother that have the same commission and profession, tie by all the bond of nature and grace. yet in their writing and speech there have be bitter invective, contest and withstanding to the face. paul and barnabas, cyprian and cornelius, origen and african chrysostome and theophilus, ruffinns and jerome, jerome and austin, austin and symplician, frosper and hilary, gregory and eutichus, who have almost all fight as fierce with their pen as ever caesar and pompey do with their sword. but behold the creator of all thing who throne. hilary, gregory and eutichus, who have almost all fight as fierce with their pen as ever caesar and pompey do with their sword. but behold the creator of all thing, who throne be heaven, who footstool be the earth, who have his garrison of angel in the heaven of star, in the firmament of storm, in the wind of mil-dew, in the air of dragon, in the deep of all creature in the world. he receive, he friendly and favourable, even as a master, that have, catch his runagate servant and have he fast. thus say s chrys^stome, bespeak he chrysost in act. now i have apprehend thou. whatsoever thou will, i will do to thou whether. have thy madness, tend thy fury, thy unseasonable, unreasonable zeal where s chrys^stome bespeak. he chrysost in act. now i have apprehend thou. whatsoever thou will, i will do to thou. whether have thy madness, tend thy fury, thy unseasonable, unreasonable zeal, where be thy bond or stripe or imprisonment? in act, he object his fault. not so much reprove saul, as defend himself, as he do in john to the jew. many good work have i show you from my father, john, for which of they do you stone i so that christ here, his, his sweet, soft, heavenly interrogation, show how far he be from indignation. bless and thrice bless be his name for ever and ever. the use of this doctrine, use that we be like unto our lord and master, even in our reproof and indignation. bless and thrice bless be his name for ever and ever, the use of this doctrine, use that we be like unto our lord and master, even in our reproof and exprobration, to mitigate our anger and fury and fervour the philosopher in his ethic confine and limit the sea of anger to his bound ethic, lib 4.. why, against who, how, when and how far it may proceed, and sure christian may learn that lesson- to observe the cause, wherefore the person with who, the season, when, the manner, how and the end of the term, how far it may pass and how long endure. the great thing in that incomprehensible goodness that we aristotle with our want eye can behold, be his mercy, his justice. the term, how far it may pass and how long endure. the great thing in that incomprehensible goodness that we aristotle with our want eye can behold, be his mercy. his justice exceed his work. his mercy exceed both. he be slow to anger and he keep not his anger for ever. o then, if the natural edge of anger be whet and sharpen on thy stony heart to wound those thou be angry with, remember to be slow unto anger, to be short in thy anger, to be mild in thy anger. remember how far this sword may be unsheathe. i know there be a time to hate and a time to love, a time of peace and a time of war, a time wherein clergy and this sword may be unsheathe. i know there be a time to hate and a time to love, a time of peace and a time of war, a time wherein clergy and laity that be in office may whet their tongue like razor. their salt must be quick, their voice pierce, their sound powerful. yet in all these kind, praess^, as gregory counsel, let anger rather attend your reprehension, greg, in job angustaa psal, then, command it so that it bear not a fury by, go before, but a show in, come after, and continue, not in a odious, tedious passion and perturbation of anger, as thy anger must not be unadvised, not unjust. so neither rash nor perpetual anger be define to be if it be furor. in a odious, tedious passion and perturbation of anger. as thy anger must not be unadvised, not unjust, so neither rash nor perpetual anger be. define to be. if it be furor, let it be also of pompey. it be. observe the day of his death. be on the day of his birth, polychr. and of jonahs guord, that it come up in a night and wither in a night. and of pliny (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). bear in the rise, die in the set of the sun. and the toadstool plin grow in a night and die in a night. so let anger perish, consume and consummate itself in a day. the day have enough for his own malice, say the prophet. nay, a day be. night and die in a night. so let anger perish, consume and consummate itself in a day. the day. have enough for his own malice, say the prophet. nay, a day be too much. let it continue. but a night, let it be like the untimely fruit of a woman. let it perish, ere ever it see the sun. say david, nay, a night be too much. a hour or two be enough for anger. say chrysostome: nay, a hour be too much. chrysost in mat, be no long angry than thou may say over the greek alphabet, say the heathen philosopher: nay, that be too much. say the divine. if thy violent usurper, anger, will hold the crown of reason and manage the kingdom of understanding, let greek alphabet, say the heathen philosopher: nay, that be too much, say the divine. if thy violent, usurper anger will hold the crown of reason and manage the kingdom of understanding, let it be, but for a moment, for the anger of god endure, but the twinkle of a eye, say scripture. let not the sun, that glorious eye of the world, be, as of thy wrath, a faithful witness in heaven. so not of thy vengeance, the swift witness in hell. and when thou be angry, be angry but sin not. let it be as leo. speak not with the mind of a persecutor, but of a helper. speak thou unto thy enemy mild without choler, moderate without fervour, as thy master here do, saul, saul. why? leo, speak not with the mind of a persecutor but of a helper. speak thou unto thy enemy mild without choler, moderate without fervour, as thy master here do. saul saul, why persecute thou i? saul saul, the ingemination austin, a name again and again, die deep enough in blood, once in the old and once in the new testament. repeat both of the tribe of benjamin, both tyrant. it be a gracious favour of the lord to vouchsafe, to question with he, but to call he by his name, be^ lorinan, act 9, and to ingeminate that name. it be a sign of his great affection and commiseration. when he be salute by judas with a kiss, he use no other word than this: judas, betray thou. ingeminate that name. it be a sign of his great affection and commiseration. when he be salute by judas with a kiss, he use no other word than this: judas, betray thou the son of man with a kiss. why, judas thou, one of my friend and follower, but twelve and one, a devil, one of my own tree, to be so blast of my own foundation, to be so undermine of my own, that have profess to forsake all, to follow i and now none of all the world else to betray i who vow to follow, to their lose of life, and now to follow and pursue and entrap and betray my life. judas thou, to betray i what? and to betray i with a kiss. to follow to their lose of life, and now to follow and pursue and entrap and betray my life, judas thou, to betray i what? and to betray i with a kiss, the sign of perfect amity and the seal of love. and do thou seal thy treason with a kiss, judas, my apostle, my friend, judas, as luke call he, do thou betray the son of man with a kiss. it be a sign of his great affection in speak to martha, who be more busy to provide for his body then for her own soul. martha, martha, thou be trouble about many thing, but a great sign of his affection. luke 22.31. when he behold peter, weak, wrack, weather-beaten, leak, sink peter, he double his speech. soul, martha, martha, thou be trouble about many thing, but a great sign of his affection, luke 22.31. when he behold peter, weak, wrack, weather-beaten, leak, sink, peter, he double his speech. simon, simon, behold, satan have seek to winnow thou. how merciful deal he with peter who, when he be miraculous, call from among fisherman to be a fisher of man, yet fall. most fearful, and notwithstanding all his faint and fall, yet he be restore and receive his story, be a ocean of mercy. you shall find he, sometime doubt, sometime sink, sometime distrust, sometime deny, so peremptory and so blasphemous, as if he have be reprobate. nay, in the great mystery of our salvation, peter be possess with a dead, dull, heavy, drowsy sleep. look. sometime deny, so peremptory and so blasphemous as if he have be reprobate. nay, in the great mystery of our salvation, peter be possess with a dead, dull, heavy, drowsy sleep. look upon he in the transfiguration, luke 9.32. peter be a sleep. look upon he in christ prayer. peter be a sleep, mat 26.39. look upon he in the very hour of the power of darkness, when christ be to be betray, peter be a sleep. mar ^3, 34 in the persecution of the church. when earnest prayer be make by all the church for peter acts, 12.6. even then also, peter be a sleep. and yet, after all these slip and sleep and fall and fault, peter be receive to be aug, temp, indultor, fons, etc. peter, acts 12.6. even then also, peter be a sleep. and yet, after all these slip and sleep and fall and fault, peter be receive to be aug, temp, indultor, fons, etc. as austen speak, and to be, though not yet, but of all other, that ingeminate lamentation of he even jerusalem, o jerusalem, jerusalem, which kill, prophet and stone they that be send unto thou. how often will i have? gather thy child together, luk 22.31, as the hen gather her chicken under her wing. and thou woula not the passionate compassion that our saviour have over these, mat 23.27, and so over all his be so infinite that no dimension in art, no affection in nature, no proportion in the creature can express it. o height. have over these mat 23.27, and so over all his be, so infinite that no dimension in art, no affection in nature, no proportion in the creature can express it. o height of heaven, depth of hell, breadth of the world, distance of the pole, love of friend, father, mother, nurse, they be but shadow and semblance, kenning, not skanning. of his favour, his mercy can be sufficient, descry or describe. they be the head of nilus, river of paradise, spring of lebanon, fountain of hermon, stream of zion, jordan that make glad the city of god. they be the charter of heaven, covenant of grace, assurance of glory. music to the ear, splendour to the eye, odour to the smell, dainty for the taste, pleasure for the. god. they be the charter of heaven, covenant of grace, assurance of glory, music to the ear, splendour to the eye, odour to the smell, dainty for the taste, pleasure for the sense and solace for the soul. and he give grace liberal, multiply his grace. give, conserve his grace. multiply, reward his grace, conserve out of this double and reiterate of the name doctrine. i observe this doctrine that the lord do so much desire the repent of a sinner that he will vouch safe his servant, that favour as to double his call and not at the first to proceed in judgement against loiter and linger, convert. he expect they that linger austen, invite they that repugn, stir they that loiter, he call saul. 2. samuel: not at the first, to proceed in judgement against loiter and linger convert. he expect they that linger austen, invite they that repugn, stir they that loiter. he call saul. 2. samuel, 3. his spouse, 4. sodom shall have some day. 2. sam 3.4. niniveh shall have forty day, jerusalem forty year. there be a time when he do not call once nay for sin, once he punish for ever. he thrust the angel out of heaven for one sin, expel adam, paradise for one apple stone achan for one wedge plague gehezi for one bribe ananias for one dissemble, corah for one rebel. and yet, since to move, we to repentance have bear with sinner, year and year after a thousand fall of weakness and wilfulness in. ananias for one dissemble, corah for one rebel. and yet, since to move we to repentance, have bear with sinner, year and year after a thousand, fall of weakness and wilfulness in thought, in word, in deed. every thing in god be worthy to be admire and wonder at. but his mercy be to be embrace with amazedness that he be merciful in so rich, so deep, so long, so broad, so unmeasurable a measure, in so great, so mighty, manifold, miraculous manner. hilary, on the 144. psalm, have a sweet say to this purpose. hilary, in 144. psal, this be a especial thing in god. this be mighty to be wonder at in that mighty one, not that he make heaven because he be powerful, nor that. in 144.. psal. this be a especial thing in god. this be mighty to be. wonder at in that mighty one. not that he make heaven because he be powerful, nor that he settle the earth because he be strength, nor that he distinguish the year by star because he be wise, not that he give man a soul because he be life, not that he move the sea by ebb and flow because he be a spirit, but that he shall be so merciful who be so just, that he shall so familiar deal with we who be a god. hilary 144.. ps. and all this only to draw we to repentance. the use of this to move you to conversion by the merciful compassion of the. we who be a god, hilary 144.. ps. and all this only to draw we to repentance. the use of this to move you to conversion, by the merciful compassion of the lord, in the manifold care he have of careless man, use he have, draw he out a way to walk. this be the way, walk in it and lest the way shall seem dark and hard to be, find he have, give he a lantern and lest he shall faint in the way he have, place a brook in the way to refresh he that he may drink of the brook in the way. this way be conversion, bernard, which, though it be, be not though a hard, rough, craggy way, yet be it not a. that he may drink of the brook in the way this way be conversion, bernard, which, though it be, be not though a hard, rough, craggy way, yet be it not a incommodious or a fruitless way, but the virtue thereof be eternal life. the world misconceive this way, they utter, refuse it. they like not the pace because they must run, they like not the race because it be long. they like not the passage because it be straight. they like not the entrance because it be narrow. they like not to climb, they fear the hill, they like not to sail, they fear the sea. the way hard the race long the race run. the passage straight the door narrow, the sea perilous, the hill promontorious. the hill they like not to sail. they fear the sea, the way hard, the race long, the race run. the passage straight, the door narrow, the sea perilous, the hill promontorious. alas, they can endure it, and so they tire or retire with the thought of fear. hereby they lose the life of saint and foreslow that holy conversion and conversation of the servant of the lord. o my belove, see the lord be slow to anger and of great mercy. draw near to he by a true, hearty, speedy conversion. it be a special gift of god, salve of sin, haven of sinner, joy of angel, terror of devil, the new creation of the soul, the new life of the saint, a consumption, yet not sickness. gift of god, salve of sin, haven of sinner, joy of angel, terror of devil. the new creation of the soul, the new life of the saint. a consumption, yet not sickness. a mortification and yet no death. a compunction, a enigma. diumum, yet scarce sorrow. a kill and yet a quicken. a crucify and yet a revive. it be a, a enigma wherein, when we be bear, we be bury, and when we be quicken, hugo de victor, we be kill, and when we be mortify, we be raise, and when our old man be consume, our new life be consummate. o that you be all sick of this consumption. that prayer may be your physic. your diet may be fast, compunction, your blood let your potion. consume our new life be consummate, o that you be all sick of this consumption. that prayer may be your physic. your diet may be fast, compunction, your blood let your potion the tear of sorrow, faith your handmaid, watch and good work the sign of your recover. if you be sick of this consumption, it will be the mean to bring health to your body, happiness to your soul, length to your life, life to your day for evermore. it will be a mean you will live more religious. love the lord more sincere, serve he more obedient, tender his glory more dear. hear his word more careful, practise it more conscionable, pray more devout, believe more faithful, profess more fruitful, which the lord in mercy increase. he more obedient, tender his glory more dear, hear his word more careful, practise it more conscionable, pray more devout, believe more faithful, profess more fruitful, which the lord in mercy increase for ever in we. and so i come to my second general part, and therein, first of the person, persecute saul, and here, first of all, 2. part. if you catechize saul with what be thy name, or discharge such a peal of gunne-shot upon he as the mariner do upon jonas, jonas, ^, what be thou? whence come thou? what be thy name, thy people, thy trade, you shall receive answer out of his own word: he be a hebrew of the hebrew, a israelite of the israelite, of the seed of abraham of the. thy people, thy trade. you shall receive answer out of his own word. he be a hebrew of the hebrew, a israelite of the israelite, of the seed of abraham, of the tribe of bentamin, by birth, a jew by privilege, a roman by sect, a pharisie by zeal, a persecutor. his personal advantage, prerogative, dignity, excellency of profession, emulation, conversation, wonderful. none ever have great endowment and blessing of nature than saul. it be a worthy observation upon that comitial exercise have between stephen and his adversary, sigonius lorin, in 7. act that there be some of all the world, opponent and opposite in that disputation and persecution of stephen out of europe, roman, out of afric, alexandrian, out of asia, cilician, and of all these out. some of all the world, opponent and opposite in that disputation and persecution of stephen out of europe, roman out of afric, alexandrian out of asia, cilician, and of all these, out of all the part of the world that be then know, and out of all those nation reckon, there be none acts 2.3 more violent for strength, more virulent for sting, more zealous in profession, more powerful in prosecution, more tragical and tyrannical in execution than saul. he waste the church, disperse the disciple, destroy the christian, say chrysost, and he follow christian not only from the synagogue into the street, but from the street into the house, their own house, and violent inhumane, draw out even the woman unto their death. he be a saul. only from the synagogue into the street, but from the street into the house, their own house, and violent inhumane draw out even the woman unto their death. he be a saul, indeed, nay, a sheol, a very hell, lombard as peter, lombard, out of the nature of the original observe, or shaul as other observe, lorin in 9 act, stir up by the devil to persecute the church. he be a wolf among the lamb, a bear among the saint, a lion ramp and roar for his prey. nay, put together the wiliness of a fox, strength of a lion, sting of a serpent, saenity of a wolf, the savage madness of bear, boar, leopard, tiger, crocodile, for by all these, in scripture, the wicked be describe. fox, strength of a lion, sting of a serpent, saenity of a wolf, the savage madness of bear, boar, leopard, tiger, crocodile, for by all these, in scripture, the wicked be describe: they be all in saul, his zeal have fire he. and therefore he say of himself: by zeal i persecute the church of god, so that christ speak to he now and cry saul, saul mean zeal, zeal, why persecute thou i? be it possible that a sweet grape shall be so sour that poison shall and such a fountain of life that such a endowment shall deserve such a punishment. such a blessing prove such a curse. the heat of the spirit shall be as hell fire. the glorious, lustrous splendour of the sun shall. a endowment shall deserve such a punishment. such a blessing prove such a curse. the heat of the spirit shall be as hell fire. the glorious, lustrous splendour of the sun shall be cimmerian egyptian darkness and make a man a dog, a christian a devil. it be it be. behold one, for example, for all saul, his spur of zeal prove a sting, a pierce, poison, enuenome, assacinate, sting by zeal. he persecute the church of god. i be sure true zeal be the true seal of the holy ghost. it be the leaxen that leaven the whole lump. it be the grain of mustardseed, the spark of fire, the fire of the temple, the measure of the tabernacle, the cubit of the sanctuary, the beacon of leaven the whole lump, it be the grain of mustardseed, the spark of fire, the fire of the temple, the measure of the tabernacle, the cubit of the sanctuary, the beacon of mount zion. and yet zeal have mark saul, a persecutor, oppressor, maligner, blasphemer of god and his gospel. i know the kingdom of heaven must suffer violence. jacob obtain by wresling, david by run, paul by endeavour, the wise virgin by watch. austen, the good servant, by work will thou enter into heaven. be violent, say austen, nay, say christ. the king of heaven, suffer violence, but yet not a more hasty than wary violence. for, as s bernard speak, zeal must stir up discretion, berna d, discretion must direct zeal as the hope of a. suffer violence, but yet not a more hasty than wary violence. for, as s bernard speak, zeal must stir up discretion, berna d. discretion must direct zeal as the hope of a christian. so the zeal of a christian be as susanna between two adulterer, as virtue between two extreme, as in ocency, between two tyrant hercules, between two serpent, the grain between two millstone. blind ignorance on the one side, proud insolence on the other side. a blind zeal, a proud zeal, the one superstitious, the other supercilious. the zeal of a christian must be as christ be before he come from heaven. he be in the midst of angel, in the cratch, he be in the midst of creature, in the temple, in the midst of. as christ be before he come from heaven. he be in the midst of angel in the cratch. he be in the midst of creature, in the temple, in the midst of the doctor in the transfiguration, in the midst of the prophet and apostle in the cross, in the midst of the thief in the resurrection, in the midst of his disciple, in the come to judgement, in the midst of the elect and reprobate. lamb on the one hand, goat on the other. bernard, as austen speak in the like august don. but let zeal ever go in the midst, sail in the midst, pass in the midst. let diligence raise up. negligence be not cold. let moderation rule the passion be not to hot, not. zeal ever go in the midst. sail in the midst, pass in the midst. let diligence raise up. negligence be not cold. let moderation rule. the passion be not to hot, not bewitch with fiery fury as saul be as that saul. zeal shall persecute christ. the doctrine hence be doctrine, that every christian let moderation govern the stern of his violent opinion, or else his zeal be abominable before god. the prayer of the reprobate be abominable. the faith of the hypocrite be abominable. the zeal of the fiery obstinate be abominable. in the law, they must bring no sacrifice without salt: zeal be that salt. they must bring no sacrifice without a eye: discretion be that eye. no unseasoned sacrifice, no service without zeal, no blind. they must bring no sacrifice without salt. zeal be that salt. they must bring no sacrifice without a eye: discretion be that eye. no unseasoned sacrifice, no service without zeal. no blind sacrifice. no zeal without discretion- rom 12. the apostle paul direct to wisdom: be wise. there be the spur zeal, but according to sobriety. there be the bridle: discretion. the disciple be commend for their duty in follow christ. there be zeal, but they be condemn for their zeal when they pray for vengeance. there want discretion. the jew be command to gather manna. there be a portion of zeal, but neither too much nor too little. there be the proportion of discretion. the holy ghost descend with fire. there be zeal, but with a wind. there be a portion of zeal, but neither too much nor too little. there be the proportion of discretion. the holy ghost descend with fire. there be zeal, but with a wind also that cool fire, there be discretion. let zeal be like to moses and phineas ambrose: moses for mildness, phineas for fervency. there be a seraphical zeal like to that in e zechiels vision, ezech 1.16. the face of a lion, the face of a man. there be a cherubicall zeal. let zeal and moderation be like naomi and ruth. let they go together, or if that pace will not serve, let they, like peter and john at the sepulchre, run together. vespasian emblem on his coin. do well moralize the meaning of zeal, moderation there. or if that pace will not serve, let they, like peter and john at the sepulchre, run together. vespasian emblem on his coin. do well moralize the meaning of zeal, moderation. there be a dolphin and a anchor: the dolphin out, strip the ship, the anchor stay the ship. if staidness and swiftness, earnestness and peaceablnes do go together, then be zeal, that true zeal that the holy prophet and servant of god have it. be a fervent zeal that be in david when he cry. the zeal of thy house have eat i up wherein david cry, not my zeal have almost eat up thy house, but the zeal of thy house have almost eat i up. austen, oscrius, saul. be zealous as ever, any be and david cry, not my zeal have almost eat up thy house, but the zeal of thy house have almost eat i up. austen oscrius saul, be zealous as ever any be, and in zeal as outrageous as ever any. he be of the tribe of benjamin and be the true benjamin. jacob on his death bed, breathe and bequeath he this blessing. benjamin shall ravine as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey and in the evening he shall divide the spoil. paul be this benjamin, benjamin be benoni. paul be this benoni. he be benjamin the son of the right hand and he be benoni the son of sorrow. benjamin, the joy of his father, benoni, the death of his mother. lor in ps. he be benjamin, the son of the right hand, and he be benoni, the son of sorrow. benjamin, the joy of his father, benoni, the death of his mother, lor, in ps 75.. paulus, benjamin, the death of rachel, his mother. paul, the death of the church, say austen, the death of the synagogue, austen. hierome, say hierome, saul, be a wolf indeed in the morning when he devour the prey etc. and make a prey of the church, but in the evening he do divide the word rich than great spoil. the use of this doctrine use be to direct and level your zeal aright that it neither fall short nor fly over, neither on the right hand nor on the left hand, but that it aim. doctrine use be to direct and level your zeal aright, that it neither fall short nor fly over, neither on the right hand nor on the left hand, but that it aim direct at the mark of the prize of the high call of god in christ jesus. i come not hither this spring to sneap your zeal with any frosty speech. far be it from i to speak it, from you to think it. i know that palsy and apoplexy be more common incident in christian zeal. then, hot ague, we need not quench the spirit o that we can kindle it. but my desire be that you please so to moderate your zeal. that you add, with your zeal, faith. so with your faith, knowledge and spirit o that we can kindle it. but my desire be that you please so to moderate your zeal, that you add with your zeal faith. so with your faith, knowledge and with knowledge, temperance and with temperance, patience and with patience, brotherly kindness and with brotherly kindness, love. or else, if your zeal be never so hot, the hot fever or fervour thereof shall not avail you. you shall be like to those fisher with s peter: fish all night, but nothing. or those scholar in s paul be, always learning, profit nothing. or those petitioner in saint james: ask always, receive nothing, james 5.. bernard aelian var, hist plutarch, or the eutichoei in s bernard: pray always but obtain nothing. like atalanta, run but a far. petitioner in saint james: ask always, receive nothing, james 5.. bernard aelian var hist plutarch or the eutichoei in s bernard: pray always but obtain nothing. like atalanta, run, but a far off. like diogenes archer, shoot, but a far off. like peter, follow, but far off, far off indeed, for your zeal shall make you enemy to the cross of christ, oppressor, maligner murderer, persecutor, to who these present shall come greeting saul, saul. why persecute thou i? if therefore, any of you have be so zealous, barrowift, browniste, humorist, atheist, devil, none else, against bishop that you can have, in zeal eat up bishopric and ecclesiastical endowment and in zeal have, persecute our reverend father, the chariot of israel and the horseman thereof. know it that? bishop that you can have. in zeal, eat up bishopric and ecclesiastical endowment and in zeal have, persecute our reverend father. the chariot of israel and the horseman thereof know it that your zeal be a saul, a persecutor, a wolf, a betrayer of the church of god. look upon saul, a pharisie by his father, a pharisie by his master, a pharisie by birth, breed, zeal, sect and profession, his knowledge more, his tongue, more his labour, more than any pharisie of our time. yet he confess by zeal i persecute the church of god in the bowel of christ, jesus, true, with a religious soul. consider it and so turn as he do, from a impostor to a pastor, from a persecutor to a professor, from. in the bowel of christ jesus, true, with a religious soul, consider it and so turn as he do, from a impostor to a pastor, from a persecutor to a professor, from a wolf among lamb to a lamb among wolf, from shed their blood to offer for they to shed his own blood. from saul to paul, from a fierce, fiery, furious, mad, monstrous traitor to a holy, happy, gracious, glorious martyr. for he be as zealous for the church as ever against the church, witness his affliction, necessity, distress, stripe, prison, tumult, labour, watch, fast and manifold suffering in endure the cross. but i end this point and come from paul cross to christ cross in my last word. why persecute thou? i perfecute i this. fast and manifold suffering in endure the cross. but i end this point and come from paul cross to christ cross in my last word. why persecute thou, i, perfecute i, this be the word that strike he to the earth. austen chrysostome, stroke he from his horse, stroke he down from his presumption. persecute thou i it. strike he down earth to earth. the father compare the state of saul at this time unto some riotous young man who by noctivagate and nightly disorder in the street, quarrel and fight and wound whosoever he meet at the length. meet with his own father in the dark and wound he his father at the length. discern he cry out: son, son, why have thou slay i, thou my? at the length meet with his own father in the dark and wound he, his father, at the length discern, he cry out: son, son, why have thou slay? i, thou, my flesh and blood, and thou the shedder of my blood? i, the cause of thy life and thou the cause of my death. thou, my son, and i the father of thy beginning, thy sword, my son, and thou, my son, the father of my end. o son, why have thou slay? i, the son, reply. what thou, my father, my father, the light of my eye, breath of my nostril, joy of my heart, honour of my name. what thee, my father, it be i, thy father, that thou have wound, that thou have slay. of my eye, breath of my nostril, joy of my heart, honour of my name, what thee my father, it be i, thy father, that thou have wound, that thou have slay, thy father, that beget, thou breed, thou feed, thou foster, thou nourish, thou exalt, thou endow, thou that think nothing too dear for thou. and now thou have slay, i all the gory, gape wound that caesar have come not so near, he as the stab that brutus give he what thou, my son, the son of my hope and the son of my desire. what, brutus, my son, what absol^n my son, my son, have thou rebel, have thou persecute. i o the wonderment, astonishment, amazement of such a father, osor evan part and of desire. what brutus my son, what absol^n my son, my son, have thou rebel, have thou persecute i. o the wonderment, astonishment, amazement of such a father, osor, evan part, and of such a son, such the emphasis of this voice: persecute i. why be it not sufficient i be, bear poor, breed bare clothe, mean, feed miserable, pursue violent, entrap and betray treacherous. but that yet thou must persecute i be. not my hunger, thirst, faint, sweat, bleed, die, sufficient not all my labour in travail, travel in preach, temptation while i hunger, sorrow when i faint, austen, fear when i retire, tear while i pity, blood while i suffer. graeca liturg (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). all the misery needs anguish, scorn, thorn whip, nail drop. i faint austen fear when i retire. tear while i pity blood, while i suffer. graeca liturg (@) (@), (@) (@) (@). all the misery needs, anguish, scorn, thorn, whip, nail drop, tear, clot, stream of blood that issue from i will not these serve. it be observe that paul know neither the voice nor the speaker for what have be the sting that paul have be touch with. if he have know he have persecute christ, but he do persecute christ for his servant be his church and the temple of the holy ghost and they be his member, his temple, therefore his church, his member, therefore his body. the doctrine, doctrine that he that do violent, persecute any of the servant of the lord do persecute. they be his member. his temple, therefore his church. his member, therefore his body. the doctrine, doctrine that he that do violent, persecute any of the servant of the lord do persecute christ himself. i need not to expatiate in the proof of this. those title of servant, son, brother, child, spouse, branch of his vine, sheep of his fold, member of his body, show sufficient how dear he love they and their profession. he that touch you, touch the apple of my eye and my sovereign. interpret this, my saviour, text in his megasine of learning. the king, majesty his book to all christian prince, that divine and royal book against antichrist, prove hence that none that ever know scripture can deny, but by christ often be. learning the king, majesty his book to all christian prince, that divine and royal book against antichrist. prove hence that none that ever know scripture can deny but by christ often be mean, his saint and servant. the use of this doctrine be to stand in fear of, enter into the number of the persecutor of christ. use the fear of sin in cain, wander the beastliness of sin in nebuchodonosor. graze the terror of sin in balthasar. tremble the shame of sin in haman. hang the punishment of sin in burn. these be example to astonish and deject the great sinner. but to a honest and religious soul that ever have taste of any part of the goodness of the lord, this be the most potent reason. astonish and deject the great sinner, but to a honest and religious soul that ever have taste of any part of the goodness of the lord, this be the most potent reason to fear he that by sin he do persecute christ. he do crucify again the son of god. when god in a christian conscience cry within he, why persecute thou, i? and yet he continue in sin so often and so long that his mind be never trouble, his spirit never daunt, his thought, never check, his soul, never grieve. o this be a wound, and a grievous wound from which the lord for ever and ever deliver. we lorizus observe out of the legend that it be a receive opinion among the papist that whosoever wound, and a grievous wound from which the lord for ever and ever deliver. we lorizus observe out of the legend that it be a receive opinion among the papist that whosoever be bear upon the day of saint paul conversion shall ever be free from any harm by venom and poison. i doubt not, but it be a fable. but i can wish that you that have hear this call of s paul at the time of his conversion will now be convert, that the poison of wickedness may never do you hurt again. it be the labour of all that come hither and the lord give a blessing to their labour. you have receive all kind of exhortation and of instruction. aaron bell, moses, rod, isaiah. be the labour of all that come hither, and the lord give a blessing to their labour. you have receive all kind of exhortation and of instruction: aaron bell, moses rod, isaiah, trumpet, jerem^es hammer, david harp, salomon song, ebal curse, geresim blessing, peter, key, paul sword, the milk of exhortation, wine of compunction, the oil of consolation and the water of regeneration. what can you have desire more than you have receive? o let not all these arise in witness against you. let not the lord continue his cry. why persecute you, the lord austen? he speak but once to paul, and paul be a convert and by this one call, convert many church. o come you not so oft to the cross to return enemy to. he speak, but once to paul, and paul be a convert and by this one call, convert many church. o come you not so oft to the cross, to return enemy to the cross of christ, and now to come to some application for this place and presence, and to omit the particular sin of our nation: the pride of the court, usury of the city, dissension in the clergy, oppression in gentry, disobedience in the commonalty, the lie, lust, oath, uncleanness, drunkenness, profaneness and wickedness of all and of all sort. i will only aim at the two monster of this time, atheism and apostasy, which do bring and continue the over stream 'slud of god wrath upon we. they be both general, both fearful. the extent. at the two monster of this time, atheism and apostasy, which do bring and continue the over stream 'slud of god wrath upon we. they be both general, both fearful. the extent of my speech can say enough either of they or against they, for atheism howsoever, some schoolman distinguish that there be none that deny a god. yet i say our age and this, your city, lombard, zincbius, afford such devil that neither confess or care for the providence or omnipotency of god, who abound in the fullness of iniquity, to who nothing be account, evil because nothing account good. nothing can be a sin because nothing be a law. the first article of who creed be in profession that there be no god. the second that evil because nothing account good. nothing can be a sin because nothing be a law. the first article of who creed be in profession, that there be no god. the second, that the story of the creation be a fable, the mystery of the incarnation fallible, the doctrine of redemption improbable, of election unprofitable, of predestination unavaileable, of the resurrection impossible. the next, that there be no heaven, no hell. add the corolary that if there be a hell, and they must to it, they hope that they shall not lack company. o who can express the misery of such a harden heart? or who, without a heart, hard can choose but tremble at such a lamentable state? o what can be call judgement when nothing do sere? the misery of such a harden heart, or who, without a heart hard can choose but tremble at such a lamentable state? o what can be call judgement when nothing do sere? what can be call love when nothing do allure? o what do he, either hope or fear? who acknowledge no religion, no resurrection, no reprobation, no judgement, no heaven nor hell, no god at all. to these belong for ever all the curse, vengeance, woe, fire, brimstone, storm, tempest, cup of god, wrath dregs of his cup, vial of the dregs of desolation and damnation, greg in job, these be murderer, assacinat, persecutor of christ. they stretch out his arm, bow his neck, pierce his side, nail his hand and imbrue his body with these blasphemous damnation, greg in job these be murderer, assacinat, persecutor of christ. they stretch out his arm, bow his neck, pierce his side, nail his hand and imbrue his body with these blasphemous stripe and scourge. heavy o heavy. be the sleep of that soul that be not awaken by these warning, stony o stony. be that heart that be not fear with these terror. the other persecutor of christ, papist. be the papist and apostate to popery, that bane and poison of reason and witchcraft of religion, that cup of fornication, that venom of babylon wherein they maintain that they may eat their god, kill their king, subvert the scripture, adore bone, pray to stone, deify the dead, deserve heaven, contest with god and equalize their pope with they maintain that they may eat their god, kill their king, subvert the scripture, adore bone, pray to stone, deify the dead, deserve heaven, contest with god and equalize their pope with god, onuphrius, platina, benno, etc. some whereof have be heretic, some negromancer, many blasphemer, all traitor. o that ever any soul purchase with the blood of christ shall be so traduce, their reason so blind, their understanding so darken and their salvation so endanger as to be guilty of crucify the son of god day by day and violent, incur his own damnation, the general apostasy from the true profession unto his soul. confusion who live and see not who see and lament not. pity o for ever. pity that ingenuous, generous, worthy spirit shall be. general. apostasy from the true profession unto his soul. confusion who live and see, not who see and lament not. pity o for ever. pity that ingenuous, generous, worthy spirit shall be so blind, lead by those child of darkness. the priest and jesuite among we. o belove, stop your eye and ear and solemn vow to god that you will for ever, even to the death, resist these charm and incantation of those man of sin. let they urge what ever they can, all be false, their antiquity, wherein their claim, be false, yet the devil be more ancient than they. or their learning, which be also a false claim, yet the pharisee more learned than they. or their good work, which be also a false claim. devil be more ancient than they, or their learning, which be also a false claim. yet the pharisee more learned than they, or their good work, which be also a false claim. yet the hypocrite in micah be more glorious than they. micah 6.8. or their miracle, which be also false. yet the devil, the angel of light, be more powerful than they, or their blasphemy, murder, treason, barbarous conspiracy, wherein, i confess, the devil be scarce, more abundant than they. and when all these thing be describe, if, then, they be not find to be bewitch, to be enemy to the cross of christ, to crucify again the lord of life and to persecute as saul here, do then burn the oracle of the prophet and apostle. bewitch, to be enemy to the cross of christ, to crucify again the lord of life and to persecute as saul here. do then burn the oracle of the prophet and apostle. pull down your church and temple. profess that christ merit do not suffice, or rather deny that there be a christ. let it be the common slander of our discontent. runagate beyond sea higgon, the runagate against d morton cast base aspersion upon the strong man of our israel, the reverend bishop and worthy doctor that have labour against the common adversary. let it be their devilish calumny that they do it only to serve the time and to attain their preferment. but let never so hellish, uncharitable a thought come into any of your soul. be their devilish calumny that they do it only to serve the time and to attain their preferment. but let never so hellish, uncharitable a thought come into any of your soul as that so many wise, judicious, religious, absolute, learned father shall ever dissemble with their god, if ever any such shall be find. let that curse of judas fall upon he. let his place be void and let another take his room. let his child be vagabond and his seed beg their bread. let his habitation be a dwell for fox. but if it be, find that they deal sincere as in the sight of the all-seeing god, and that upon the fear of the loss of body and soul, if they shall beguile you o. be. find that they deal sincere as in the sight of the all-seeing god, and that, upon the fear of the loss of body and soul, if they shall beguile you o, then hear they and believe they, for with they be the word of eternal life. paul, have a commission to go to persecute. i have, by saul, receive a commission to inquire of those that do persecute and therefore leave these two monster. let we brief descend to examine some person and let all of you now enter into due examination, whether any of you have persecute christ or no, if there be among you a common drunkard, a common usurer, a common swearer, a common lewd liver, a common hinderer and slanderer of god word. you have, persecute christ or no. if there be among you a common drunkard, a common usurer, a common swearer, a common lewd liver, a common hinderer and slanderer of god word, know thou that thou be a saul. thou do persecute christ. if there be a atheistical degge that do revile the messenger of god with base and scandalous, slanderous aspersion, abuse and abase, scornful that reverend and honourable title of priest, know that if thou have not part in the priesthood here, thou shall have none in the kingdom there, and in that thou do it to the least of these, thou do it to christ. thou be a saul. thou do persecute christ if there be any one that viperlike have eat out his birth. do it to the least of these. thou do it to christ. thou be a saul. thou do persecute christ. if there be any one that viperlike have eat out his birth, build upon the ruin of break poor citizen, eat up his brother like bread, the stone out of the wall shall cry against thou and know it that thy house be golgotha, the place of dead man skull, and thy possession be acheldema, the field of blood. the bread thou eat be the flesh of man. the wine thou drink be the blood of man. thou be a cannibal. thou be a saul. thou do persecute christ. if there be any among your man of traffic that ever have afford any engine of artillery to that, man. thou be a cannibal. thou be a saul, thou do persecute christ. if there be any among your man of traffic that ever have afford any engine of artillery to that great enemy of christ and christian, the turk, thereby to work the massacre of christian and effusion of their blood, know it that that blood do cry against thou. thou be a saul, thou do persecute christ any. thou be a judas, thou do betray christ. if there be any among you that may deserve the style of a quarrel, querulous, litigious wrangler and spend the great time of his life in law, like that triwltius in milan, of who this epitaph be make, he that never rest, nor let any other here. he rest if spend the great time of his life in law, like that triwltius in milan, of who this epitaph be. make he that never rest. nor let any other here he rest. if there be any such, know thou be a saul. thou do persecute christ. if there be any such that have engross the living of the church to make a common sale of soul, hereafter simoniacal, to sell that which the king of this land so many year have give. let they beware, for though the devil plead for they by scripture, that they have not free receive and therefore not free to give they let they remember that though the clergy must labour, yet buy they must not. and to beg they be ashamed. let they not free receive and therefore not free to give. they let they remember that though the clergy must labour, yet buy they must not. and to beg they be ashamed. let they know they be sacrilegious balthazir and the gold they receive shall be. it shall bring a curse upon they, erasmus adag, their family and posterity. they be like bloody saul. to who christ speak, saul saul, why persecute thou i, if there be any such lawyer that undertake any unjust and false cause or proterminate their client as innocentius, observe jano humh, and never suffer their cause to be end until their purse be consume. aelian var, hist, lib 9, cap 18.. which make themistocles so sharp to censure the law that if two way be. suffer their cause to be end until their purse be consume. aelian var hist, lib 9, cap 18.. which make themistocles so sharp to censure the law that if two way be show he the one go to hell, the other to the bar, he will soon take the way that lead to hell. if there be any such unconscionable lawyer, let he know he be a saul. he do persecute christ. if there be any that have oppose any action, intend to the glory of god and save of soul and have stay the happy, proceed in any such motion, let he know that he be a persecuter and a adversary of christ. plutarch the drone that lie at home. traduce: honourable end avour of these abroad. proceed in any such motion, let he know that he be a persecuter and a adversary of christ. plutarch the drone that lie at home. traduce honourable. end avour of these abroad be to be expel the common wealth in which give. i leave to examine the lie speech that have injurious vilify and traduce a great part of the glory of god, the honour of our land, joy of our nation and expectation of many wise and noble senator of this kingdom. i mean in the plantation of virginia, when the descry of the indian be offer to that learned and famous prince henry the seven, some idle, dull and unworthy skeptic move the king not to entertain the motion. we know our loss by the spaniard. be offer to that learned and famous prince henry the seven. some idle, dull and unworthy skeptic move the king not to entertain the motion. we know our loss by the spaniard gain, but now the soul of those dreamer do seem, by a pythagorical transanimation, to be come into some of those scandalous and slanderous detractor of that most noble voyage. sure, if the prayer of all good christian prevail, the expectation of the wise and noble, the knowledge of the most, experiment and learned, the relation of the best travel and obseruant be true, it be like to be the most worthy voyage that ever be effect by any christian in descring any country of the world, both for the peace of the entry, for the it be like to be the most worthy voyage that ever be effect by any christian. in descring any country of the world, both for the peace of the entry, for the plenty of the country and for the climate, see that the country be not unlike to equalize, though not inata for gold, which be not impossible, yet tyrus for colour, basan for wood, persia for oil, arabia for spice, spain for silk, tharsis for ship, netherlands for fish, bononia for fruit and, by tillage, babylon for corn. beside the abundance of mulberry, mineral metal, pearl, gum, grape, dear foul drug for physic, herb for food, root for colour, ash for soap, timber for building pasture, for feed, river for fish and whatsoever commodity, england want the. pearl gum grape, dear foul drug for physic herb for food root for colour ash for soap, timber for building pasture, for feed river for fish and whatsoever commodity england want the philosopher commend the temperature, the merchant the commodity, the politician the opportunity, the divine, the piety in convert so many thousand soul. the virginian desire it and the spaniard envy we, and yet our own lazy, drowsy, yet bark countryman, traduce it. who shall honour it if it be but for the remembrance of that virgin queen of eternal memory who be first godmother to that land and nation, as also that virgin country may in time prove to we the barn of britain, as sicily be to rome or the garden of the world, as to that land and nation, as also that virgin country, may in time prove to we the barn of britain as sicily, be to rome or the garden of the world as be thessaly or the argosy of the world, as be germany. and beside the future expectation, the present encouragement be exceed much in that it be a voyage, countenance by our gracious king, consult on by the oracle of the council, adventure in by our wise and great, noble and undertake by so worthy, so honourable and religious a lord, and further, not only by many other party of this land, both clergy and laity, but also by the willing, liberal contribution of this honourable city and as that thrice worthy deane of gloucester d morton. by many other party of this land, both clergy and laity, but also by the willing liberal contribution of this honourable city and as that thrice worthy deane of gloucester d morton not long since, remember his majesty and his noble, that it be a voyage wherein every christian ought to set to his help hand. see the angel of virginia cry out to this land, as the angel of macedonia do to paul: o come and help we. there be a fearful woe. denounce against those that come not to assist deborah. curse you, meroz, say the angel of the lord. curse you the inhabitant thereof, judge 5.. because they come not to help the lord, to help the lord against the mighty, whosoever they be. that say the angel of the lord, curse you, the inhabitant thereof, judge 5.. because they come not to help the lord, to help the lord against the mighty, whosoever they be, that purposely withstand or confront this most christian, most honourable voyage. let he read that place and fear: have god call this land to that great work of apostleship that, whereas this be one of the first part of christendom that receive the gospel, so now it be the first part that ever plant and water the gospel in so great, fair, fruitful a country. and shall sceptical humorist be a mean to keep such a honour from we, such a blessing from they? no, my belove. to the present assurance of great profit, add this future. and shall sceptical humorist be a mean to keep such a honour from we, such a blessing from they? no, my belove. to the present assurance of great profit, add this future profit that whosoever have a hand in this business shall receive a unspeakable blessing. for they that turn many to righteousness, dan 12. shall shine as the star for ever and ever. you will make plutarch (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), athenocus (@), (@), (@), (@), (@) a savage country to become a sanctify country. you will obtain their best commodity. they will obtain the save of their soul. you will enlarge the bound of this kingdom, nay, the bound of heaven and all the angel that behold this if they rejoice so much at the. the save of their soul. you will enlarge the bound of this kingdom, nay, the bound of heaven, and all the angel that behold this. if they rejoice so much at the conversion of one sinner, o what will their joy be at the conversion of so many? go on as you have. begin, and the lord shall be with you. go and possess the land. it be a good land, a land flow with milk and honey. god shall bless you and those end of the world shall honour he. i will end with one word of exhortation to this city: many excellent thing be. speak of thou as sometime of the city of god. hither the tribe come, even the tribe of the lord, herein be. word of exhortation to this city. many excellent thing be speak of thou as sometime of the city of god. hither the tribe come, even the tribe of the lord. herein be the seat of judgement, even the seat of the house of david. peace be within thy wall, plenteousness within thy palace. yet remember how manifold infection, hence, as from a fountain, have issue out all the trick of deceive, the diverse lust of filthy. live the pride of attire the cause of oppression, gluttony in eat, surfeit in drink, and the general disease of the fashion lactant 7. diuin so that, as lactantius out of sibilla, prophesy of rome: (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). so may it be say of the transformation of london, it shall the fashion lactant, 7. diuin, so that, as lactantius out of sibilla, prophesy of rome: (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). so may it be say of the transformation of london. it shall be jerusalem, the city of god, and it be become murder, slaughter-house, theft, refuge, oppression, safety, whoredom, stew, usury, bank vanity, stage abound in all kind of filthiness and profaneness. o remember that sin have be the pioneer of the great city. his majesty speech the 21. of may, to the lord mayor and alderman at greenwich, and have not leave one stone upon another. my honourable l mayor, i need not to remember you in this behalf the last sabaoth. you receive a lesson, though not from the cross, yet from the crown, by our another, my honourable l mayor, i need not to remember you in this behalf, the last sabaoth. you receive a lesson, though not from the cross, yet from the crown, by our royal ecclesiastes. practise that lesson. both concern the infection of the body and infection of the soul of this city. remember the charge. your year must end and your life must end, and you must give account of your stewardship. my honourable lord, you reverend father of the law, your judgement be the harbinger to the great judgement. you be god, but you shall die like man, as god have. honour you, psal 82.. so honour he in set forth of his glory, in punish of his enemy, in countenance of his servant. o my lord. die like man as god have. honour you, psal 82.. so honour he in set forth of his glory, in punish of his enemy, in countenance of his servant. o my lord, if there be not negligence either in spiritual or temporal judge, can there be so many hundred priest and jesuite locust of the bottomless pit among we and so many thousand papistical apostate since the death of the late queen of bless memory? remember to punish these and to proceed in judgement against they, lest god proceed in judgement against you and not only punish his enemy but countenance yea and reverence his servant. o look upon the deject state of the royal priesthood. the clergy they seek, not their ancient honour. their honour lie in punish his enemy but countenance yea and reverence his servant. o look upon the deject state of the royal priesthood. the clergy. they seek not their ancient honour. their honour lie in the dust, but it shall revive. they seek now but ordinary favour. it be a faithful witness of a religious and good heart in one of the chief and honourable among you, in the l bishop of winchester case, that the contempt of the clergy, my l cook in his report, will be the downfall of religion. have the levite in the law their privilege and have the mean clark in your law their privilege. and shall the clergy be prohibit they? it be god cause, not they. and if god take it in hand all. privilege and have the mean clark in your law: their privilege. and shall the clergy be prohibit they, it be god cause, not they. and if god take it in hand, all your prohibition will not serve. remember, then, to countenance and reverence his servant. all of you, my belove, hear the sum of all. fear god and keep his commandment. let there be unity and verity in you of the clergy, judgement and mercy in you of the magistracy, obedience and religion in you of the commonalty. you all know god be angry, wrath be come out, the plague be begin. yea continue from year to year, ride progress from country to country, execute judgement upon high and low and keep court at this time, within this. come out, the plague be begin. yea continue from year to year, ride progress from country to country, execute judgement upon high and low and keep court at this time within this city o serve the lord in fear. kiss the son lest he be angry and so you perish from the right way with true repentant sinner. appease he with poor distress wretch. entreat he with patriarch and prophet and apostle. believe he with all his saint and servant. love he with the holy angel. praise he with heaven, earth and all the creature due and dutiful. serve he which grace, the god of all. grace grant we all amen. and dutiful serve he which grace, the god of all grace grant, we all amen.