the discovery of gviana on thursday, the 6. of february in the year 1595.. we depart england and the sunday follow, have sight of the north cape of spain. the wind, for the most part, continue prosperous. we pass in sight of the burlings and the rock, and so onward for the canary and fall with fuerte, the 17. of the same month, where we spend two or three day and relieve our company with some fresh meat from thence we coast by the canaria and so to tenerife and stay there for the lion, whelp your lordship ship, and for captain amiss preston and the rest. but when after 7. or 8 day, we find thcm not. we depart and direct our course for trinedado with my own ship and a small bark of captain cross, only for we have before lose sight of a small gallego on the coast of spain, which come with we from plymmouth. we arrive at trinedado the 22. of march, cast ancour at point curiapan, which the spaniard call punto de gallo, which be situate in 8. degree or there abouts. we abide there 4. or 5. day and in all that time we come not to the speech of any indian or spaniard on the coast. we see a fire as we sail from the point carao towards curiapan, but for fear of the spaniard, none dare come to speak with. we, i myself, coast it in my barge, close aboard the shore and land in every cove, the better to know the island while the ship keep the channel from curiapan. after a few day we turn up north-east to recover that place which the spaniard call puerto hispanioles and the inhabitant conquerabia. and as before revictual my barge, i leave the ship and keep by the shore, the better to come to speech with some of the inhabitant and also to understand the river, water, place and port of the island which, as it be rude, do my purpose be to send your lordship. after a few day, from curiapan, i come to a port and seat of indian call parico, where we find a freshwater river. but see no people. from thence i row to another port, call by the natural piche and by the spaniard de brea, in the way between both. be diverse little brook of fresh water and one salt river that have store of oyster upon the branch of the tree and be very salt and well taste albina. their oyster grow upon those bough and spray and not on the ground. the like be common see in the west indies and else where this tree be describe by andrew thevet in his french antartique and the form figure in the book as a plant very strange, and by pliny in his 12 book of his natural history. but in this island, as also in guiana, there be very many. of they at this point call tierra de brea or piche. there be that abundance of stone, pitch that all the ship of the world may be therewith ioden from thence, and we make trial of it in trim our ship to be most excellent, good and melt, not with the sun as the pitch of norway, and therefore for ship trade, the south part very profitable. from thence we go to the mountain foot call and so pase the river carone, on which the spanish city be seat. we meet with our ship at puerto hispanioles, or conquerabia. this island of trinedado have the form of a sheephook and be but narrow, the north part be very mounteynous, the soil be very excellent and will bear sugar. ginger or any other commodity that the indies yield. it have store of dear wild pork, fruit, fish and foul. it have also for bread sufficient cassani and of those root and fruit which be common everywhere in the west indies. it have diverse beast which the indies have not. the spainard confess that they find grain of gold in some of the river, but they have a purpose: to enter guiana, the magazine of all rich. metetl care not to spend time in the search thereof any far. this island be call by the people thereof and in it be diverse nation. those about parico be call jaio, those at punto carao be of the arwacas, and between carao and curiadan they be call saluaios, between carao. and punto be the nepoio and those about the spanish city term, themselves carinepagote of the rest of the nation and of other port and river. i leave to speak here, be impertinent to my purpose and mean to describe they as they be situate in the particular plot and description of the island three part whereof i coast with my barge that i may the better describe it. meet with the ship at puerto hispanioles, we find at the land place a company of spaniard who keep a guard at the descent and they offer a sign of peace. i send captain whiddon to speak with they who afterward, to my great grief, i leave bury in the say island after my return from guiana, be a. man most honest and valiant. the spaniard seem to be desirous to trade with we and to enter into term of peace, more for doubt of their own strength then for aught else. and in the end, upon pledge, some of they come aboard the same evening there, stale also aboard we, in a final canoe, two indian, the one of they be a or lord of the people, call cantyman, who have the year before be with captain whiddon and be of his acquaintance. by this cantyman we understand what strength the spanyarde have, how far it be to their city. and of don anthonio de berreo, the governor, who be say to be slay in his second attempt of guiana, but be nor while we remain. at puerto hispanioles. some spanyarde come aboard we to buy linen of the company and such other thing as they want and also to view our ship and company, all which i entertain, kind and feast after our manner by mean, whereof i learn of one and another as much of the estate of guiana as i can, or as they know, for those poor soldier have be many year without wine. a few draught make they merry. in which mood they vaunt of guiana and of the riches thereof, and all what they know of the way and passage. my self seem to purpose nothing less than the entrance or discovery thereof, but breed in they a opinion that i be bind only for the relief of those english which i have plaint in virginia, whereof the brute be come among they, which i have perform in my return. if extremity of weather have not force i from the say coast, i find occasion of stay in this place for two cause: the one be to be revenge of berreo who, the year before, betray 8.. of captain whiddons, meet and take they, while he depart from they to seek the e bonaventure which arrive at trinedado the day before from the east indies. in who absence, barreo send a canoe aboard the pinnace only with indian. and dog, invite the company to go with they into the wood to kill a dear who, like wise man in the absence of their captain, follow the indian, but be no. soon one harquebus shoot from the shore, but berreos soldier lie in ambush. have they all, notwithstanding that he have, give his word to captain whiddon that they shall take water and wood safe? the other cause of my stay, be for that. by discourse with the spaniard, i daily learn more and more of guiana, of the river and passage and of the enterprise of berreo, by what mean or fault he fail and how he mean to prosecute the same while we thus spend the time, i be assure, by another of the north. side of the island that berreo have send to marguerita and to cumana for soldier meaning to have give i a cassado at part, if it have be possible. for although he have give order through all the island that no indian shall come aboard to trade with i, upon pain of hang and quarter, have execute two of they for the same, which i afterwards find yet every night there come some with most lamentable complaint of his cruelty, how he have divide the island and give to every soldier a part, that he make the ancient which be lord of the country to be their slave. that he keep they in chain and drop their naked body with burn bacon and such other torment which i find afterward to be true. for in the city, after i enter the same, there be 5.. of the lord or little king which they call in the west, indies in one chain, almost dead of famine and waste with torment. these be call in their own langauge, acarewana, and now, of late, since english, french and spanish be come among they, they call themselves captain, because they perceive that the chief of every ship be call by that name. those five captain in the chain be call wannawanare, carroaori, maquarima, tarroopanama, and so as both to be revenge of the former wrong, as also consider that to. enter guiana by small boat, to depart 400. or 500 mile from my ship and to leave a garrison in my back interest in the same enterprise who also daily expect supply out of spain. i shall have savour very much of the ass and therefore take a time of most advantage. i set upon the corp duguard in the evening and have put they to the sword, send captain calfield upward with 60. soldier and myself follow with 40. more, and so take their new city, which they call s joseph, by break of day. they abide not any fight after a few shot and all be dismiss, but only berreo and his companion. i bring they with and, at the instance of the indian, i set their now city of s joseph on fire. the same day arrive captain george gifford with your lord ship ship, and captain keymis, who i lose on the coast of spain with the gallego, and in they diverse, gent and other which to our little army be a great comfort and supply. we than hasten away towards our purpose: discovery. and first i call all the captain of the island together that be enemy to the spaniard, for there be some which berreo have bring out of other country and plant there to eat out and waste those that be natural of the place. and by my indian interpreter, which i carry out of england, i make they understand that i be the servant of a queen who be the great of the north and a virgin and have more under she, then there be tree in that island, that she be a enemy to the in respect of their tyranny and oppression and that the deliver all such nation about she as be by they oppress and have. free all the coast of the northern world from their servitude. have send i to free they also and with all to defend the country of guiana from their invasion and conquest. i show they her majesty picture, which they so admire and honour, as it have be easy to have bring they. idolatrous thereof the like and a more large discourse i make to the rest of the nation, both in my pass to guiana and to those of the border, so as, in that part of the world, her majesty be very famous and admirable, who they now call ezrabeta cassipuna aquerewana, which be as much as elizabeth the great princess or great commander. this do we leave hispanioles and return to curiapan and have berreo, my prisonour. i gather from he as much of guiana as he know this berreo, be a gent well descend and have long serve the spanish king in milan, naples, the low country and else where, very valiant and liberal and a gent of great assuredness and of a great heart. i uf. he accord to his estate and worth in all thing i can accord to the small mean i have. i send captain whiddon the year before to get what knowledge he can of guiana, and the end of my journey at this time be to discover and enter the same. but my intelligence be far from truth, for the country be situate above 600. english mile further from the sea than i be make believe it have, be which afterward understanding to be true by berreo, i keep it from the knowledge of my company who else will never have be bring to attempt the same, of which 600. mile i pass, 400. leave my ship so far from i, at anchor in the sea which be more. of desire to perform that discovery, then, of reason especial, have such poor and weak vessel to transport ourselves in. for in the bottom of a old gallego, which i cause to be fashion like a galley, and in one barge, two wherry and a ship boat of the lion whelp, we carry too person and their victual for a month in the same be all drive to lie in the rain and weather, in the open air, in the burn sun and upon the hard board and to dress our meat and to carry all manner of furniture in they, wherewith they be so pester and unsavoury that what with victual, be most fish with the weet clothes of so many man thrust together and the heat. of the sun. i will undertake there be never any prison in england that can be find more unsavoury and loathsome, especial to myself, who have for many year before be diet and care for in a sort far more differ. if captain preston have not be persuade that he shall have come too late to trinedado to have find we there for the month be expire, which i promise to tarry for he there ere he can recover the coast of spain, but that it have, please god, he may have join with we and that we have enter the country, but some ten day soon ere the river be overflow. we have adventure, either to have go to the great city of manoa, or at least take so many of the other city and town near at hand, as will have make a royal return. but it please not god so much to favour i at this time. if it shall be my lot to prosecute the same, i shall willing spend my life therein, and if any else shall be enable thereunto and conquer the same, i assure he thus much. he shall perform more than ever. be do in mexico by cortes, or in peru by pacaro, whereof the one conquer the empire of mutezuma, the other of guascar and atabalipa, and whatsoever prince shall possesseit, that prince shall be lord of more gold and of a more beautiful empire and of more city and people, then, either the king of spain or the great turk. but because there may arise many doubt, and how this empire of guiana be become so populous and adorn with so many great city, town, temple and treasure, i think good to make it know that the emperor now reign be descend from those magnificent prince of peru of who large territory of who, policy, conquest, edifice and riches. pedro de cieza, francisco lopez and other have write. large discourse. for when francisco, pacaro, diego almagro and other conquer the say empire of peru and have put to death atabalipa, son to cuaynacapa, which atabalipa have former cause his elder brother, guascar, to be slay, one of the young son of guaynacapa flee out of peru and take with he many thousand of those soldier of the empire call oreiones, and with those and many other which follow he, he vanquish all that tract and valley of america which be situate between the great river of amazon and baraquan, otherwise call orenoke and maranion, the empire of guiana, be direct east from peru towards the sea and lie under the equinoctial line, and it have more abundance of gold than any part of peru. and as many or more great city then ever peru have when it flourish most, it be govern by the same law and the emperor and people observe the same religion and the same form and policy in government as be use in peru, not differ in any part and as i have be assure by such of the spanyarde as have see manoa, the imperial city of guiana, which the spaniard call el dorado, that for the greatness for the riches and for the excellent seat it far exceed any of the world, at least of so much of the world as be know to the spanish nation. it be found upon a lake of salt water of 200 league long, like unto mare caspin, and if we compare it to that of peru, and but read the reiport of francisco lopez and other, it will seem more than credible. and because we may judge of the one by the other, i think good to insert part of the 120 chapter of lopez in his general history of the indies, wherein he describe the court and magnificence of guynacapa, ancestor to the emperor of guiana. who, very word be these tenia piece reynos, tenia quemar, no, no vergal la puna a whole gar mar invention allende cuzco po guascar, lo escondieron lo a espania, that be all the vessel of his house, table and kitchen be. of gould and silver and the mean of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal. he have in his wardrobe hollow statue of gold which seem giant and the figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast, bird, tree and herb that the earth bring forth and of all the fish that the sea or water of his kingdom breed. he have also rope, budget, chest and trough of gold and silver, heap of billet of gold that seem wood mark out to burn. final, there be nothing in his country whereof he have not the counterfeit in gold. yea, and they say the ingas have a garden of pleasure in a island near puna where they go to recreate themselves when they will take. the air of the sea, which have all kind of garden herb, flower and tree of gold and silver, a invention and magnificence till then never see. beside all this, he have a infinite quantity of silver and gold, unwrought in cuzco, which be lose by the death of guascar, for the indian hide it. see that the spaniard take it and send it into spain. and in the 117. chapter, francisco picarro cause the gold and silver of atabalipa to be weigh. after he have take it, which lopez set down in these word: follow do mill, mill which be they find fifty and two thousand mark of good silver and one million and three hundred twenty and six thousand and five hundred pesoe of gold. now, although these report may seem strange, yet if we consider the many million which be daily bring out of peru into spain, we may easy believe the same. for we find that, by the abundant treasure of that country, the spanish king vex all the prince of europe and be become, in a few year, from a poor king of castille, the great monarch of this part of the world, and likely every day to increase. if other prince forsloe the good occasion, offer and suffer he to add this empire to the rest, which by far exceed all the rest. if his gold now endanger we, he will then be unresistible, such of the spanyarde as afterward endeavour the conquest thereof, whereof there have be many. as shall be declare hereafter. think that this inga, of who i, this emperor, now live, be descend. take his way by the river amazon, by that branch which be calum papamene, for by that way, follow oreliano by the commandment of the marquis pacarro in the year 1542.. who name the river also bear this day, which be also by other call maragnon, although andrew thevet do affirm that between maragnon and amazon there be 120.. league. but sure it be that those river have one head and beginning and the maragnon which thevet describe be but a branch of amazon or oreliano, of which i will speak more in another place. it be also attempt by diego ordace, but whether before oreliano or after, i know. not, but it be now little less than 70.. year since that ordace, a knight of the order of saint jago, attempt the same, and it be in the year 1542.. that oreliano discover the river of amazon, but the first that eversawe manoa be johannes martin, master of the munition to ordace at a port call morequito, in guiana, there lie at this day a great anchor of ordaces ship and this port be some 300.. mile within the land, upon the great river of orenoque. i rest at this port sour day, twenty day after i leave the ship at curiapan. the relation of this martin, who be the first that discover manoa, his success and end, be to be see in the chancery of saint. juan, whereof berreo have a copy, which appear to be the great encouragement as well to berreo as to other, that former attempt the discovery and conquest. oreliano, after he fail, of the discovery of guiana by the say river of amazon, pass into spain and there obtain a patten of the king for the invasion and conquest, but die by sea about the island and his fleet sever by tempest. the action for that time proceed not. diego ordace follow the enterprise and depart spain with 600. soldier and 30. horse, who arrive on the coast of guiana, be slay in a mutiny with the most part of such as favour, he as also of the rebellious part, in so much as his ship perish and few. or none return. neither be it certain know what become of the say ordace, until berreo find the anchor of his ship in the river of orenoque, but it be suppose, and so it be write by lopez, that he perish on the sea, and of other writer diverf, conceive and report, and hereof it come that martin enter so far within the land and arrive at that city of inga the emperor for it chance that while ordace with his army rest at the port of morequito, who be either the first or second that attempt, guiana, by some negligence, the whole store of powder provide for the service be set on fire and martin have the chief charge, be condemn by the general ordace to be. execute forthwith martin being much favour by the soldier have all the mean possible procure for his life. but it can not be obtain in other sort then this: that he shall be set into a canoe alone, without any victual, only with his arm, and so turn loose into the great river. but it please god that the canoe be carry down the stream and that certain of the guianian meet it the same evening and have not at any time see any christian nor any man of that colour. the carry martynes into the land to be wonder at, and so from town to town until he come to the great city of manoa, the seat and residence of inga the emperor, the emperor after he. have. behold, he know, he to be a christian, for it be not long before that his brother, guascar and atabalipa, be vanquish by the spaniard in peru and cause he to be lodge in his palace and well entertain. he live 7. month in manoa but not suffer to wander into the country any where he be, also bring thither all the way, blindfold, lead by the indian, until he come to the entrance of manoa itself and be 14. or 15. day. in the passage he avow at his death that he enter the city at noon and then they uncover his face and that he travel all that day till night through the city and the next day from sun rise to sun set ere. he come to the palace of inga. after that martynes have live 7 month in manoa and begin to understand the language of the country. inga ask he whether he desire to return into his own country or will willing abide with he. but martynes, not desirous to stay, abstain the favour of inga to depart, with who he send diverse guianian to conduct he to the river of orenoque, all load with as much gold as they can carry which he give to martynes at his departure. but when he be arrive near the river side, the borderer which be call, rob he and his guianian of all the treasure the borderer be at that time at war, which inga have not conquer, save only of two. great bottle of gords which be fill with bead of gold, curious wrought, which those thought have be no other thing than his drink, or meat or grain for food with which martynes have liberty to pass. and so, in canoe, he fall down from the river of orenoque to trinedado, and from thence to marguerita, and so to saint juan, where remain a long time for passage into spain. he die in the time of his extreme sickness and when he be without hope of life, receive the sacrament at the hand of his confessor. he deliver these thing with the relation of his travel and also call for his culabaza, or gords of the gold bead which he give to the church and friar to be. pray for this martynes, be he that christen, the city of manoa by the name of el dorado, and as berreo inform i upon this occasion, those guianian, and also the borderer and all other in that tract, which i have see be marvelous, great drunkard, in which vice i think no nation can compare with they. and at the time of their solemn feast, when the emperor carowse with his captain, tributary and governor, the manner be thus, all those that pledge he be first strip naked and their body anoint all over with a kind of white balsamum by they call curcai, of which there be great plenty and yet very dear amongst they, and it be, of all other, the most precious whereof we have. have good experience when they be anoint all over. certain servant of the emperor have prepare gold, make into fine powder, blow it through hollow canesupon their naked body until they be all shine, from the foot to the head. and in this sort they sit, drink by twenty and hundred and continue in drunkenness sometime six or seven day together. the same be also confirm by a letter, write into spain which be intercept, which master robert dudley tell i he have see upon this sight and for the abundance of gold which he see in the city, the image of gold in their temple, the plate, armour and shield of gold which they use in the war. he call it el dorado after oreliano, who be employ by pacaro, afterward marquis pacaro, conqueror and governor of peru, and the death of ordace and martynes one pedro de osua, a knight of navarre. attempt guiana take his way from peru and build his brigandine upon a river call oia, which rise to the southward of and be very great. this river fall into amazon, by which osua with his company descend and come out of that province which be call mutylones, and it seem to i that this empire be reserve for her majesty and the english nation, by reason of the hard success which all these and other spaniard find in attempt the same, whereof i will speak brief, though impertinent in some sort to. my purpose, this pedro de osua, have among his troop a bescayn call agiri, a man mean bear and bear no other office than a surgeant or alferez. but after certain month, when the soldier be grieve with travel and consume with famine, and that no entrance can be find by the branch or body of amazon, this agiri raise a mutiny of which he make himself the head and so prevail, as he put osua to the sword and all his follower take on, he, the whole charge and commandment, with a purpose not only to make himself emperor of guiana, but also of peru and of all that side of the west indies. he have of his party seven hundred soldier, and of those many promise to draw in other captain and company to deliver up town and sort in peru, but neither find by the say river any passage into guiana, nor any possibility to return towards peru by the same amazon, by reason that the descent of the river make so great a currant, he be enforce to at the mouth of the say amazon, which can be less than a thousand league from the place where they embark. from thence he coast the land till he arrive at marguerita, to the north of mompatar, which be at this day call puerto. for that he there slay don juan de villa andreda, governor of marguerita, who be father to. don juan sermiento, governor of marguerita. when sir john burgh land there and attempt the island agiri, put to the sword all other in the island that refuse to be of his party and take with he certain cemerones and other desperate companion. from thence he go to cumana and there fly the governor and deal in all as at marguerita. he spoil all the coast of caracas and the province of vesuello and of rio de hache. and as i remember it be the same year that sir john hawkins fail to saint juan de lua in the jesus of lubeck for himself, tell i that he meet with such a one upon the coast that rebel and have fail down all the river of amazon, agiri. from thence land about marta and sack it. also put to death so many as refuse to be his follower. purpose: to invade granada and to sack pampelone, merida, lagrita and the rest of the city of, and from thence again to enter peru, but in a fight in the say he be overthrow and find no way to escape. he first put to the sword his own child. foretell they that they shall not live to be defame or opbray by the spaniard after his death, who will have term they, the child of a traitor or tyrant, and that sithence he can not make they prince, he will yet deliver they from shame and reproach. these be the end and tragedy of oreliano ordace osua martin. and agiri. after these follow jeronimo ortal de saragosa with 130.. soldier who fail his entrance by sea, be cast with the currant on the coast of and people about s miguell. it be then attempt by don pedro de silva, a portague of the family of de sylva, and by the favour which rigomes have with the king, he be set out. but he also shoot wide of the mark for be depart from spain with his fleet, he enter by maragnon and amazon, whereby the nation of the river and by the amazon he be utter overthrow and himself and all his army defeat. only seven escape and of those but two return. after he come pedro harnandez de serpa, and land at camena in the. west indies take his journey by land towards orenoque, which may be some 120. league, but ere he come to the boarder of the say river, he be set upon by a nation of indian call wikiri and overthrow in sort that of 300. soldier horseman. many indian and negro there return, but 18 other affirm that he be defeat. in the very entrance of guiana, at the first civil town of the empire, call macureguarai, captain preston in, take s jago de leon, which be by he and his company very resolute, perform, be a great town and far within the land, hold a gentleman prisoner who die in his ship, that be one of the company of hernandes de serpa and save among those that escape. who witness what opinion be hold among the spaniard thereabouts of the great riches of guiana and el dorado, the city of inga, another spaniard, be bring aboard i by captain preston, who tell i in the hear of himself and diverse other gentleman, that he meet with berreos, camp-master, at carasas when he come from the border of guiana and that he see with he forty of most pure plate of gold, curious wrought and sword of guiana, deck and inlay with gold, feather garnish with gold and diverse rarity which he carry to the spanish king after hernandez de serpa. it be undertake by the adelantado don gonzales cemenes de casada, who be one of the chief in the conquest of who, daughter and heir don. anthonio de berreo, marry gonzales seek the passage, also by the river, call papamene, which rise by quito in peru and run southeast 100 league and then fall into amazon. but he also fail the entrance, return with the loss of much labour and cost. i take one captain, george, a spaniard, that follow gonzales in this enterprise. gonzales give his daughter to berreo, take his oath and honour to follow the enterprise to the last of his substance and life. who since, as he have swear to i, have spend 300000. ducat in the same and yet never can enter so far into the land as myself with that poor troop, or rather a handful of man, be in all about 100, gentleman, soldier, rower, bote-keeper, boy. and of all sort. neither can any of the forpass undertaker nor berreo himself discover the country till now late. by conference with a ancient king call carapana, he get the true light thereof. for berreo come about 1500.. mile ere he understand aught or can find any passage or entrance into any part thereof. yet he have experience of all these forename and diverse other and be persuade of their error and mistake. berreo seek it by the river cassamar, which fall into a great river call pato, pato fall into meta and meta into baraquan, which be also call orenoque. he take his journey from granada where he dwell have the inheritance of gonzales cemenes in those part. he be follow with 700. horse he drive. with he 1000 head of cattle, he have also many woman, indian and slave, how all these river cross and encounter how the country lie and be bordr, the passage of cemenes and berreo. i own discovery, and the way that i enter with all the rest of the nation and river, your lordship shall receive in a large chart or map which i have not yet finish and which i shall most humble, pray your lo to secret and not to suffer it to pass your own hand, for by a draught thereof all may be prevent by other nation. for i know it be this very year seek by the french, although by the way that they now take, i fear it not much it be. also tell i ere i depart england that villiers the admiral be in preparation for the plant of amazon, to which river the french have make diverse voyage and return much gold and other rarity. i speak with a captain of a french ship that come from thence. his ship ride in falmuth the same year that my ship come first from virginia. there be another this year in helford that also come from thence and have be 14 month at a anchor in amazon, which be both very rich, although, as i be persuade, guiana can be enter that way. yet. no doubt the trade of gold from thence pass by branch of river into the river of amazon, and so it do on every hand far. from the country itself, for those indian of trinedado have plate of gold from guiana, and those cannibal of dominica which dwell in the land by which our ship pass yearly to the west, indies also. the indian of those indian call tucaris, chochi, apotomio and all those other nation inhabit never about the mountain that run from through the province of vensuello and in maracapana, and the cannibal of guanipa the indian call assawai, coaca, aiai and the rest all which shall be describe in my description as they be fituate, have plate of gold of guiana and upon the river of amazon, thevet write that the people wear croissant of gold, for of that form the guianinians most common make they so as from dominica to amazon which be above 250. league, all the chief indian in all part wear of those plate of guiana. undoubted, those that trade amazon return much gold which aforesaid come by trade from guiana, by some branch of a river that fall from the country into amazon, and either it be by the river which pass by the nation call tisnado or by carepuna. i make inquiry amongst the most ancient and best travel of the, and i have knowledge of all the river between orenoque and amazon and be very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike woman, because of some it be believe, of other not. and though i digress from my purpose yet, i will set down that have be. deliver i for truth of those woman and i speak with a or lord of people that tell i he have be in. the river and beyond it also. the nation of these woman be on the south side of the river in the privince of, and their chief strength and retract be in the land situate on the south side of the entrance, some 60 league within the mouth of the say river. the memory of the like woman be very ancient as well in africa as in asia. in africa, those that have medusa for queen, other in scythia near the river of tanais and thermadon. we find also that lampedo and marthesia be queen of the amazon. in many history they be verify to have be and in diverse age and province, but they which be not far from guiana do accompany with man, but once in a. year and for the time of one month which i gather by their relation to be in april, and that time all king of the border assemble and queen of the amazon. and after the queen have choose the rest cast lot for their valentine, this one month, they feast, dance and drink of their wine in abundance and the moon be do. they all depart to their own province. if they conceive and be deliver of a son, they return he to the father. if of a daughter, they nourish it and retain it, and as many as have daughter send unto the begetter a present. all be desirous to increase their own fex and kind, but that they cut of the right dug of the breast. i do not find to be true. it be far tell i that if in these warsthey take any prisoner that they use to accompany with those also at what time soever, but in the end for certain they put they to death, for they be say to be very cruel and bloodthirsty, especial to such as offer to invade their territory. these amazon have likewise great store of these plate of gold which they recover by exchange chief for a kind of green stone which the spaniard call piedras hijadas and we use for spleen stone and for the disease of the stone. we also esteem they. of these i see diverse in guiana and common every king or have one, which their wife for the most. part wear and they esteem they as great jewel. but to return to the enterprise of berreo who, as i have say, depart from with 700.. horse, beside the provision above, rehearse, he descend by the river, call cassanar, which rise in nueno, out of the mountain by the city of, from which mountain also spring pato, both which fall into the great river of meta and meta rise from a mountain, join to pampelone in the same granada. these, as also guaiare, which issue out of the mountain by timana, fall all into baraquan and be but of his head. for at their come together they lose their name and baraquan, far down be also rebaptize by the name of orenoque, on the other side of the. city and hill of timana rise, which fall into the sea, by marta, by cassonar first, and so into meta, berreo pass, keep his horseman on the bank where the country serve they for to march and where otherwise he be, drive to embark they in boat which he build for the purpose, and so come with the currant down the river of meta and so into baraquan. after he enter that great and mighty river, he begin daily to lose of his company, both man and horse, for it be in many place violent, swift and have forcible eddy, many sand and diverse island sharp point with rock. but after one whole year journey, for the most part by river and the rest by land, he grow. daily to few number, for both by sickness and by encounter with the people of those region through which he travel, his company be much waste, especial by diverse encounter with the amapaiens. and in all this time he never can learn of any passage into guiana, nor any news or same thereof, until he come to a far border of the say amapaia, eight day journey from the river caroli, which be the far river that he enter. among those of amapaia, guiana be famous, but few of these people accost berreo or will trade with he the first three month of the six which he sojourn there. this amapaia be also marvelous, rich in gold, as both berreo confess and those of guiana, with who i have most conference and be situate upon orenoke. also in his country, berreo lose 60. of his best soldier and most of all his horse that remain in his former year travel. but in the end, after diverse encounter with those nation, they grow to peace and they present berreo with 10. image of fine gold among diverse other plate and croissant which, as he swear to i and diverse other gentleman be so curious, wrought as he have not see the like either in italy, spain or the low country. and he be resolve that when they come to the hand of the spanish king, to who he have send they by his camp-master, they will appear very admirable, especial be wrought by such a nation as have no iron instrument at all, nor any of those help which our gold smith have to work with all the particular name of the people in amapaia which give he these piece be call anebas, and the river of orenoque at that place be above 12. english mile broad, which may be from his out fall into the sea 700. or 800. mile. this province of amapaia be a very low and a marish ground near the river and by reason of the red water which issue out in small. branch through the fenny and boggy ground there breed diverse poisonful worm and serpent and the spaniard not suspect, nor in any fort foreknow the danger- be infect with a grievous kind of flux by drink thereof and even the very horse poison therewith, in so much as at the end of the six month that they abide there, of all their troop there be not leave above 120. soldier and neither horse nor cattle for berreo hope to have find guiana by 1000 mile near than it fall out to be in the end by mean, whereof they sustain much want and much hunger, oppress with grievous disease and all the misery that can be imagine. i demand of those in guiana that have travel amapaia, how? they live with that tawny or red water when they travel thither and they tell i that after the sun be near the middle of the sky they use to fill their pot and pitcher with that water. but either before that time or towards the set of the sun it be dangerous to drink of and, in the night, strong poison. i learn also of diverse other river of that nature among they, which be also, while the sun be in the meridian, very safe to drink and in the morning, evening and night, wonderful, dangerous and infective. from this proviuce berreo haste away as foone as the spring and beginning of summer appear, and seek his entrance on the border of orenoque on the south side. but there run a ledge of so high and impassable mountain as he be not able by any mean to march over. they continue from the east sea, into which orenoque fall, even to quito, in peru. neither have he mean to carry victual or munition over those craggy, high and fast hill, be all woody, and those so thick and spiny and so full of prickle thorn and brier as it be impossible to creep through they. he have also neither friendship among the people nor any interpreter to persuade or treat with they and, more to his disadvantage, the and king of amapaia have give knowledge of his purpose to the guianian and that he seek to sack and conquer the empire for the hope of their so great abundance and quantity of gold. he pass by the mouth of many great river which fall into orenoque both from the north and south, which i forbear to name for tediousness and because they be more please in describe than read. ilstreo affirm that there fall a hundred river into orenoque from the north and south, whereof the left be as big as ria, that pass between popayan and granada, ria being esteem one of. the renown river in all the west indies and number among the great river of the world. but he know not the name of any of these, but caroli only, neither from what nation they descend, neither to what province they lead, for he have no mean to discourse with the inhibatant at any time, neither be he curious in these thing, be utter unlearned and not know the east from the west. but of all these i get some knowledge and of many more, partly by my own travail and the rest by conference of. from one i learn one, of other, the rest have with i, a indian that speak many language, and that of guiana. natural i seek out all the age man and such. as be great traveller, and by the one and the other, i come to understand the situation: the river, the kingdom, from the east sea to the border of peru and from orenoque southward as far as amazon or maragnon, and the religion of maria tamball and of all the king of province and captain of town and village, how they stand in term of peace or war, and which be friend or enemy the one with the other, without which there can be neither entrance nor conquest in those part nor else where, for by the dissension between guascar and atabalipa pacaro conquer peru, and by the hatred that the () bare to mutezuma cortes be victorious over mexico, without which both the one and the other have fail of their enterprise and of the great honour and riches which they attain unto now, berreo begin to grow into despair and look for no other success than his predecessor in this enterprise, until such time as he arrive at the province of emeria, towards the east sea and mouth of the river, where he find a nation of people very favourable and the country full of all manner of victual. the king of this land be call carapana, a man very wise, subtle and of great experience, be little less than 100 year old. in his youth he be send by his father into the island of trinedado by reason of civil war among themselves and be breed at a village in that island, call parico. at that place, in his youth, he have see many christian, both french and spanish, and go diverse time with the indian of trinedado to marguerita and cumana in the west indies, for both those place have ever be relieve with victual from trinedado by reason, whereof he grow of more understanding and note the difference of the nation, compare the strength and arm of his country with those of the christian. and ever after temporize so as whosoever else do amiss or be waste. by contention, carapana keep himself and his country in quiet and plenty. he also hold peace with caribas, or cannibal his neighbour, and have free trade with all nation. whosoever else have war. berreo sojourn and rest his weak troop in the town of carapana six week and from he learn the way and passage to guiana and the riches and magnificence thereof, but be then utter disable to proceed. he determine to try his fortune another year, when he have renew his provision and regathered more force, which he hope for as well out of spain as from nuevo, where he have leave his son, don anthonio xemenes, to second he upon the first. notice give of his entrance and so, for the present, embark himself in canoe and by the branch of orenoque, arrive at trinedado, have from carapana sufficient pilot to conduct he from trinedado, he coast, and so recover marguerita and have, make relation to don juan sermiento, the governor of his proceed and persuade he of the riches of guiana. he obtain from thence 50. soldier promise present to return to carapana and so into guiana. but berreo mean nothing less at that time, for he want many provision necessary for such a enterprise and therefore depart from marguerita seat himself in trinedado and from thence send his camp-master and his sergeant mayor back to the border to discover the near passage into the empire, as also to treat with the borderer and to draw they to his party and love, without which he know he can neither pass safe nor in any sort be relieve with victual or aught. else carapana direct this company to a king call morequito. assure they that no man can deliver so much of guiana as morequito can and that his dwell be but five day journey. from macureguarai, the first civil town of guiana. now, your lordship shall understand that this morequito, one of the great lord or king of the border of guiana, have, two or three year before, be at cumana and at marguerita in the west indies, with great store of plate of gold which he carry to exchange for such other thing as he want in his own country, and be daily feast and present by the governor of those place and hold amongst they some two month, in which time one governor of cumana, win he to be his conductor into guiana, be allure by those croissant and image of gold which he bring with he to trade, as also by the ancient fame and magnificence of el dorado. whereupon send into spain for a patent to discover and conquer guiana. not know of the precedence of berreos patent which, as berreo affirm, be sign before that of so as when understand of berreo and that he have make entrance into that territory and forego his desire and hope. it be very think that practise with morequito, hinder and disturb berreo in all he can, and not to suffer he to enter through his seignory, nor any of his company, neither to victual nor guide they in any sort, for govenor of camena and berreo be become mortal enemy as well. for that berreo have get trinedado into his patent with guiana, as also in that he be by berreo prevent in the journey of guiana itself. howsoever it be, i know not, but morequito for a time, dissemble his disposition, suffer spaniard and a friar which berreo have send to discover manoa, to travel through his country. give they a guide for macureguaray, the first town of civil and apparel people, from whence they have other guide to bring they to manoa, the great city of inga, and be furnish with those thing which they have learn of carapana be of most price in guiana. go onward and in eleven day arrive at manoa, as berreo affirm for certain, although i can not be assure thereof by the lord which now govern the province of morequito, for he tell i that they get all the gold they have in other town, on this side. manoa there be many very great and rich and, as he say, build like the town of christian, with many room. when these ten spaniard be return and ready to put out of the border of arromaia the people of morequito, set upon they and fly they, all but one that swim the river and take from they to the value of 40000. pesoe of gold and as it be write in the story of job, one only live to bring the news to berreo that both his nine soldier and holy father be benight in the say province. i myself speak with the captain of morequito that fly they and be at the place where it be. execute berreo, enrage herewithal, send all the strength he can. make into arromaia to be revenge of he, his people and country. but morequito, suspect the fame, flee over orenoque and through the territory of the saima and wikiri, recover cumana, where he think himself every safe with the governor. but berreo send, for he in the king name and his messenger find he in the house of one fashardo, on the sudden ere he be suspect, so as he can not then be convey away, dare not deny he as well to avoid the suspicion of the practice, as also for that a holy father be slay by he and his people. morequito, offer fashardo the weight of three quintal in gold to let he escape. but the poor guianian betray of all side be deliver to. the camp-master of berreo and be present, execute after the death of this morequito the soldier of berreo, spoil his territory and take diverse prisoner. among other, they take the uncle of morequito call, who be now king of arromaia, who, son, i bring with i into england and be a man of great understanding and policy. he be above 100 year old and yet of a very able body. the spanyarde lead he in a chain 17. day and make he their guide from place to place between his country and emeria, the province of carapana, aforesaid, and be at last redeem for 100 plate of gold and diverse stone call piedras hijadas, or spleen stone, now berreo, for execute of morequito and other cruelty, spoil and. slaughter do in arromaia, have lose the love of the and of all the borderer and dare not send any of his soldier any far into the land than to carapana, which he call the port of guiana. but from thence, by the help of carapana, he have trade far into the country and always appoint 10 spaniard to reside in carapana town. by who favour and by be conduct by his people, those ten search the country thereabouts as well for mine as for other trade and commodity. they also have get a nephew of morequito, who they have christen and name don juan, of who they have great hope, endeavour by all mean to establish he in the say province, among many other, trade those spaniard. use cansas to pass to the river of barema, pawroma and dissequebe, which be on the south side of the mouth of orenoque, and the buy woman and child from the cannibal, which be of that barbarous nature as they will, for 3. or 4. hatcher sell the son and daughter of their own brother and sister and for somewhat more even their own daughter. here of the spaniard make great profit for buy a maid of 12. or 13. year for three or four hatchet. they sell they again at marguerita in the west indies for 50. and 100 pesoe which be so many. crown the master of my ship, io douglas, take one of the canoe which come load from thence with people to be sell. and the most of they escape. yet, of those he bring there be one as well favour and as well shape as ever. i see any in england, and afterward i see many of they which, but for their tawny colour, may be compare to any of europe. they also trade in those river for bread of cassavi, of which they buy a hundred pound weight for a knife and sell it at marguerita for ten pesoe. they also recover great store of cotton, brasil wood and those bed which they call hamacas or brasil bed, wherein in hot country all the spaniard use to lie common, and in no other neither do we ourselves, while we be there, by mean of which trade for ransom of diverse. of the guianian and for exchange of hatchet and knife, berreo recover some store of gold, plate eagle of gold and image of man and diverse bird, and dispatch his camp-master for spain with all that he have gather therewith to levy soldier and by the show thereof to draw other to the love of the enterprise. and have send diverse image as well of man as beast, bird and fish, so curious, wrought in gold. doubt not, but to persuade the king to yield to he some further help, especial for that this land have never be sack, the mine never wrought, and in the indies their work be well spend and the gold draw out with great labour and charge. he also dispacrhed messenger to his son in to levy all the force he can and to come down the river orenoque to emeria, the province of carapana, to meet he. he have also send to saint jago de leon, on the coast of the caracas, to buy horse and mule. after i have thus learned of his proceed, past and purpose, i tell he that i have resolve to see guiana and that it be the end of my journey and the cause of my come to trinedado. as it be. indeed, and for that purpose, i send ja whiddon the year before to get intelligence with who berreo himself have speech at that time, and remember how inquisitive ja whiddon be of his proceed and of the country of guiana berreo be, strike into a great melancholy, lie and sadness and use all the argument he can to dissuade i and also assure the gentleman of my company that it will be labour lose and that they shall suffer many misery if they proceed. and first he deliver that i can not enter any of the river with any bark or pinnace, nor hardly with any ship, bear it be so low, sandy and full of flat, and that his company be daily ground in. their cansas, which draw but twelve inch water. he further say that none of the country will come to speak with we, but will all fly, and if we follow they to their dwelling, they will burn their own town. and beside that the way be long the winter at hand, and that the river beginning once to swell, it be impossible to stem the currant, and that we can not, in those small bot, by any mean, carry victual for half the time. and that which indeed most discourage my company. the king and lord of all the border and of guiana have decree that none of they shall trade with any christian for gold, because the same will be their own overthrow. and that for the love of gold the christian mean to conquer and dispossess they of all together. many and the most of these i find to be true, but yet i resolve to make trial of all, whatsoever happen. direct captain george gifford, my vide-admiral, to take the lion whelp, and captain calfield, his bark, to turn to the eastward against the mouth of a river. call capuri, who entrance i have before. send captain whiddon and io douglas, the master, to discover who find some nine. foot water or better upon the flood, and five at low water, to who i have give instruction that they shall anchor at the edge of the shall and upon the best of the flood to thrust over which shall john douglas void and bekon for they before. but they labour in vain, for neither can they turn it up altogether so far to the east, neither do the flood continue so long, but the water fall ere they can have pass the sand, as we after find by a second experience. so as now, we must either give over our enterprise or leave our ship at adventure 400.. mile behind we to run up in our ship bote, one barge and two wherry, but be doubtful how. to carry victual for so long a time in such babble, or any strength of man especial for that. berreo assure we that his son must be by that time. come down with many soldier. i send away one king, master of the lion, whelp, with his ship boat to try a other branch of a river in the bottom of the bay of guanipa which be call amana, to prove if there be water to be find for either of the small ship to enter. but when he come to the mouth of amana he find it as the rest, but stay not to discover it thorough because he be assure by a indian, his guide, that the cannibal of guanipa will assail they with many canoe. and that they shoot poison arrow so as if he haste not back, they shall all be lose. in the mean time, fear the worst, i cause all the carpenter we have to cut down a gallego boat which we mean to cast off and to fit she with bank to row on and in all thing to prepare she the best they can so as she may be bring to draw but five foot for so much we have on the bar of capuri at low water and doubt of king return, i send io douglas again in my long barge as well to relieve he as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of that bay, for it have be hold for infallible that. whatsoever ship or boat shall fall therein can never again, by reason of the violent currant which set into the say bay, as also for that the rbize and easterly wind blow direct into the same, of which opinion i have hear john hampton of plymouth, one of the great experience of england, and diverse other beside that have trade trinedado. i send with john douglas and old cassique of trinedado for a pilot who tell we that we can not return again by the bay or gulf, but that he know a by branch which run within the land to the eastward and that he think by it we may fall into capuri and so return in four day. john dowglas, search those river and find four. goodly entrance, whereof the least be as big as the thames at wolwich, but in the bay thitherward it be shoal and but six foot water. so as we be now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over and therefore resolve to go on with the bote and the bottom of the gallego in which we thrust 60. man in the lion whelp boat and wherie we carry 20.. captain calfield in his wherry carry ten more and in my barge other ten which make up a hundred. we have no other mean but to carry victual for a month in the same and also to lodge therein as we can and to boil and dress our meat, captain gifford have with he master edw. porter, captain eye () s, and eight more in his wherry with all their victual weapon and provision. captain calfield, have with he my cousin, but shed gorges, and eight more in the galley of gent and officer myself have captain thin, my choose, john greenuile, my nephew john gilbert, captain whiddon, captain keymis, edw handcoke, captain clarke, lieutenant hewes, thg upton, captain facy, jerom ferrar, antho wells, will connock, and above 50. more. we can not learn of berreo any other way to enter, but in branch, so far to the windeward as it be impossible for we to recover, for we have as much sea to cross over in our wherry as between dover and calais and in a great billow the wind and currant be. both very strong, so as we be drive to go in those small bote direct, before the wind, into the bottom of the bay of guanipa and from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those river which io douglas have last discover and have with we for pilot a indian of barema, a river to the south of orenoque between that and amazon, who canoe we have former, take as he be, go from the say barema lade with cassavi bread to fell at marguerita, this arwacan promise to bring i into the great river of orenoque, but indeed of that which he enter he be utter ignorant, for he have not see it in twelve year before, at which time he be very young. and of no judgement. and if god have not send we another help, we may have wander a whole year in that labyrinth of river. ere we have find any way, either out or, in especial after we be past ebb and flow, which be in four day, for i know all the earth do not yield the like confluence of stream and branch, the one cross the other so many time, and all so fair and large and so like one to another as no man can tell which to take. and if we go by the sun or compass, hope thereby to go direct one way or other, yet that way we be also carry in a circle amongst multitude of land and every island. so border with high tree, as no man can see any further than the breadth of the river or length of the breach. but this it chance that enter into a river which, because it have no name, we call the river of the red cross ourselves. be the first christian that ever come therein, the 22. of may, as we be, row up the same, we espy a small canoe with three indian, which, by the swiftness of my barge row with eight oar, i overtake ere they can cross the river. the rest of the people, on the bank shadow under the thickewood, gaze on with a doubtful conceit what may befall those three which we have take. but when they perceive that we offer they. no violence, neither enter their canoe with any of we nor take out of the canoe any of their. they then begin to show themselves on the bank side and offer to traffic with we for such thing as they have, and as we draw near they all stay and we come with our barge to the mouth of a little creek which come from their town into the great river. as we abide there a while, our indian pilot, call ferdinando, will needs go ashore to their village to fetch some fruit and to drink of their artificial wine, and also to see the place and know the lord of it against another time and take with he a brother of he which he have with he. in the journey. when they come to the village of these people, the lord of the island offer to lay hand of they purpose to have slay. they both yield for reason that this indian of we have bring a strange nation into their territory to spoil and destroy they. but the pilot be quick and of a dispose body, slip their finger and run into the wood and his brother be the better footman of the two, recover the creek mouth where we stay in our barge, cry out that his brother be slay with that. we set hand on one of they that be next we a very old man, and bring he into the barge. assure he that if we have not our pilot again. we will present, cut off his head, this old man, be resolve that he shall pay the loss of the other. cry out to those in the wood to save ferdinando, our pilot. but they follow, he notwithstanding, and hunt after he upon the foot with their dear dog, and with so main a cry that all the wood eckoe with the shout they make. but at last, this poor chase indian recover the river side and get upon a tree and, as we be coast, leap down and swim to the barge, half dead with fear, but out good hap be that we keep the other old indian which we handfa to redeem our pilot withal for be natural of those river, we assure ourselves he know. the way better than any stranger can. and indeed, but for this chance, i think, we have never find the way either to guiana or back to our ship, for ferdinando, after a few day, know nothing at all, nor which way to turn, yea, and many time the old man himself be in great doubt which river to take. those people which dwell in these break land and drown land be general call tiuitiua. there be of they two sort, the one call ciawani and the other waraweete. the great river of orenoque, or baraquan, have nine branch which fall out on the north side of his own main mouth. on the south side it have seven other fall into the sea, so it desemboke by 16.. arm in all between land and break ground, but the land be very great, many of they as big as the isle of wigh, and big and many less, from the first branch on the north to the last of the south. it be at least 100 league, so as the river mouth be no less than 300. mile wide at his entrance into the sea, which i take to be far big than that of amazon. all those that inhabit in the mouth of this river, upon the several north branch, be these tiuitiua, of which there be two chief lord, which have continual war one with the other. the land which lie on the right hand be call pallamos and the land on the left hororotomaka. and the river by which john dowglas return within the land from amana to capuri. they call macuri. these tiuitiua be a very goodly people and very valiant and have the most manly speech and most deliberate that ever i hear of what nation soever. in the summer they have house on the ground, as in other place. in the winter they dwell upon the tree where they build very artificial town and village, as it be write in the spanish story of the west indies. that those people do in the low land near the gulf of vraba, for between may and september the river of orenoke rise thirty foot upright and then be those land overflow twenty foot high above the level of the ground save. some few raise ground in the middle of they, and for this cause they be enforce to live in this manner. they never eat of any thing that be set or sow, and, as at home, they use neither plant nor other manurance. so when they come abroad they refuse to feed of aught but of that which nature, without labour, bring forth. they use the top of palmito for bread and kill dear fish and pork for the rest of their lustenance. they have also many sort of fruit that grow in the wood and great variety of bird and foul, and if to speak of they be not tedious and vulgar, sure we see in those passage of very rare colour and form, not elsewhere to be find, for as much as i have either see or read of these people, those that dwell upon the branch of orenoque call capuri and macureo, be for the most part carpenter of canoe, for they make the most and fair house and sell they into guiana for gold and into trinedado for tobacco, in the excessive take whereof they exceed all nation, and notwithstanding the moistness of the air in which they live, the hardness of their diet and the great labour they suffer to hunt, fish and foul for their liunig. in all my life, either in the indies or in europe, do i never behold a more goodly or better favour people or a more manly. they be wont to make war upon all nation, and especial on the cannibal, so as none dare, without a good strength, trade by those river. but of late they be at peace with their neighbour. all hold the spaniard for a common enemy. when their commander die, they use great lamentation, and when they think the flesh of their body be putrefy and fall from the bone than they take up the carcase again and hang it in the casiquy house that die and deck his scull with feather of. all colour and hang all his gold plate a about the bone of his arm, thigh and leg. those nation which be call arwacas, which dwell on the south of orenoque, of which place and nation our indian pilot be be disperse in many other place and do use to beat the bone of their lord into powder and their wife and friend drink it all in their several sort of drink. after we depart from the port of these ciawani, we pass up the river with the flood and anchor the ebb, and in this fort we go onward. the three day that we enter the river, our galley come on ground and stick so fast as we think that even there our discovery have end and that we must have leave 90. of our man to have inhabit like rook upon tree with those nation. but the next morning, after we have cast out all her ballast with tug and hawl to and fro, we get her afloat and go on. at four day end we fall into as goodly a river as ever, i behold, which be call the great amana, which run more direct without wind. and turn than the other. but soon after the flood of the sea leave we, and we enforce either by main strength to row against a violent currant or to return as wise as we go out. we have, then, no shift but to persuade the company that it be but two or three day work, and therefore desire they to take pain. every gentleman and other take their turn to row and to spell one the other at the hour end. every day we pass by goodly branch of river. some fall from the west, other from the east into amana, but those i leave to the description in the chart of discovery, where every one shall be name with his rise and when. three day more. be overgo our company begin to despair. the weather be extreme, hot, the river border with very high tree that keep away the air, and the currant against we, every day strong than other. but we evermore command our pilot to promise a end the next day and use it so long as we be drive to assure they from four reach of the river to three, and so to two and so to the next reach. but so long we labour, as many day be spend and so drive to draw ourselves to hard allowance, our bread even at the last, and no drink at all, and our man and ourselves so weary and scorch and doubtful withal whether we shall ever perform it or no. the heat increase as we draw towards the line, for we be now in five degree the far we go on, our victual decrease and the air breed great faintness. we grow weak, and weak when we have most need of strength and ability. for howerlie the river run more violent than other against we, and the barge wherry and ship boat of captain gifford and captain calfield have spend all their provision so as we be bring. into despair and discomfort. have we not persuade all the company that it be but only one day work more to attain the land where we shall be relieve of all we want, and if we return, that we be sure to starve, by the way, and that the world will also laugh. we to scorn on the bank of these river be diverse sort of fruit good to eat, flower and tree of that variety as be sufficient to make ten volume of herbal. we relieve ourselves many time with the fruit of the country and sometime with foul and fish. we see bird of all colour, some carnation, some crimson ' orange tawny, purple ' watchet? and of all other sort, both simple and mix. as it be, unto we a great good pass of the time to behold they, beside the relief we find by kill some store of. they with our foul piece, without which have little or no bread and less drink, but only the thick and trouble water of the river, we have be in a very hard case. our old pilot of the ciawani who, as i say, before we take to redeem ferdinando, tell we that if we will enter a branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and wherry and leave the galley at anchor the while in the great river, he will bring we to a town of the arwacas where we shall find store of bread, hen, fish and of the country wine, and persuade we that, depart from the galley at noon, we may return ere night. i be very glad to hear this speech and present, take my bark with eight musketeer, captain giffords, wherry with himself, and four musketeer, and captain calfield with his wherry and as many, and so we enter the mouth of. this river and because we be persuade that it be so near, we take no victual with we at all. when we have row three hour, we marvel. we see no sign of any dwell and ask the pilot where the town be, he tell we a little far. after three hour more the sun be almost set. we begin to suspect that he lead we that way to betray we. for he confess that those spaniard which flee from trinedado and also those that remain with carapana in emeria be join together in some village upon that river. but when it grow towards night and we demand where the place be, he tell we but four reach more. when we have row four and four. we see no sign and our poor watermen even heart break and tire, be ready to give up the ghost, for we have now come from the galley near forty mile. at the last, we determine to hang the pilot, and if we have well know the way back again, by night, he have sure go, but our own necessity plead sufficient for his safety, for it be as dark as pitch and the river begin so to narrow itself and the tree to hang over from side to side, as we be drive with arm sword to cut a passage through those branch that cover the water. we be very desirous to find this town. hope of a feast, because we make but a short breakfast aboard the galley in the morning and it be now eight a clock at night and our stomach begin to gnaw apace. but whether it be best to return or go on we begin to doubt, suspect treason in the pilot more and more. but the poor old indian ever assure we that it be but a little far. but this one turn and that turn and at last, about one a clock after midnight we see a light and row towards it. we hear the dog of the village. when we land we find few people, for the lord of that place be go with diverse canoe above. 400.. mile of, upon a journey towards the head of orenoque, to trade for gold and to buy woman of the cannibal who afterward, unfortunate, pass by we as we ride at a anchor in the port of morequito, in the dark of night and yet come so near we as his canoe grate against our barge. he leave one of his company at the port of morequito, by who we understand that he have bring thirty young woomen, diverse plate of gold and have great store of fine piece of cotton cloth and cotton bed. in his house. we have good store of bread, fish, hen and indian drink, and so rest that night and in the morning after we have trade with such of his people. as come down, we retune towards our galley and bring with we some quantity of bread, fish and hen. on both side of this river we pass the most beautiful country that ever my eye behold, and whereas all that we have see before be nothing but wood, prickle, bush and thorn, here we behold plain of twenty mile in length, the grass, short and green, and in diverse part, grove of tree by themselves, as if they have be by all the art and labour in the world so make of purpose. and still, as we row the deer, come down feed by the water side, as if they have be use to a keeper. call upon this river there be great store of foul, and of many sort. we see in it diverse sort of strange fish and of marvelous bigness, but for lagartos it exceed, for there be thousand of those ugly serpent, and the people call it for the abundance of they the river of lagartos in their language. i have a negro, a very proper young fellow, that leap out of the galley to swim in the mouth of this river, be in all our sight, take and devour, with one of those lagartos in the mean, while our company in the galley think we have. be all lose, for we promise to return before night and send the lion whelp ship boat with captain whiddon to follow we up the river. but the next day, after we have row up and down some four score mile, we return and go on our way up the great river. and when we be even at the last cast, for want of victual, captain gifford- be before the galley and the rest of the bote- seek out some place to land upon the bank to make fire. espy, four canoe come down the liver and with no small joy, cause his man to try the uttermost of their strength and after a while two of the 4. give over and run themselves ashore. every man betake. himself to the fastness of the wood. the two other lesser get away while he land to lay hold on these and so turn into some by-creeke. we know not whither those canoe that be take, be load with bread and be bind for marguerita in the west indies, which those indian call arwacas, purpose to carry thither for exchange. but in the lesser there be three spaniard who have hear of the defeat of their governor in trinedado and that we purpose to enter guiana. come away in those canoe, one of they be a cavallero as the captain of the arwacas after tell we, another a soldier and the three a refiner. in the mean time, nothing on the earth can have be more welcome to. we next unto gold than the great store of very excellent bread which we find in these canoe. for now our man cry: let we go on, we care not how far. after that, captain gifford have, bring the two canoe to the galley, i take my barge and go to the bank side with a dozen shot where the canoe first run themselves ashore and land there, send out captain gifford and captain thou on one hand and captain calfield on the other, to follow those that be flee into the wood and as i be creep through the bush, i see a indian basket hide, which be the refiner basket, for i find in it his quicksilver, saltpetre and diverse thing for the trial of mettle. and also the dust of such ore as he have refine. but in those canoe which escape there be a good quantity of ore and gold. i than land more man and offer 500 pound to what soldier soever can take one of those 3. spaniard, that we think be land, but our labour be in vain in that behalf, for they put themselves into one of the small canoe and so, while the great canoe be in take, they escape, but seek after the spaniard. we find the arwaca, hide in the wood, which be pilot for the spaniard, and row their canoe, of which i keep the chief, for a pilot, and carry he with i to guiana, by who i understand, where and in what. country, the spaniard have labour for gold, though i make not the same know to all. for when the spring begin to break and the river to raise themselves so sudden, as by no mean we can abide the dig of any, i especial for that the rich be defend with rock of hard stone, which we call the white spar, and that it require both time, man and instrument fit for such a work. i think it best not to hover thereabouts, lest if the same have be perceive by the company there will have be. by this time many bark and ship set out and perchance other nation will also have get of we for pilot, so as both ourselves may have be prevent and all. our care take for good usage of the people, be utter lose by those that only respect, present profit and such violence or insolence offer, as the nation which be borderer will have change their desire of our love and defence into hatred and violence. and for any long stay to have bring a more quantity, which i hear have be often object. whosoever have see or prove the fury of that river after it begin to arise and have be a month and odd day as we be from hear aught from our ship, leave, they mean man 400.. mile off, will perchance have turn somewhat soon than we do if all the mountain have be gold or rich stone and, to say the truth, all the branch and small river which fall into orenoque be raise with such speed as if we wade they over the shoe in the morning, outward we be cover to the shoulder, homeward the very same day. and to stay to dig out gold with our nail have be, but nor ingeny such a quantity as will have serve our turn. we can not have have but a discovery of the mine to our infinite disadvantage we have make, and that can have be the best profit of far search or stay for those mine be not easy, break nor open. in haste and i can have return a good quantity of gold ready cast, if i have not shoot at another mark than present profit. this arwacan pilot with the rest fear that we will have eat they or otherwise have put they to some cruel death for the spaniard, to the end that none of the people in the passage towards guiana or in guiana itself may come to speech with. we persuade all the nation that we be man eater and cannibal. but when the poor man and woman have see we, and that we give they meat and to every one something or other which be rare and strange to they, they begin to conceive the deceit and purpose of the spaniard who indeed, as they confess, take from they both their wife and daughter daily and use they for the satisfy of their own lust, especial, such as they take in this manner by strength. but i protest before the majesty of the live god that i neither know nor believe that any of our company, one or other, by violence or otherwise, even know any of their woman. and yet we see many hundred and have many in our power. and of those very young and excellent favour which come among we without deceit, stark, naked, nothing get we more love amongst they, then this usage, for i suffer. not any man to take from any of the nation so much as a pina or a potato root without give they contentment, nor any man so much as to offer to touch any of their wife or daughter, which course so, contrary to the spaniard who tyrannixe over they in all thing draw they to admire her majesty, who commandment, i tell they it be, and also wonderful to honour our nation. but i confess it be a very impatient work to keep the mean sort. from spoil and steal when we come to their house, which by cause in all i can not prevent. i cause my indian interpreter at every place when we depart, to know of the loss or wrong do, and if aught be steal or take by violence, either the same be restore and the party punish in their sight, or else be pay for to their uttermost demand. they also much wonder at we after they hear that we have slay the spaniard at trinedado for they be before resolve that no nation of christian dare abide their presence. and they wonder more when i have make they know of the great overthrow that her majesty army and fleet have give they of late year in their own. country. after we have take in this supply of bread with diverse basket of root, which be excellent meat, i give one of the canoe to the arwacas which belong to the spaniard that be escape, and when i have dismiss all but the captain, who by the spaniard be christine martin, i send back in the same canoe the old ciawan and ferdinando, my first pilot, and give they both such thing as they desire, with sufficient victual to carry they back and by. they write a letter to the ship which they promise to deliver and perform it. and then i go on with my new hire pilot, martin the arwacan. but the next or second day after we come aground again with our galley and be like to cast she away with all our victual and provision, and so lie on the sand one whole night and be far more in despair at this time to free she then before, because we have no tide of flood to help we and therefore fear that all our hope will have end in mishap. but we fasten a anchor upon the land and, with main strength, draw she off. and so the 15 day, we discover a far off the mountain of guiana, to our great joy, and towards the evening have a slent of a northerly wind that blow very strong, which bring we in sight of the great river of orenoque, out of which this river descend wherein we be. we descry a far off three other canoe, as far as we can discern, they after who we hasten with our barge and wherry, but two of they pass out of sight and the three enter up the great river on the right hand to the westward, and there stay out of sight. think that we mean to take the way eastward towards the province of carapana. for that way the spaniard keep not dare. to go upward to guiana. the people in those part be all their enemy and those in the canoe thought we to have be those spaniard that be flee from trinedado and have escape, kill and when we come so far down as the open of that branch into which they slip, be near they with our barge and wherry we make after they and, ere they can land, come within, call and by our interpreter, tell they what we be, wherewith they come back, willing aboard we and of such fish and tortugas egg as they have gather they give we and promise in the morning to bring the lord of that part with they and to do we all other service they can. that night we come to a anchor at the part of three goodly river, the one be the river of amana, by which we come from the north and run athwart towards the south. the other two be of orenoque, which cross from the west and run to the sea towards the east and land upon a fair sand where we find thousand of tortugas egg which be very wholesome meat and great restore. so as our man be now well fill and high content both with the fare and nearness of the land of guiana, which appear in sight in the morning, there come down accord to promise the lord of that border, call toparimaca, with some thirty or fortte follower, and bring we diverse sort of fruit and of his wine, bread, fish and flesh, who we also feast as we can. at least he drink good spanish wine, whereof we have a small quantity in bottle, which, above all thing they love. i confer with this toparimaca of the next way to guiana, who conduct our galley and bote to his own port and carry we from thence some mile and a half to his town, where some of our captain garouse of his wine till they be reasonable, pleasant for it be very strong, with pepper and the juice of diverse herb and fruit, digest and purge. they keep it in great earthen pot of ten or twelve gallon, very clean and sweet, and be themselves at their meeting and feast, the great garouser and drunkard of the world. when we come to his town we find two. cassique, whereof one of they be a strange that have be up the river in trade and his boat people and wife encamp at the port where we ankor and the other be of that country, a follower of toparimaca. they lay each of they in a cotton hamaca which we call brasil bed, and two woman attend. they with six cup and a little ladle to fill they out of a earthen pitcher of wine. and so they drink each of they, three of those cup at a time, one to the other, and in this sort they drink, drink at their feast. and meeting that cassique, that be a stranger, have his wife stay at the port where we anchor and in all my life i have seldom see a better favour woman. she be of good stature, with black eye, fat of body, of a excellent countenance, her hair almost as long as herself, tie up again in pretty knot and it seem she stand. not in that awe of her husband as the rest, for she speak and discourse and drink among the gentleman and captain and be very pleasant, know she own comeliness and take great pride therein. i have see a lady in england so like to she as, but for the difference of colour i will have swear may have be the same. the seat of this town of toparimaca be very pleasant, stand on a little hill in a excellent prospect with goodly garden, a mile compass round about it and two very fair and large pond of excellent fish adjoin this town. be call arowocai, the people be of the nation call nepoios and be follower of carapana. in that place i see very age people that we may perceive, all their sinew and vein, without any flesh and but even as a case cover only with skin. the lord of this place, give i a old man for pilot, who be of great experience and travel and know the river most perfect, both by day and night, and it shall be requisite for any man that pass it to have such a pilot, for it be four, five and six mile over in many place and twenty mile in other place, with wonderful eddy and strong currant, many great land and diverse shoal and many dangerous rock and beside, upon any iucrease of wind, so great a elbow as we be sometime in great peril. of drown in the galley for the small bote dare not come from the shore. but when it be very fair the next day, we haste thence and have a easterly wind to help, we we spare our arm from row. for after we enter orenoque, the river lie for the most part east and west. even from the sea unto in peru, this river be navigable with ship, little less than 1000 mile, and from the place where we enter it may be fail up in small pinnace to many of the best part of nuevo granada and of popayan, and from no place may the city of these part of the indies be so easy take and invade as from. hence, all that day we sail. up a branch of that river, have on the left hand a great island which they call assapana, which may contain some five and twenty mile in length and 6. mile in breadth. the great body of the river run on the other side of this island, beyond that middle branch, there be also another island in the river, call iwana, which be twice as big as the isle of wight, and beyond it and between it and the main of guiana, run a three branch of orenoque, call arraroepana. all three be goodly branch and all navigable for great ship. i judge the river in this place to be at least thirty mile broad, reckon the land which divide the branch in it. for afterward i seek. also both the other branch, after we reach to the head of the island, call assapana, a little to the westward on the right hand. there open arrive which come from the north, call europa, and fall into the great river and beyond it, on the same side, we ankor for that night by another island, six mile long and two mile broad, which they call ocaywita. from hence in the morning we land two guianian which we find in the town of toparimaca that come with we who go to give notice of our come to the lord of that country, call putyma, a follower of topiawari, chief lord of arromaia, who succeed morequito who, as you have hear before berreo put to death but his town. be far within the land, he come not unto we that day. so as we ankor again that night, near the bank of another island of bigness, much like the other, which they call putapayma, on the main land over against which island be a very high mountain call oceope, we covet to anchor rather by these land in the river than by the main, because of the tortugas egg which our people find on they in great abundance and also because the ground serve better for we to cast our net for fish. the main bank be for the most part stony and high and the rock of a blue metalline colour like unto the best steel over which i assure take it to be of the same blue stone be also diverse great mountain which border this river in many place. the next morning, towards nine of the clock, we weigh anchor and the breeze increase. we fail always west up the river a and after a while open the land on the right side, the country appear to be champain and the bank show very perfect red. i therefore send two of the little barge, with captain gifford and with he captain thou, captain calfield, my cousin greenvile, my nephew io gilbert, captain eynus, master edw porter and my cousin butshead gorges, with some few soldier, to march over the bank of that red land and to discover what manner of country it be on the other side who, at their return, find it all a plain level as far as they go or can discern from the high tree they can get upon. and my old pilot, a man of great travel, brother to the, tell i that those be call the plain of the sayma and that the same level reach to cumana and carraca, in the west indies, which be 120. league. to the north and that there inhabit four principal nation: the first be the sayma, the next assawai, the three and great the wikiri, by who pedro hernandez de serpa, before mention, be overthrow as he pass with three hundred horse from cumana towards orenoque in his enterprise of guiana. the four be call aroras and be as black as negro but have smooth hair, and these be very valiant, or rather desperate people and have the most strong poison on their arrow and most dangerous of all nation, of which poison i will speak somewhat be a digression not unnecessary. there be nothing whereof i be more curious than to find out the true remedy of these poison arrow, for, beside the mortalitic of the wound they make the party shot, endure the most insufferable torment in the world and abide a most ugly and lamentable death, sometime die stark mad, sometime their bowel break out of their belly and be present discolour as black as pitch and so unsavoury as no man can endure to cure or to attend they. and it be more strange to know that in all this time there be never spaniard, either by gift or torment, that can attain to the true knowledge of the cure, although they have martyr and put to invent torture. i know not how many of they. but every one of these indian know it, not, no, not one among thousand, but their southsaire and priest who do conceal it and only teach it, but from the father to the son. those medicine which be vulgar and serve for the ordinary poison, be make of the juice of a root call tupara. the same also quench marvelous, the heart of burn fever and heal inward wound and break vein that bleed within the body. but i be more behold to the guianian than any other, for anthonio de berreo tell i that he can never attain to the knowledge thereof, and yet they teach i the best way of heal as well thereof as of all other poison. some of the spaniard have be cure. in ordinary wound of the common poison arrow with the juice of garlic. but this be a general rule for all man that shall hereafter travel the indies where poison arrow be use, that they must abstain from drink, for if they take any liquor into their body, as they shall, be marvelous, provoke there unto by drought, i say, if they drink before the wound be dress or soon upon it, there be no way with they but present death. and so i will return again to our journey, which for this three day we finish, and cast anchor again near the continent, or the left hand, between two mountain, the one call aroami and the other. i make no stay here, but till midnight, for i fear hourly lest any rain shall fall, and then it have be impossible to have go any further up, notwithstanding that there be every day a very strong breeze and easterly wind. i defer the search of the country on guiana side till my return down the river the next day. we fail by a great island in the middle of the river call manoripano, and as we walk a while on the island while the galley get a head of we there come from we from the main, a small canoe with seven or eight guianian to invite we to anchor at their port. but i defer till my return, it be that cassique. to who those nepoio go which come with we from the town of. and so the five day we reach as high up as the province of arromaia, the country of morequito who berreo execute, and ankor to the west of a island call murrecotima, ten mile long and five broad, and that night the cassique aramiary to who town. we make our long and hungry voyag out of the river of amana pass by we. the next day we arrive at the port of morequito and anchor there, send away one of our pilot to seek the king of aromaia, uncle to morequito, slay by berreo as aforesaid. the next day follow, before noon he come to we on foot from his house, which be 14. english. mile, himself, be 110.. year old, and return on foot the same day, and with he, many of the borderer, with many woman and child that come to wonder at our nation and to bring we down victual, which they do in great plenty as venison, pork, hen, chicken, foul fish, with diverse sort of excellent fruit and root, and great abundance of the prince of fruit that grow under the sun, especial those of guiana. they bring we also store of bread and of their wine and a sort of paraquito no big than wren and of all other sort, both small and great. one of they give i a beast call by the spaniard armadlla, which they call cassacam, which seem to be all bar over. with small plate, somewhat like to a renocero, with a white horn grow in his hinder part as big as a great hunt horn which they use to wind in steed of a trumpet. monardus write that a little of the powder of that horn put into the ear cure deafness. after this old king have rest a while in a little tent that i cause to be set up, i begin by my interpreter to discourse with he of the death of morequito, his predecessor, and afterward of the spaniard, and ere i go any far, i make he know the cause of my come thither, who servant i be, and that the queen pleasure be. i shall undertake the voyage for their defence and to deliver. they from the tyranny of the spaniard dilate at large, as i have do before to those of trinedado. her majesty, greatness, her justice, her charity to all oppress nation with as many of the rest of her beauty and virtue as either i can express or they conceive, all which be with great admiration, attentive, hear and marvelous admire. i begin to found the old man as touch guiana and the state thereof, what sort of common wealth it be, how govern of what strength and policy, how far it extend and what nation be friend or enemy, adjoin and final of the distance and way to enter the same. he tell i that, himself and his people, with all those down the river towards the sea. as far as emeria, the province of carapana, be of guiana but that they call themselves, and that all the nation between the river and those mountain in sight call wacarima, be of the same cast and appellation and that on the other side of those mountain of wacarima there be a large plain which, after i discover in my return, call the valley of amariocapana. in all that valley the people be also of the ancient guianian. i ask what nation those be which inhabit on the further side of those mountain, beyond the valley of amariocapana. he answer with a great sigh, as a man which have inward feel of the loss of his country and liberty, especial for that his elder son be slay in. a battle on that side of the mountain, who he most entire love, that he remember in his father life time, when he be very old and himself a young man, that there come down into that large valley of guiana, a nation from so far off as the sun sleep- for such be his own word- with so great a multitude as they can not be number nor resist, and that they wear large coat and hat of crimson colour, which colour he express by show a piece of red wood wherewith my tent be support, and that they be call oreiones and epuremei those that have slay and root out so many of the ancient people as there be leaf in the wood upon all the tree and have now make themselves lord of all, even to that mountain foot call curaa, save only of two nation, the one call awarawaqueri and the other. and that in the last battle fight between the epuremei and the iwarawaqueri, his elder son be choose to carry to the aid of the iwarawaqueri a great troop of the and be there slay with all his people and friend, and that he have now remane but one son. and far tell i that those epuremei have build a great town, call at the say, mountain foot, at the begin of the great plain of guiana, which have no end, and that their house have many room one over the other, and that therein the great king of the oreione and epuremei keep three thousand man to defend the border against they and withal daily to invade and slay they. but that of late year, since the christian offer to invade his territory and those frontier, they be all at peace and trade one with another, save only the iwarawaqueri and those other nation upon the head of the river of caroli, call cassipagotos, which we afterward discover each one hold the spaniard for a common enemy. after he have answer thus far, he desire leave to depart, say that he have far to go, that he be old and weak and be every day call for by death, which be also his own phrase. i desire he to rest with we that night, but i can not entreat he. but he tell i that at my return from the country above he will again come to we and in the mean time provide for we the best he can of all that his country yield. the same night he return to orecotona, his own town. so as he go that day, 28. mile the weather be very hot, the country be situate between 4. and 5. degree of the equinoctial. this topiawari be hold. for the proud and wise of all, the, and so he behave himself towards i in all his answer at my return, as i marvel to find a man of that gravity and judgement and of so good discourse that have no help of learning nor breed. the next morning we also leave the port and fail westward up to the river to view the famous river, call caroli as well, because it be marvelous of itself as also for that i understand it, lead to the strong nation of all the frontier that be enemy to the epuremei, which be subject to inga, emperor of guiana and menoa. and that night we ankor at another island, call caiama, of some five or six mile in length, and the next day arrive at the mouth of caroli, when we be short of it, as low or further down as the port of morequito, we hear the great roar and fall of the river. but when we come to enter with our barge and wherry think to have go up some forty mile to the nation of the, we be not able with a barge of eight oar to row one stone cast in a hour, and yet the river be as broad as the thames at wolwich and we try both side and the middle and every part of the river so as we encamp upon the. bank adjoin and send off our orenequepone, which come with we from morequito to give knowledge to the nation upon the river of our be there and that we desire to see the lord of camuria which dwell within the province upon that river. make they know that we be enemy to the spaniard for it be on this river side that morequito slay the friar and those nine spaniard which come from manoa, the city of inga, and take from they 40000. pesoe of gold so as the next day there come down a lord or cassique, call wanuretona, with many people with he, and bring all store of provision to entertain we, as the rest have do and as i have before. make my come know. to topiawari, so do i acquaint this cassique therewith and how i be, send by her majesty for the purpose aforesaid and gather also what i can of he touch the estate of guiana, and i find that those also of caroli, be not only enemy to the spaniard but most of all to the epuremei, which abound in gold. and by this warunetona i have knowledge that on the head of this river be three mighty nation which be seat on a great lake from whence this river descend and be call, and, and that all those either against the spaniard or the epuremei will join with we, and that if we enter the land over the mountain of curaa, we shall satisfy ourselves with gold. and all other goodthinge. he tell we far of a nation call iwarawaqueri, before speak off that hold daily war with the epuremei that inhabit macuregnarai, the first civil town of guiana, of the subject of inga the emperor, upon this river. one, captain george, that i take with berreo, tell i there be a great silver i and that it be near the bank of the say river, but by this time as well, orenoque, caroli and all the rest of the river be rise four or five foot in height, so as it be not possible by the strength of any man or with any boat whatsoever to row into the river against the stream. i therefore send, captain thou, captain greenuile, my nephew john gylbert. my cousin butshead gorges, captain clarke and some 30. shot more to coast the river by land and to go to a town some twenty mile over the valley call amnatapoi, and they find guide there to go far towards the mountain foot to another great town call capurepana, belong to a cassique call haharacea, that be a nephew to old topiawari, king of arromaia, our chief friend, because this town and province of capurepnna adjoin to macureguarai, which be a frontier town of the empire and the mean, while myself, with captain gifford, captain calfield, edw hancocke and some half a dozen shoot march over land to view the strange overfall of the river of carol, which roar so far of, and also to see the plain adjoin and the rest of the province of canuri. i send also captain whiddon w connocke and some eight shot with they to see if they can find any mineral stone alongst the river side. when we run to the top of the first hill of the plain adjoin to the river, we behold that wonderful breach of water which run down caroli and may from that mountain see the river how it run in three, part above twenty mile of, and there appear some ten or twelve overfal in sight, every one as high over the other as a church tower, which fall with that fury that the rebound of water make it seem as if it have be all cover over with a great shower of rain and in some place we take it at. the first for a smoke that have rise over some great town. for i own part i be well persuade from thence to have return be a very ill footman. but the rest be all so desirous to go near the say strange thunder of water as they draw i on by little and little till we come into the next valley where we may better discern the same. i never see a more beautiful country, nor more lively prospecte hill. so raise here and there over the valley, the river, wind into diverse branch, the plain adjoin without bush or stubble, all fair green grass, the ground of hard sand, easy to march on either for horse or foot, the dear cross in every path, the bird. towards the evening sing on every tree with a thousand, several tune crane and heron of white, crimson and carnation perch in the river side, the air fresh with a gentle easterly wind, and every stone that we stoop to take up promise either gold or silver. by his complexion your l shall see of many sort, and i hope some of they can be better under the sun. and yet we have no mean but with our dagger and finger to tear they out. here and there the rock be most hard of that mineral spar aforesaid and be like a flint and be altogether as hard or hard and beside the vein like a fathom or two deep in the rock. but we want all thing. requisite, save only our desire and good will to have perform more. if it have, please god, to be short. when both our company return, each of they bring also several sort of stone that appear very fair but be such as they find loose on the ground and be for the most part but cullored and have not any gold fix in. they yet, such as have no judgement or experience, keep all that glister and will not be persuade. but it be rich because of the lustre and bring of those and of marquesite with all from trinedado and have deliver of those stone to be try in many place and have thereby breed a opinion that all the rest be of the same. yet some of these stone i show afterward to a spaniard of the caracas who tell i that it be el madre and that the i be far in the ground. but it shall be find a weak policy in i either to betray myself or my country with imagination. neither be i so far in love with that lodging watch, care, peril, disease, ill favoure, bad fare and many other mischief that accompany these voyage as to woo myself again into any of they. be i not assure that the sun cover not so much riches in any part of the earth. captain whiddon and our chirurgeon nich millechap bring i a kind of stone like sapphire. what they may prove i know not. i show they. to some of the, and they promise to bring i to a mountain that have, of they very large piece, grow diamond, wife, whether it be crystal of the mountain, bristol diamond or sapphire, i do not yet know, but i hope the best, sure i be, that the place be as likely as those from whence all the rich stone be bring, and in the same height or very near on the left hand of this river caroli, be seat those nation which be call iwarawakeri before remember, which be enemy to the epuremei, and on the head of it, adjoin to the great lake cassipa, be situate those other nation which also resist inga and the epuremei, call cassepagotos, and i far understand that this lake. of cassipa be so large as it be above one day journey for one of their canoe to cross, which may be some 40 mile, and that therein fall diverse river and that great store of grain of gold be find in the summer time when the lake fall by the bank in those branch. there be also another goodly river, beyond caroli, which be call arui, which also run through the lake cassipa and fall into orenoque. father west make all that land between caroli and arui a island which be likewise a most beautiful country. next unto arui, there be two river, atoica and caera, and on that branch, which be call caora, be a nation of people who head appear not above their shoulder, which, though it may be think a mere fable. yet for my own part, i be resolve. it be true, because every child in the province of arromaia and canuri affirm the same: they be call ewaipanoma, they be report to have their eye in their shoulder and their mouth in the middle of their breast, and that a long train of hair grow backward between their shoulder. the son of topiawari, which i bring with i into england, tell i that they be the most mighty man of all the land and use bow, arrow and club. thrice as big as any of guiana or of the, and that one of the iwarawakeri take a prisoner of they the year before our arrival there and bring he into the border of arromaia, his father country, and far when i seem to doubt of it, he tell i that it be no wonder among they but that they be as great a nation and as common as any other in all the province and have, of late year, slay many hundred of his father people and of other nation, their neighbour. but it be not my chance to hear of they till i be come away, and if i have but speak one word of it while i be there, i may have bring one of they with i. to put the matter out of doubt. such a nation be write of by mandevile, who report be hold for fable many year, and yet since the east indies be discover, we find his relation, true of such thing as heretofore be hold, incredible. whether it be true or no, the matteris not great. neither can there be any profit in the imagination. for my own part, i see they not. but i be resolve that so many people do not all combine or forethink to make the report when i come to cumana in the west indies. afterward, by chance, i speak with a spaniard dwell not far from thence, a man of great travel, and after he know that i have be in guiana and so far direct west as caroli, the first question he ask i whether i have see any of the ewaipanoma, which be those without head who be esteem a most honest man of his word and in all thing else, tell i that he have see many of they. i may not name he because it may be for his disadvantage, but he be well know to mucherons, son of london, and to peter mucheron, merchant of the flemish ship that be there in trade, who also hear what he avow to be true of those people. the four river to the west of caroli, be casnero, which fall into orenoque, on this side of amapaia, and that river be great than or any of europe, it rise on the south of guiana, from the mountain which divide guiana from amazon, and i think it to be navigable many hundred mile. but we have no time, mean, nor season of the year to search those river for the cause, afore say the winter be come upon we. although the winter and summer, as touch, cold and heat, differ not, neither do the tree, eversencible, lose their leaf but have always fruit, either ripe or green, and most of they both blossom leaf, ripe fruit and green at one time, but their winter only consili of terrible rain and overflow of the river, with many great storm and gust, thunder and lightning of which we have our fill ere we return. on the north side, the first river that fall into orenoque be cariola. beyond it, on the same side, be the river of between these two. be a great nation of cannibal and their chief town bear the name of the river and be call at this town. be a continual market of woman for. 3. or 4. hatchet a piece. they be bring by the arwacas and by they sell into the west indies, to the west of lime. be the river pao, beyond it, beyond that, voari and capuri, which fall out of the great river of meta, by which berreo descend from nuevo granada to the westward of capuri. be the province of amapaia, where berreo winter and have so many of his people poison with the tawny water of the marsh of the anebas, above, toward nuevo fall in and cassanar, to the west of those, towards the province of the ashaguas and catetios. be the river of beta, dawney and vbarro and towards the frontier of peru. be the province of thomebamba and caximalta, adjoin to quito in. the north of peru be the river of guiacar and goavar, and on the other side of the say mountain, the river of papamene, which descend into maragnon or amazon, pass through the province of the mutylone where don pedro de osua, who be slay by the traitor agiri before rehearse, build his brigandine when he seek guiana. by the way of amazon, between dawney and beta lie a famous island in orenoque, now call baraquan, for above meta, it be not kowne by the name of orenoque, which be call athule, beyond which ship of burden can pass by reason of a most forcible overfall and current of water. but in the eddy all small vessel may be draw, even to peru itself. but to speak of more of these river without the description be but tedious and therefore i will leave the rest to the description. this river of orenoque be navigable for ship little less than 1000 mile and for lesser vessel near 2000. by it, as aforesaid, peru, nuevo and popaian may be invade. it also lead to that great empire of inga and to the province of amapaia and anebas which abound in gold. his branch of cosnero, manta, caora, descend from the middle land and valley which lie between the easter province of peru and guiana, and it fall into the sea, betwne maragnon and trinedado, in two degree and a half, all which your honour shall better perceive in the general description of guiana, peru. nuevo, the kingdom of popayan and roidas with the province of vensuello, to the bay of vraba behind cartagena, westward, and to amazon southward. while we lie at anchor on the coast of canuri and have take knowledge of all the nation upon the head and branch of this river and have find out so many feveral people which be enemy to the epuremei and the new conqueror, i think it time lose to linger any long in that place especial for that. the fury of orenoque begin daily to threaten we with danger in our return. for no half day pass, but the river begin to rage and overflow very fearful, and the rain come down in terrible shower and gust in great abundance and withal. our man begin to cry out for want of shift, for no man have place to bestow any other apparel then that which he wear on his back and that be thorough wash on his body, for the most part ten time in one day, and we have now be well near a month. every day pass to the westward, far and far from our ship. we therefore turn towards the east and spend the rest of the time in discover the river towards the sea, which we have not view and which be most material. the next day follow, we leave the mouth of caroli and arrive again at the port of morequito, where we be before for pass down the stream. we go without labour and against the wind, little less than 100 mile a day assoon as i come to anchor. i send away one for old topiawari, with who i much desire to have further conference and also to deal with he for some one of his country to bring with we into england as well to learn the language as to confer withal, by the way, the time be. now spend of any long. stay there. within three hour after my messenger come to he, he arrive also and with he such a rabble of all sort of people and every one load with somewhat as if it have be a great marker or fair in england, and our hungry company cluster thick and threefold among their basket. every one lay hand on what he like. after he have rest a while in my tent, i shut out all but ourselves and my interpreter and tell he that i know that both the epuremei and the spaniard be enemy to he, his country and nation, that the one have conquer guiana already and the other seek to regain the same from they both, and therefore i desire he to instruct i what he can, both of the passage into the golden part of guiana and to the civil town and apparel people of inga. he give i a answer to this effect: first, that he can not perceive that i mean to go onward towards the city of mania, for neither the time of the year serve, neither can he perceive any sufficient number. for such a enterprise, and if i do, i be sure, with all my company, to be bury there for the emperor be of that strength as that many time so many man more be too few beside he. give i this good counsel and advise i to hold it in mind. as for himself, he know he can not live till my return, that i shall not offer by any mean hereafter to invade the strong part of guiana with out the help of all those nation which be also their enemy. for that it be impossible without those either to be conduct, to be victual or to have aught, carry with we our people, not be able to endure the march in so great heat and travel unless the borderer give they help to carry with they both their meat and furniture. for he remember that in the plain of macureguarai, 300.. spaniard be overthrow, who be tire out and have none of the borderer to their friend, but meet their enemy as they pass the frontier, be environ of all and the people set the long dry grass on fire, smother they so as they have no breath to fight nor can discern their enemy for the great smoke he tell. i far that sour day journey from. his town be macureguarai and that those be the next and near of the subject of inga and of the epuremsi and the first town of apparel and rich people, and that all those, plate of which be scatter among the borderer and carry to other nation far and near, come from the say macureguarai and be there make, but that those of the land within be far fine and be fashion after the image of man, beast, bird and fish. i ask he whether he think that those company that i have there with i be sufficient to take that town or no. he tell i that he think they be i. than ask he whether he will assist i with guide and some company of his. people to join with we? he answer that he will go himself with all the borderer if the river do remain fordable, upon this condition that i will leave with he till my return again, fift soldier which he undertake to victual. i answer that i have not above fifty good man in all there, the rest be labourer and rower, and that i have no provision to leave with they of powder, shot apparel or aught else, and that without those thing necessary for their defence they shall be in danger of the spaniard in my absence who i know will use the same measure towards i that i offer they at trinedado. and although, upon the motion, captain calfeide, captain grenuile, my nephew john gilbert and diverse other be desirous to stay yet i be resolve that they must needs have perishr dfor berreo expect daily a supply out of spain and look also hourly for his son to come down from nueve reign degranada with many horse. and soot and have also in valentia in the 200. horse ready to march, and i can not have spare above forty and have not any store at all of powder, lead or march to have leave with they not any other provision, cytherspade, pickeaxe or aught else to have fortify withal. when i have give he reason that i can not at this time leave he such a company, he then desire i to forbear he and his country for that time, for he assure i that i shall be no soon, three day from the coast, but those epuremei will invade he and destroy all the remain of his people and friend. if he shall any way either guide we or assist we against they. he further allege that the spaniard seek this death and, as they have already, murtheae his nephew, moriquito, lord of that province. so they have he 17 day in a chain before he be king of the country, and lead he like a dog from place to place until he have pay 100 plate of gold and diverse chain of splpen stone for his ransom. and now, since he become owner of that province, that they have many time lay wait to take he and that they will be now more vehement when they shall understand of his conference with the english. and because, say he, they will, the better displant i if they can. lay hand on i. they have get a nephew of i call eparacano, who they have christen don juan and his son don, who they have also apparel and arm by, who they seek to make a party against i in my own country. he also have take to wife one loviana of a strong family which be borderer and neighbour and myself, be now old and in the hand of death, be not able to travel nor to shift as when i be of young year. he therefore pray we to defer it till the next year, when he will undertake to draw in all the bordererst to serve we, and then also it will be more seasonable to travel for at this time of the year. we shall not be pable to haste any river. the water be and will be, so grow ere our return. he far tell i that i can not desire so much to invade and the rest of guiana, but that the borderer will be more vehement than i. for he yield for a chief cause: that in the war with the epuremei they be spoil of their woman and that their wife and daughter be take from they. so as for their own part, they desire nothing of the gold or treasure for their labour, but only to recover woman from the epuremei. for he far complain, very sad as it have be a matter of great consequence, that whereas they be wont to have ten or twelve wife, they be now enforce to content themselves with three or four, and that the lord of the epuremei have 50. or 100. and in truth they war more for woman then, either for gold or dominion, for the lord of country desire many child of their own body to increase their race and kindred, for in those consist their great trust and strength. diverse of his follower afterward desire i to make have again that they may sack the epuremei, and i ask they of what they answer? of their woman for we, and their gold for you, for the hope of many of those woman. they more desire the war, then, either for gold or for the recovery of their ancient territory. for what, between the subject of inga and the spaniard, those frontier be grow thin of people and also great number be flee to other nation, far of for fear of the spaniarde. after i receive this answer of the old man, we fall into consideration whether it have be of better advice to have enter macureguarai and to have begin a war upon inga at this time. yea or no, if the time of the year and all thing else have sort. for i own part, as we be not able to march it for the river, neither have any such strength as be requisite, and dare not abide the come of the winter or to tarric any long from our ship, i think it be evil counsel to have attempt it at that time, although the desire of gold will answer many objection. but it will have be, in my opinion, a utter overthrow to the enterprise if the same shall be hereafter by her majesty. attempt for then, whereas now they have hear we be enemy to the spaniard and be send by her majesty to relieve they. they will as good, cheap. have join with the spaniard at our return, as to have yield unto we, when they have prove that we come both for one errant and that both seek but to sack and spoil they. but as yet our desire of gold or our purpose of invasion be not know unto those of the empire, and it be likely that if her majesty undertake the enterprise, they will rather submit themselves to herobedience, then to the spaniard, of who cruelty both themselves and the borderer have already taste. and therefore, till i have know her majesty pleasure, i will rather have lose the sack of one or two town, although they may have be very profitable then to have deface or endanger the future hope of so many. million and the great good and rich trade which england may be possess off. thereby, i be assure now that they will all die, even to the last man against the spanyarde, in hope of our succour and return, whereas otherwise, if i have either lay hand on the borderer or ransom the lord, as berreo do, or invade the subject of inga, i know all have be lose for hereafter. after that, i have resolve, topiawari, lord of aromaia, that i can not at this time leave with he the company he desire, and that i be content to forbear the enterprise against the epuremei till the next year. he free, give i his only son to take with i into england and hope that though he himself have but a short time to live and that by our mean his son shall be establish after his death. and i leave with he one, franncis sparrow, a servant of captain gifford, who be desirous to tarry and can describe a country with his pen, and a boy of i call hugh goodwin, to learn the language. i after ask the manner how the epuremei wrought those plate of gold and how they can melt it out of the stone. he tell i that the most of the gold which they make in plate and image be not sever from the stone, but that on the lake of manoa and in a multitude of other river they gather it in grain of perfect gold and in piece as big as small stone, and that they put it to a part of copper, otherwise they can not work it, and that they use a great earthen pot with hole round about it, and when they have mingle the gold and copper together, they fasten cane to the hole, and so, with the breath of man, they increase the fire till the mettle run, and then they cast it into mould of stone and clay and so make those plate. and image. i have send your honour of two sort, such as i can by chance recover more to show the manner of they then for the value, for i do not in any sort make my desire of gold know, because i have neither time nor power to have a great quantity. i give among they many more piece of gold than i receive of the new money of 20. shilling with her majesty picture to wear, with promise that they will become her servant thenceforth. i have also send your honour of the oar, whereof i know some be as rich as the earth, yield any of which i know there be sufficient, if nothing else be to be hope for, but beside that we be. not able to tarry and search the hill, so we have neither pioneer bar sledge nor wedge of iron to break the ground, without which there be no work in mine. but we see all the hill with stone of the colour of gold and silver, and we try they to be no marquesite and therefore, such as the spanyarde call el madre, which be a undoubted assurance of the general abundance. and myself see the outside of many mine of the spar, which i know to be the same that all covet in this world, and of those, more than i will speak of, have learn what i can in canuri and aremaia and receive a faithful promise of the principal of those province to become servant. to her majesty and to resist the spanyarde if they make any attempt in our absence and that they will draw in the nation about the lake of cassipa and those iwarawaqueri. i then part from old topiawari and receive his son for a pledge between we and leave with he two of we, as aforesaid, to francis sparrow i give instruction to travel to marcuregnarai with such merchandise as i leave with they, thereby to learn the place and, if it be possible, to go on to the great city of manoa, which be do we weigh, anchor and coast the river on guiana side, because we come up on the north side by the lawn of the saima and wikiri there come with we from aremaia. a cassique call putijma, that command the province of warapana, which putijma slay the nine spanyarde upon caroli before speak of who desire we to rest at the port of his country, promise to bring we to a mountain adjoin to his town that have stone of the colour of gold, which he perform. and after we have rest there one night, i go myself in the morning, with most of the gentleman of my company, over land towards the say mountain, march by a river side call mana, leave on the right hand a town call tuteritona, stand in the province of tarracoa, of which wartaaremagoto be principal. beyond it lie another town, towards the south, in the valley of amariocapana, which bear the name of the. say valley who plain, stretch themselves some 60. mile in leugth, east and west, as fair ground and as beautiful field as any man have ever see, with diverse copsy, scatter here and there by the river fool, and all as full of dear as any forest or park in england and in cuelic lake and river, the like abundance of fish and foul of which jeriparragosa be lord from the diver of mana. we cross another river in the say beiwtiful valley, call oiana, and rest ourselves by a clear lake which lie in the middle of the say oiana and one of our guide kindle we fire with two stick. we stay a while to dry our shirt which, with the heat, hang very weet and heavy on our shoulder. afterward we seek the ford to pass over towards the montain, call iconuri, where putijma foretell we of the mine. in this lake we see one of the great fish, as big as a wine pipe, which they call manati and be most excellent and wholesome meat. but after i perceive that to pass the say river will require half a day march more, i be not able myself to endure it and therefore i send captain keymis with six shot to go on and give he order not to return to the port of putijma, which be call chiparepare, but to take leisure and to march down. the say valley, as far as a river call cumaca, where i promise to meet. he again himself promise also to be his guide. and as they march, they leave the town of emparepana and capurepana on the right hand, and march from putijmas house down the say valley of amariocapana, and we return the same day to the river side. see, by the way, many rock like unto gold oar, and on the left hand a round mountain which consist of mineral stone. from hence we row down the stream coast, the provice of parino. as for the branch of river which i overpass in this discourse, those shall be better express in the description, with the mountain of ara and the rest which be situate in. the province of parino, anp. when we be come as far down as the land call ariacoa, where orenoque divide itself into three great branch, each of they be most goodly river, i send away captain henry thin and captain greenevile with the galley the near way and take with i captain gifford, captain calfielde, edward porter and captain eynos with my own barge and the two wherry, and go down that branch of orenoque, which be call cararoopana, which lead towards emeria, the province of carapana, and towards the east sea as well, to find out, captain keymis, who i have send over land, as also to acquaint myself with carapana, who be one of the great of all, the lord of the, and when he come. to the river of cumaca, to which putijma promise to conduct captain keymis. i leave captain eynos and master porter in the say river to expect his come and the rest of. we row down the stream towards emeria. in this branch, call cararoopana, be also many goodly, i land, some of six mile long, some of ten and some of twenty. when it grow towards sun set, we enter a branch of a river that fall into orenoque call, where i be inform of the mountain of crystal to which, in truth, for the length of the way and the evil season of the year, i be not able to march nor abide any long upon the journey. we see it a far off and it appear. like a white church tower of a exceed height there, fall over it a mighty river which touch no part of the side of the mountain but rush over the top of it and fall to the ground with a terrible noise and clamour, as if 1000 great bell be knock one against another. i think there be not in the world so strange a overfall nor so wonderful to behold. berreo tell i that it have diamond and other precious stone on it and that they shine very far off. but what it have i know not. neither dare he or any of his man ascend to the top of the say mountain. those people adjoin be his enemy as they be, and the way to it. so impassable. upon this river of winecapora we rest a while and from thence march into the country to a town call after the name of the river, whereof the chief be one timitwara, who also offer to conduct i to the top of the say mountain call wacarima. but when we come in first, to the house of the say timitwara, be upon one of their feast day, we find they all as drink, as beggar, and the pot walk from one to another without rest. we that be weary and hot with march, be glad of the plenty, though a small quantity satisfy we. their drink be very strong and heady, and so rest ourselves a while. after we have feed we, we ourselves back to. our boat upon the river and there come to we all the lord of the country with all such kind of victual as the place yield and with their delicate wine of and with abundance of hen and other provision and of those stone which we call spleenestone. we understand by the chieferaine of that their lord carapana be depart from emeria, which be now in sight, and that he be flee to cairamo, adjoin to the mountain of guiana, over the valley call amariocapana, be persuade by those ten spanyarde which lay at his house that we will destroy, he and his country. but after these of and saporatona his follower, perceive our purpose and see that we come as enemy to the spanyarde only and have not so much as harm any of those nation. no, though we find they to be of the spanyarde own servant. they assure we that carapana will be as ready to serve we as any of the lord of the province which we have pass, and that he dare do no other till this day but entertain the spanyarde, his country lie, so direct in their way and next of all other to any entrance that shall be make in guiana, on that side. and they far assure we that it be not for fear of our come that he be remove, but to be acquit of the spanyarde or any other that shall come hereafter, for the province of cairoma be situate at the mountain foot which divide the plain of guiana from the country of the, by mean whereof, if any shall come, in our absence, into his town, he will slip over the mountain, into the plain of guiana, among the epuremei, where the spanyarde dare not follow. he without great force, but in my opinion, or rather i assure myself that carapana be a notable, wise and subtle fellow, a man of one hundred year of age and therefore of great experience, be remove to look on, and if he find that we return strong, he will be we. if not, he will excuse his departure to the spaniard and say it be for fear of our come. we therefore think it bootless to row so far down the stream or to seek any far for this old fox. and therefore, from the river of waricapana, which lie at the entrance of emeria, we turn again and leave to the eastward those 4 river which fall from out the mountain of emeria into orenoque, which be, and iparoma, below those 4. be also these branch and mouth of orenoque which fall into the east sea, whereof the first be the next amacura, the three barima, the four wana, the five morooca, the 6 paroma, the last wijnsi. beyond they there fall out of the land between orenoque and amazon 14. river which i forbear to name, inhabit by the arwacas and cannibal. it be now time. to return towards the north and we find it a wearisome way back from the border of emeria to recover up again to the head of the river carerupana, by which we descend and where we part from the galley which i direct to take the next way to the port of toparmaca, by which we enter first. all the night it be stormy and dark and full of thunder and great shower. so, as we be, drive to keep close by the bank in our small boat, be all hearty afraid both of the billow and terrible current of the river. by the next morning we recover the mouth of the river of cumaca where we leave captain eynns and edward porter to attend the come of captain keymis over land. but when we enter the same, they have hear no news of his arrival, which breed in we a great doubt. what may be become of he? i row up a league or two far into the river, shoot off piece all the way that he may know of our be there and the next morning we hear they answer we also with a piece. we take they aboard, we, and take our leave of their guide who of all other most lament our departure and offer to send his son with we into england if we can have stay till he have send back to his town, but our heart be cold to behold the great rage and increase of orenoque and therefore depart and turn toward the west till we have recover the part of the 3 branch aforesaid that we may put down the stream. after the galley, the next day we land on the island of assapana which divide the river from that branch by which we send down to emeria and there feast ourselves with that beast which be call armadilla, present unto we before at winicapora, and the day follow, we recover the galley at anchor at the port of toparimaca and the same evening depart with very foul weather and terrible thunder and shower, for the winter be come on very far the best be. we go no less than 100 mile a day down the river, but by the way we enter it be impossible to return. for that the river of amana, be in the bottom of the bay of guanipa, can be sail back by any. mean both the breeze and current of the sea be so forcible, and therefore we follow a branch of orenoque, call capuri, which enter into the sea eastward of our ship. to the end we may bear with they before the wind, and it be not without need, for we have by that way as much to cross of the main sea. after we come to the river mouth, as between gravelyn and dover, in such boat as your ho have hear to speak of what pass homeward, be tedious either to describe or name any of the river island or village of the tiuitiua which dwell on tree. we will leave all those to the general map. and to be short when we be arrive at the sea side, then grow our great doubt and the bitter of all our journey forepast. for i protest before god that we be in a most desperate estate. for the same night which we anchor in the mouth of the river of capuri, where it fall into the sea, there arise a mighty storm and the river mouth be at least a league broad. so as we run before night close under the land with our small boat and bring the galley as near as we can. but she have as much a do to live as can be and there want little of her sink and all those in she. for my own part, i confess i be very doubtful which way to take. either to go over in the pester galley- there be but six foot water over the sand for two league together, and that also in the channel and she draw five- or to adventure in so great a billow and in so doubtful weather to cross the sea in my barge. the long we tarry, the worse it be, and therefore i take captain gifford, captain calfeild and my cousin greenevile into my barge and after it clear up about midnight, we put ourselves to god keep and thrust out into the sea, leave the galley at anchor who dare not adventure, but by daylight, and so be all very sober and melancholy one. faint cheer, another to show courage. it please god that the next day, about nine of the clock, we descry the island of trinedado and steer for the near part of it. we keep the shore till we come to curiapan, where we find our ship a anchor than which there be never to we a more joyful sight. now that it have, please god to send we safe to our ship, it be time to leave guiana to the sun who they worship, and steer away towards the north. i will therefore, in a few word, finish the discovery thereof, of the several nation which we find. upon this discovery, i will once again make repetition and how they be affect at our first entrance into amana. which be one of the outlet of orenoque we leave, on the right hand of we, in the bottom of the bay, lie direct against trinedado, a nation of inhuman cannibal which in habit the river of guanipa and berbeese. in the same bay there be also a three river, which be call, which rise on side towards cumana, and that river be inhabit with the wikiri who chief town upon the say river be sayma. in this bay there be no more river but these three, before rehearse, and the four branch of amana, all which in the winter thrust so great abundance of water into the sea as the same be take up fresh two or three league from the land in the passage towards guiana. that be, in all those land which the eight branch of orenoque fashion into island, there be but one sort of people call tiuitiua, but of two cast, as they term. they the one call ciawani, the other, and those war one with the other on the hithermost part of orenoque, as at toparimaca, and those be of a nation call nepoios and be of the follower of carapana, lord of emeria, between and the port of morequito, which stand in aromaia, and all those in the valley of amariocapana be call and do obey morequito and be now follower of topiawari, upon the river of caroli, be the canuri which be govern by a woman who be inheritrix of that province, who come far off to see. our nation and ask i diverse question of her majesty. be much delight with the discourse of her majesty, greatness and wonder at such report, as we true make of her highness. many virtue and upon the head of caroli and on the lake of cassipa. be the three strong nation of the right, south into the land, be the and and beyond, those adjoin to macureguarai, the first city of inga, be the iwarawakeri. all these be profess enemy to the spanyarde and to the rich epuremei also to the west of carol. be diverse nation of cannibal and of those ewaipanoma without head, direct west be the and which be also marvelous, rich in gold. the rest, towards peru, we will omit, on the north of. orenoque, between it and the west indies, be the wikiri, saymi and the rest. before spokeen of all mortal enemy to the spanyarde, on the south side of the main mouth of orenoque, be the arwacas, and beyond, they the cannibal, and to the south of they the amazon. to make mention of the several beast, bird, fish, fruit, flower, gum, sweet wood, and of their several religion and custom will, for the first, require as many volume as those of, and for the rest, another bundle of decade. the religion of the epuremei be the same which the ingas, emperor of peru, use, which may be red in cieca and other spanish story. how they believe the immortality of the soul, worship the sun and bury with they alive their best, belove, wife and treasure, as they likewise do in pegu, in the east indies and other place. the bury nor their wife with they, but their jewel hope to enjoy they again, the arwacas dry the bone of their lord and their wife and friend, drink they in powder. in the grave of the perwians, the spaniard find their great abundance of treasure. the like also be to be find among these people in every province. they have all many wife and the lord five, five-fold to the common sort. their wife never eat with their husband, nor among the man, but serve their husband at meal and afterwards feed. by thamselue. those that be past their young year make all their bread and drink and work their cotton bed and do all else of service and labour for the man do nothing but hunt fifh, play and drink when they be out of the war. i will enter no further into discourse of their manner, law and custom, and because i have not myself see the city of inga, i can avow on my credit what i have hard, although it be very likely that the emperor inga have build and erect as magnificent palace in guiana, as his ancestor do in peru, which be, for their riches and rareness, most marvelous and exceed all in europe, and i think of the world, china except, which also the spaniard, which i have assure i to be of truth, as also the nation of the borderer, who be but saluaios to those of the lund do cause much treasure to be bury with they, for i be inform of one of the of the. valley of amariocapana, which have bury with he, a little before our arrival, a chair of gold most curious, wrought, which be make either in macuraguarai adjoin or in mancha. but if we shall have grieve, they, in their religion at the first, before they have be, teach better and have dig up their grave, we have lose they all. and therefore i hold my first resolution that her majesty shall either accept or refuse the enterprise, ere any thing shall be do that might in any sort hinder the same. and if peru have so many heap of gold, where of those ingas be prince, and that they delight so much therein, no doubt, but this which now live and reign in manoa, have the same honour. and i be assure, have more abundance of gold within his territory than all peru and the west indies. for the rest, which myself have see, i will promise these thing that follow and know to be true, those that be desirous to discover and to see, many nation may be satisfy. within this river which bring forth so many arm and branch, lead to several country and province above 2000 mile east and west and 800. mile south and north, and of these the most either rich in gold or in other merchandise. the common soldier shall here fight for gold and pay himself in steed of penny, with plate of half a foot broad, whereas he break his bone in other war for provant and penury. those commander and chieftain that shoot at honour and abundance shall find there more rich and beautiful city, more temple adorn with golden image, more sepulchre fill with treasure. then, either cortes find in mexico or pazzaro in peru, and the shine glory of this conquest will eclipse all those so far extend beam of the spanish nation. there be no country which yield more pleasure to the inhabitant either for these common delight of hunt, hawk, fish, fowl and the rest, than guiana do it have so many plain, clear river abundance of pheasant, partridge, quail, rail crane, heron and all other foul dear of all sort, pork, hare, lion, tiger, leopard and diverse other sort of beast, either for chase or food it have a kind. of beast call, or as big as a english beef, and in great plenty to speak of the several sort of every kind, i fear will be troublesome to the reader and therefore i will omit they and conclude that both for health, good air, pleasure and riches i be resolve it can be equal by any region, either in the east or west. moreover, the country be so healthful- 2 s100 person and more- which lie without shift, most sluttish, and be every day almost melt, with heat in row and march, and sudden wet again with great shower, and do eat of all sort of corrupt fruit and mademeale, of fresh fish without season, of tortugas, of lagartas and of all sort good and bad, without either order or measure, and beside lodge in the open air every night. we lose not any one, nor have one ill dispose, to my knowledge, nor find any callentura or other of those pestilent diseale which dwell in all hot region, and so never the equinoctial line. where there be store of gold, it be in effect needle to remember other commodity for. trade, but it have, towards the south part of the river, great quantity of brasil, wood and diverse berry that die, a most perfect crimson and carnation. and for paint, all france, italy or the east indies yield none such, for the more the skin be wash, the fair the colour appear and with which even those brown and tawny woman spot themselves and colour their cheek. all place yield abundance of cotten, of silk, of balsamum and of those kind most excellent, and never know in europe of all sort of gum, of indian pepper and what else the country may afford within the land. we know not. neither have we time to abide the trial and search the soil beside be so excellent and so full. of river, as it will carry sugar, ginger and all those other commodity which the west indies have. the navigatiou be short, for it may be sail with a ordinary wind in six week and in the like time back again. and, by the way, neither lee shore, enemy coast rock nor sand, all which in the voyage to the west indy and all other place we be subject unto, as the channel of bahama come from, the west indies can not be pass in the winter and when it be at the best it be a perilous and a fearful place. the rest of the indies for calm and disease, very troublesome, and the bermuda a hellish sea for thunder, lightning and storm. this very year there. be seventeen sail of spanish ship lose in the channel of bahama and the great philip like to have sink at the bermuda, be put back to saint juan, and so it fall out in that navigation every year for the most part, which, in this voyage be not to be fear, for the time of the year to leave england be best in july, and the summer in guiana be in october, november, december, januarie, february and march, and then the ship may depart thence in april and so return again into england in june, so as they shall never be subject to winter weather, either come, go or stay there, which for my part i take to be one of the great comfort and encouragement that can be think on, have as i have do, taste in this voyage by the west indies, so many calm, so much heat, such outrageous gust, foul weather and contrary wind. to conclude, guiana be a country that have yet her maidenhead never sack, turn nor wrought. the face of the earth have not be tear, nor the virtue and salt of the soil spend by manurance. the grave have not be open for gold. the mine not break with fledge, not their image pull down out of their temple. it have never be enter by any army of strength and never conquer or possess by any christian prince. it be beside, so defensible that if two fort be build in one of the province which i have see the flood set in so near the bank, where the channel also lie, that no ship can pass up, but within a pike length of the artillery, first of the one and afterwards of the other, which two fort will be a sufficient guard both to the empire of inga and to a hundred other, several kingdom lie within the say river, even to the city of quito in peru. there be therefore great difference between the easiness of the conquest of guiana and the defence of it be conquer, and the west or east indies. guiana have but one entrance, by the sea, if it have that. for any vessel of burden, so as whosoever shall first possess it, it shall be find unaccessable for any enemy, except he come in wherry, barge or canoe, or else in flat bottom boat, and if he do offer to enter it in that manner, the wood be so thick, 200 mile together upon the river, of such entrance as a mouse can sit in a boat, unhit from the bank by land. it be more impossible to approach, for it have the strong situation of any region under the sun and be so environ with impassable mountain on every side, as it be impossible to victual any company in the passage which have be well prove, by the spanish nation who, since the conquest of peru, have never leave five year free from attempt this empire or discover some way into it. and yet, of 23, several gentleman, knight and noble man, there be never any that know which way to lead a army by land or to conduct ship by sea any thing near the, say, country of which the river of amazon take name, be the first, and don anthonio de berreo, who we displant, the last. and i doubt much whether he himself or any of he yet know the best way into the say empire. it can therefore hardly be regain if any strength be former set down but in one or two place and but two or three crumster or galley build and furnish upon the river. within the west indies have many port, water place and landing and near than 300. mile to guiana no mancan harbour a ship except he. know one only place which be not learn in haste and which i will undertake there be not any one of my company that know whosoever hearken most after it beside by keep one good fort or build one town of strength. the whole empire be guard and whatsoever company. shall be afterwards plant within the land, although in twenty several province, those shall be able all to reunite themselves upon any occasion, either by the way of one river or be able to march by land without either wood, bog or mountain, whereas in the west indies there be few town or province that can succour or relieve one the other, either by land or sea. by land, the country be either defart, mounteynous or strong enemy. by sea, if any man invade to the eastward, those to the west can in many month turn against the breeze and easterwind beside the spanyarde be therein so disperse as they be no where strong, but in nueva hispania only the sharp mountain, the thorn and poison prickel, the. sandy and deep way in the valley, the smother, heat and air and want of water in other place, be their only and best defence, which, because those nation that invade they be not victual or provide to stay, neither have any place to friend adjoin. do serve they in steed of good arm and great multitude, the west indies be first. offer her majesty grandfather by columbus, a stranger in whomethere may be doubt of deceit, and beside it be then think incredible that there be such and so many land and region never write of before this empire. be make know to her majesty by her own vassal and by he that owe to she more duty than a ordinary subject, so that it shall ill. sort with the many grace and benefit which i have receive, to abuse her highness, either with fable or imagination, the country be already discover. many nation win to her majesty love and obedience, and those spaniard which have late and long labour about the conquest, beat out discourage and disgrace which among these nation be think invincible. her majesty may in this enterprise employ all those soldier and gentleman that be young brother, and all captain and cheiftames that want employment, and the charge will be only the first, set out in victual and arm they for after the first or second year, i doubt not. but to see in london a contratation house of more receipt for guiana, then there be now in civil for the. west indy and i be resolve that if there be but a final army, a foot in guiana, march towards manoa, the chief city of inga. he will yield to her majesty by composition so many hundred thousand pound yearly, as shall both defend all enemy abroad and defray all expense at home, and that he will beside pay a garrison of 3000. or 4000 soldier, very royal, to defend he against other nation. for he can but know how his predecessor, yea, how his own great uncle, guascar, and atibalipa, son to guanacapa, emperor of peru, be, while they contend for the empire beat out by the spanyarde, and that both of late year and ever since, she say, conquest, the spanyarde have seek the passage and entry of his country and of their cruelty use to the borderer. he can be ignorant in which respect, no doubt, but he will be bring to tribute with great gladness if nor he have neither shot nor iron weapon in all his empire. and therefore, may easy be conquer. and i far remember that berreo confess to i and other, which i protest before the majesty of god, to be true that there. be find among prophecy in peru, at such time as the empire be reduce to the spanish obedience in their chief temple, amongst diverse other which fore show the loss of the say empire, that from inglatierra those ingas shall be again in time to come restore and deliver from the servitude of the say conqueror. and i hope, as we, with these few hand have, displant the first garrison and drive they out of the say country. so her majesty will give order for the rest and either defend it and hold it as tributary, or conquer and keep it as empress of the fame. for whatsoever prince shall possess, it shall be great, and if the king of spain enjoy it, he will become unresistible her. majesty hereby shall confirm and strengthen the opinion of all nation as touch her great and princely acton, and where the south border of guiana reach to the dominion and empire of the amazon, those woman shall hereby hear the name of a virgin which be not only able to defend she own territory and her neighbour, but also to invade and conquer so great empire and so far remove. to speak more at this time, i fear, will be but troublesome. i trust in god, this be true will suffice and that he which be king of all king and lord of lord, will put it into her heart, which be lady of lady to possess it. if not, i will judge those man worthy to be. king thereof that, by her grace and leave, will undertake it of themselves.