news from virginia of the happy arrival of that famous and worthy knight, sir thomas gate, and well repute and valiant captain newport, into england. it be no idle, fabulous tale, nor be it feign news, for truth herself. be here, arrive, because you shall not muse with she. both gate and newport come to tell, report, do lie which do dewlge unto the world that they at sea do die. it be true that eleven month and more, these gallant, worthy wight be in the ship sea-venture name, deprive virginia sight and brave do they glide the main till neptune begin to frown as if a courser, proud back, will throw his rider down the sea do rage the wind, do blow distress. be they then their. ship do leak her tackle break in danger, be her man, but heaven be pylotte. in this storm, and to a island, never bermoothawe call, conduct then which do abate their fear. but yet these worthy force be oppress with weather again to run their ship between two rock, where she do still remain, and then on shore the island come inhabit by hog, some foul and tortoise there be. they only have one dog to kill these swine to yield. they food that little have to eat, their store be spend and all thing scant, alas, they want meat. a thousand hog that dog do kill their hunger to sustain, and with such food do in that i will two and forty week remain and there two. gallant pynases do build of seader-tree the brave deliverance, one be call of seventy ton, be she the other, patience have to name her burden, thirty ton, two only of their man which there pale death do overcome. and for the loss of those two soul which be account dear, a son and daughter than be bear and be baptize there, the two and forty week be past, they hoist sail and away, their ship with hog. well freight be their heart with much joy. and so unto virginia come, where these brave soldier find the englishman oppress, with grief and discontent in mind, they seem distract and forlorn for those two worthy loss. yet at their home return they joy. amongst they some be cross and in. the midst of discontent come noble delaware. he hear the grief on either part and set they free from care. he comfort they and cheer their heart that they abound with joy. he feed they full and feed their soul with god word every day. a discreet counsel he create of man of worthy fame. that noble gate lieutenant be the admiral have to name the worthy sir george somers, knight and other of command, master georg percy, which be brother unto northumberland. sir ferdinando wayneman, knight and other of good fame. that noble lord, his company, which to virginia come and land there. his number be one hundred seventy. then add to the rest and they make full four hundred able man where they unto their labour. fall as man that mean to thrive. let we pray that heaven may bless they all and keep they long alive. those man that vagrant live with we have there deserve well. their governor write in their praise, as diverse letter tell. and to the adventurer, thus he write: be not dismay at all, for scandal can do we wrong. god will not let we fall. let england know our willingness for that. our work be good. we hope to plant a nation where none before have stand to glorify the lord. it be do, and to no other end he that will cross so good a work to god can be no friend. there be no fear of hunger here for corn much store here, grow much. fish the gallant river yield. it be truth, without suppose great store of fowl, of venison, of grape and mulberry, of chestnut, walnut and such like, of fruit and strawberry there be indeed no want at all, but some condition ill. that wish the work shall not go on with word do seem to kill, and for a instance of their store, the noble delaware have for a present hither send to testific his care in manage so good a work, two gallant ship by name, the blessing and the hercules, well fraught, and in the same two ship, be these commodity fur, sturgeon, caviar, blacke-walnut-tree and some deale-boord with such they lade be some pearl, some wainscot and clapbord, with some sassafras, wood and iron, promise for. it be true, their mine be very good then. maugre scandal, false report or any opposition, the adventurer do thus dewlge to man of good condition that he that want shall have relief, be he ofhone mind, apparel, coin or any thing to such they will be kind to, such as to virginia, do purpose to repair, and when that they shall thither come, each man shall have his share: day wage for the labourer and for his more content a house and garden plot shall have beside it. be further mean that every man shall have a part, and not thereof denay, of general profit, as if that he twelve pound ten shilling pay and he that in virginia shall copper coin receive for high or commodity. and will the country leave upon delivery of such coin unto the governor? shall, by exchange at his return, be by their treasurer, pay he in london, at first sight no man shall cause to grieve for. it be their general will and wish that every man shall live. the number of adventurer that be for this plantation be full, eight hundred. worthy man, some noble, all offashion, good, discreet. their work be good, and as they have begin, may heaven assist they in their work and thus our news be do.