a true relation of captain george waymouth, his voyage make this present year, 1605, in the discovery of the north part of virginia. upon tuesday, the 5 day of march, about ten a clock afore noon, we set sail from ratcliff and come to a anchor that tide about two a clock before gravesend. from thence the 10 of march be sunday at night we anchor in the down and there ride till the next day, about three a clock after noon when with a scant wind we set sail and by reason the wind continue southward. we be beat up and down. but on saturday, the 16 day, about four a clock after noon we put into dartmouth haven, where the continuance of the wind at south southward, we be beat up and down. but on saturday, the 16 day, about four a clock after noon, we put into dartmouth haven where the continuance of the wind at south and south-west constrain we to ride till the last of this month. there we ship some of our man and supply necessary for our ship and voyage. upon easter day be the last of march. upon easter day we put to sea. the wind come at north-north-east, about five a clock after noon we weigh, anchor and put to sea, in the name of god be well victual and furnish with munition and all necessary, our company, 29 person, our whole company be but 29 person, of who i may bold say few voyage have be. god be well victual and furnish with munition and all necessary. our company, 29 person, our whole company be but 29 person, of who i may bold say few voyage have, be man forth with better seaman general in respect of our small number. monday, the next day be the first of april. by six a clock in the morning, we be six league south-south-east from the lizard, at two a clock in the afternoon. this day, the weather be very fair. our captain, for his own experience and other with he sound sound and have six and fifty fathom and a half the sound, be some small black perrie sand, some reddish sand, a match or two with small shell. call saint james his shell. the fourteen. six and fifty, fathom and a half the sound be some small black perrie sand, some reddish sand, a match or two with small shell. call saint james his shell. the fourteen of april be sunday. between nine and ten of the clock in the morning our captain descry the island, cueruo, which bare south-west and by west about seven league from we. by eleven of the clock we descry flores to the southward of cueruo. we fall with the land of azores as it lie, by four a clock in the afternoon. we bring cueruo due south from we, within two league of the shore, but we touch not because the wind be fair and we think ourselves sufficient water and wooded. here. our captain observe the. due south from we, within two league of the shore, but we touch not because the wind be fair and we think ourselves sufficient water and wooded. here our captain observe the sun and find himself in the latitude of 40 degree and 7 minute. so he judge the north part of cueruo to be in 40 degree. after we have keep our course about a hundred league from the land by continual southerly wind, we be force and drive from the southward whither we first intend. and when our captain by long beat, see it be but in vain, to strive with wind not know god purpose herein, to our further blessing which, after by his especial direction, we find he think best to stand as nigh. be, but in vain to strive with wind, not know god purpose herein, to our further blessing which, after by his especial direction, we find he think best to stand as nigh as he can by the wind to recover. what land we may first discover? monday, the 6 of may be in the latitude of 39 and a half, about ten a clock afore noon, we come to a riplin which we discern a head, our ship, which be a breach of water cause, either by a fall or by some meeting of current, which we judge this to be, for the weather be very fair and a small gale of wind. we sound and find no ground in a hundred fathom. monday, the 13 of may. we judge this to be for the weather be very fair and a small gale of wind. we sound and find no ground in a hundred fathom. monday, the 13 of may, about eleven a clock afore noon, our captain judge we be not far from land, sound and have a soft oaze in a hundred and sixty fathom. at four a clock after noon we sound again and have the same oaze in a hundred fathom from 10 a clock that night till three a clock in the morning. our captain take in all sail and lay at hull, be desirous to fall with the land in the day time because it be a unknown coast which it please god in his mercy to grant we otherwise. and lay at hull be desirous to fall with the land in the day time because it be a unknown coast which it please god in his mercy to grant we otherwise. we have run our ship upon the hide rock and perish all. for when we set sail we sound in 100 fathom and by eight a clock have not make above five or six league. our captain, upon a sudden change of water, suppose very. he see the sand present sound and have but five fathom. much marvel, because we see no land. he send one to the top who thence descry a whitish sandy cliff which bare west-north-west, about six league off from we, but come near within three or four league, we see many. send one to the top who thence descry a whitish sandy cliff which bare west-north-west, about six league off from we, but come near within three or four league, we see many breach still near the land. at last we espy a great breach, a head we all along the shore into which, before we shall enter, our captain think best to hoist out his ship boat and sound it, which, if he have not do we have be in great danger, for he bear up the ship as near as he dare after the boat, until thomas cam, his mate, be in the boat, call to he to tack about and stand off, for in this breach he have very shall water, two fathom and less upon until thomas cam, his mate, be in the boat, call to he to tack about and stand off, for in this breach he have very shall water, two fathom and less, upon rock, and sometime they suppose they see the rock within three or four foot, whereon the sea make a very strong breach which we may discern from the top to run along as we sail by it: 6 or 7 league to the southward, this be in the latitude of 41 degree 20 minute, wherefore we be constrain to put back again from the land and sound, the weather be very fair and a small wind, we find ourselves embay with continual showlde and rock in a most uncertain ground, from five or six fathom at. land and sound, the weather be very fair and a small wind, we find ourselves embay with continual showlde and rock in a most uncertain ground from five or six fathom. at the next cast of the lead we shall have 15 and 18 fathom over many which we pass, and god, so bless we that we have wind and weather as fair as poor man in this distress can wish, whereby we both perfect, discern every breach and, with the wind, be able to turn where we see most hope of safe passage. thus we part from the land which we have not so much before desire and at the first sight rejoice, as now we all joyful, praise god that it have please he to deliver. part from the land which we have not so much before desire and, at the first sight, rejoice, as now we all joyful, praise god that it have, please he, to deliver we from so imminent danger. here we find great store of excellent cod, fish and see many whale, as we have do two or three day, before we stand off all that night and the next day be wednesday, but the wind still continue between the point of south, south-west and west-south-west. so as we can not make any way to the southward, in regard of our great want of water and wood, which be now spend, we much desire land and therefore seek for it where the wind will best suffer we to refresh ourselves. regard of our great want of water and wood which be now spend. we much desire land and therefore seek for it where the wind will best suffer, we to refresh ourselves. thursday, the 16 of may. we stand in direct with the land and much marvel we descry it not wherein we find our sea charts very false, put land where none. be friday, the 17 of may, about six a clock at night, we descry the land which bear from we north-north-east, but because it blow a great gale of wind, the sea very high and near night, not fit to come upon a unknown coast, we stand off till two a clock in the morning. be saturday, then stand in with it. again we descry. high and near night, not fit to come upon a unknown coast. we stand off till two a clock in the morning, be saturday. then stand in with it again. we descry it by eight a clock in the morning. bear north-east. from we the description of the island. it appear a mean high land, as we after find it be, but a island of some six mile in compass, but i hope the most fortunate ever yet discover. about twelve a clock that day we come to a anchor on the north side of this island, about a league from the shore. about two a clock our captain with twelve man row in his shipboat to the shore where we make no long stay but lade our island about a league from the shore, about two a clock, our captain with twelve man row in his shipboat to the shore where we make no long stay but lade our boat with dry wood of old tree upon the shore side and return to our ship where we ride that night. this island be woody, grow with fir, birch, oak and beech as far as we see along the shore and so likely to be within on the verge grow gooseberry, strawberry, wild pease and wild-rose bush. the water issue forth down the rocky cliff in many place and much foul of diverse kind breed upon the shore and rock. while we be at shore our man aboard with a few hook get above thirty great. cliff in many place and much foul of diverse kind breed upon the shore and rock. while we be at shore, our man aboard with a few hook get above thirty great cod and haddock which give we a taste of the great plenty of fish which we find afterward, wheresoever we go upon the coast from. hence we may discern the main land from the west-south-west to the east-north-east and a great way, as it then seem, and as we after find it up into the main, we may discern very high mountain though the main seem, but low land which give we a hope. it will please god to direct we to the discovery of some good, although we be drive by wind. far from that. main seem, but low land which give we a hope it will please god to direct we to the discovery of some good, although we be drive by wind far from that place, whither, both by our direction and desire, we ever intend to shape the course of our voyage. the next day be whit-sunday, because we ride too much open to the sea and wind. we weigh anchor about twelve a clock and come along to the other island more adjoin to the main, and in the ride direct with the mountain about three league from the first island where we have anchor, when we come near unto they sound all along in a good depth, our captain man, his shipboat and send she before with thomas. from the first island where we have anchor. when we come near unto they sound all along in a good depth, our captain man his shipboat and send, she before with thomas cam, one of his mate, who he know to be of good experience, to sound and search between the land for a place safe for our ship to ride in. in the mean while we keep aloof at sea, have give they in the boat a token to weffe in the ship if he find a convenient harbour which it please god to send we, far beyond our expectation, in a most safe birth, defend from all wind, in a excellent depth of water for ship of any burden, in six, seven, eight, nine and ten. we, far beyond our expectation, in a most safe birth, defend from all wind, in a excellent depth of water for ship of any burden, in six, seven, eight, nine and ten fathom upon a clay oaze very tough. we all, with great joy, praise god for his unspeakable goodness who have from so apparent danger deliver we and direct we upon this day into so secure a harbour, in remembrance whereof we name it pentecost-harbor whitsund^y. we arrive there that day out of our last harbour in england, from whence we set sail upon easter-day about four a clock. after we be anchor and well moor, our captain with half a dozen of our company go on shore to seek fresh water and a convenient place to. about four a clock after we be anchor and well moor, our captain with half a dozen of our company go on shore to seek fresh water and a convenient place to set together a pinnace which we bring in piece out of england both, which we find very fit upon this island as also upon the former we find at our first come to shore where fire have be make and about the place be very great egg shell big than goose, egg fish bone and, as we judge the bone of some beast here we espy crane stalk on the shore of a little island adjoin crane where we after see they use to breed. whitsun-munday, the 20 day of may, very early in the morning. we espy crane stalk on the shore of a little island adjoin crane, where we after see they use to breed. whitsun-munday, the 20 day of may, very early in the morning, our captain cause the piece of the pinnace to be carry a shore where, while some be busy about she other dig well to receive the fresh water which we find issue down out of the land. in many place here i can not omit, for foolish fear of imputation, of flattery, the painful industry of our captain who, as at sea he be always most careful and vigilant, so at land he refuse no pain, but his labour be ever as much, or rather more, than any man, which not only encourage other with better. always most careful and vigilant. so at land he refuse no pain. but his labour be ever as much, or rather more, than any man, which not only encourage other with better content but also effect much. with great expedition. in dig we find excellent clay for brick or tile. the next day we finish a well of good and wholesome clear water in a great empty cask which we leave there. we cut yard waste, tree and many necessary for our ship, while our carpenter and cooper labour to fit and furnish forth the shallop. this day our boat go out about a mile from our ship. we fish and in small time with two or three hook be fish sufficient for our whole company three day. this day our boat go out about a mile from our ship we fish and in small time with two or three hook be fish sufficient for our whole company. three day with great cod, haddock and thornback, and towards night we draw with a small net of twenty fathom very nigh the shore. abundance of many good fish. we get about thirty very good and great lobster, many rockfish, some plaise and other small fish and fish call lump, very pleasant to the taste and we general observe that all the fish, of what kind soever we take, be well feed, fat and sweet in taste. wednesday, the 22 of may, we fell and cut wood for our ship use, cleanse and scour our well and dig. soever we take be well feed, fat and sweet in taste. wednesday, the 22 of may. we fell and cut wood for our ship, use, cleanse and scour our well and dig a plot of ground wherein, among some garden seed, we sow pease and barley corn sow which in sixteen day grow eight inch above ground and so continue grow every day half a inch, although this be but the crust of the ground and much inferior to the mould we after find in the main. friday, the 24 of may. after we have make a end of cut wood and carry water aboard our ship, with fourteen shot and pike we march about and through part of two of the land, the big of which we a end of cut wood and carry water aboard our ship with fourteen shot and pike we march about and through part of two of the land, the big of which we judge to be four or five mile in compass and a mile broad. the profit and fruit which be natural on these land, be these the fruit of the land, all along the shore and some space within, where the wood hinder not grow plentiful raspberry, gooseberry, strawberry, rose, currant, wild vine, angelica. within the land grow wood of sundry sort, some very great and all tall: birch, beech, ash, maple, spruce, cherry-tree, yew, oak, very great and good firre-tree, out of which issue turpentine in so marvelous plenty and so sweet as our chirurgeon and and all tall birch, beech, ash, maple, spruce, cherry-tree, yew, oak, very great and good firre-tree out of which issue turpentine in so marvelous plenty and so sweet, as our chirurgeon and other affirm they never see so good. in england we pull off much gum congeal on the outside of the bark which smell like frankincense. this will be a great benefit for make tar and pitch. we stay the long in this place not only because of our good harbour, which be a excellent comfort, but because every day we do more and more discover the pleasant fruitfulness, insomuch as many of our company wish themselves settle here, not expect any further hope or better discovery to be make. here our man find abundance of great. discover the pleasant fruitfulness, insomuch as many of our company wish themselves settle here, not expect any further hope or better discovery to be make. here our man find abundance of great muscle among the rock and in some of they many small pearl. and in one muscell which we draw up in our net be find fourteen pearl pearl, whereof one of pretty bigness and orient in another above fifty small pearl. and if we have have a drag, no doubt we have find some of great value. see, these do certain show that here they be, breed the shell all glister with mother of pearl. wednesday, the 29 day, our shallop be now finish and our captain and man furnish to depart with she from the. they be breed. the shell all glister with mother of pearl. wednesday, the 29 day. our shallop be now finish and our captain and man furnish to depart with she from the ship a cross erect. we set up a cross on the shore side upon the rock. thursday, the 30 of may, about ten a clock afore noon, our captain with 13 man more, in the name of god and with all our prayer for their prosperous discovery and safe return, depart in the shallop, leave the ship in a good harbour which before i mention well moor and man with 14 man. this day, about five a clock in the afternoon, the savage come first to we. we in the ship espy, three canoe come towards. mention well moor and man with 14 man. this day, about five a clock in the afternoon, the savage come first to we, we in the ship espy. three canoe come towards we which go to the island adjoin, where they go a shore and very quick have make a fire about which they stand. behold our ship, to who we make sign with our hand and hat, weff unto they to come unto we because we have not see any of the people yet. they send one canoe with three man, one of which, when they come near unto we, speak in his language very loud and very bold, seem as though he will know why we be there and by point with his oar towards the they come near unto we speak in his language very loud and very bold, seem as though he will know why we be there, and by point with his oar towards the sea we conjecture he mean we shall be go. but when we show they knife and their use by cut of stick and other trifle as comb and glass, they come close aboard our ship as desirous to entertain our friendship. to these we give such thing as we perceive they like. when we show they the use: bracelet, ring, peacock feather which they stick in their hair and tobacco pipe after their departure to their company on the shore, present come four other in another canoe, to who we give, as to the former use. stick in their hair and tobacco pipe after their departure to their company on the shore. present come four other in another canoe, to who we give. as to the former, use they with as much kindness as we can. the shape of their body be very proportionable. they be well countenance, not very tall nor big but in stature. like to we three sort of colour of paint. they paint their body with black, their face some with red, some with black and some with blue. their clothing be beaver skin or deer skin, cast over they like a mantle and hang down to their knee, make fast together upon the shoulder with leather. some of they have sleeve their clothing and buskin, most have none, some over they like a mantle and hang down to their knee. make fast together upon the shoulder with leather. some of they have sleeve their clothing and buskin, most have none. some have buskin of such leather tew they have beside a piece of beaver skin between their leg. make fast about their waste to cover their privity. they suffer no hair to grow on their face but on their head, very long and very black, which those that have wife bind up behind with a leather string in a long round knot. they seem all very civil and merry, show token of much thankfulness for those thing we give they. we find they then, as after a people of exceed, good invention, quick understanding and ready capacity. very civil and merry show token of much thankfulness for those thing we give they. we find they then, as after a people of exceed good invention, quick understanding and ready capacity, their boat, their canoe, be make without any iron of the bark of a birch tree, strengthen within with rib and hoop of wood, in so good fashion, with such excellent ingenious art, as they be able to bear seven or eight person, far exceed any in the indies. one of their canoe come not to we, wherein we imagine their woman be, of who they be, as all savage, very jealous. when i sign unto they, they shall go sleep because it be night. they understand present and point that at the shore, right against. who they be, as all savage, very jealous. when i sign unto they, they shall go sleep because it be night. they understand present, and point that at the shore right against our ship, they will stay all night as they do. the next morning very early come one canoe aboard, we again with three savage who we easy then entice into our ship and under the deck, where we give they pork, fish, bread and pease, all which they do eat, and this i note- they will eat nothing raw, either fish or flesh. they marvel much and much look upon the make of our can and kettle, so they do at a headpeece and at our gun, of which they be most fearful and will fall. marvel much and much look upon the make of our can and kettle, so they do at a headpeece and at our gun, of which they be most fearful and will fall flat down at the report of they at their departure. i sign unto they that if they will bring i such skin as they wear, i will give they knife and such thing as i see they most like, which the chief of they promise to do. by that time the sun shall be beyond the midst of the firmament. this i do to bring they to a understanding of exchange and that they may conceive the intent of our come to they, to be for no other end, about 10 a clock this day, we bring they to a understanding of exchange and that they may conceive the intent of our come to they to be for no other end. about 10 a clock this day, we descry our shallop return towards we which, so soon as we espy we certain conjecture our captain have find some unexpected harbour further up towards the main to bring the ship into or some river. know his determination and resolution, not so sudden else, to make return which, when they come near they express by shoot, volley of shot, and when they be come within musket shoot, they give we a volley and hale we than we in the ship give they a great piece and hale. they thus we welcome they who glad we exceed within musket shoot. they give we a volley and hale we than we in the ship give they a great piece and hale. they thus we welcome, they who glad we exceed with their joyful relation of their happy discovery, which shall appear in the sequel, and we likewise give they cause of mutual joy with we, in discourse of the kind civility we find in a people where we little expect any spark of humanity. our captain have, in this small time, discover up a great river, trend alongst into the main about forty mile, the pleasantness whereof, with the safety of harbour for ship, together with the fertility of ground and other fruit which be general by his whole company, relate, i omit till i report. the pleasantness whereof, with the safety of harbour for ship, together with the fertility of ground and other fruit which be general by his whole company relate. i omit till i report of the whole discovery therein. after perform, for by the breadth, depth and strong flood, imagine it to run far up into the land, he, with speed return, intend to flank his light horseman for arrow, lest it may happen that the further part of the river shall be narrow and by that mean subject to the volley of savage on either side. out of the wood, until his return, our captain leave on shore, where he land, in a path which seem to be frequent, a pipe, a brooch and a knife, thereby to know of the wood until his return, our captain leave on shore, where he land in a path which seem to be frequent, a pipe, a brooch and a knife, thereby to know if the savage have recourse that way, because they can, at that time, see none of they trifle leave on shore, but they be take away before our return thither. i return now to our savage who, according to their appointment, about one a clock, come with 4 canoe to the shore of the island right over against we, where they have lodge the last night, and send one canoe to we with two of those savage who have be a board and another who then seem to have command of they. for though we perceive, last night and send one canoe to we with two of those savage who have be a board and another who then seem to have command of they, for though we perceive their willingness yet he will not permit they to come aboard, but he have view we and our ship sign that he will go to the rest of the company and return again present. after their departure it begin to rain and continue all that afternoon. so as they can not come to we with their skin and fur, nor we go to they, but after a hour or there about the three which have be with we before come again who we have to our fire and cover they with our gown, our captain bestow but after a hour or there, about the three which have be with we before come again who we have to our fire and cover they with our gown, our captain bestow a shirt upon he who we think to be their chief, who seem never to have see any before we give he a brooch to hang about his neck, a great knife and lesser knife, to the two other and to every one of they a comb and glass, the use whereof we show they, whereat they laugh and take glad. we victual they and give they which they taste but will by no mean drink our beveridge they like. well, we give they sugar candy which, after they have taste, they like and desire more. and give they which they taste but will by no mean drink our beveridge they like. well, we give they sugar candy which after they have taste they like and desire more, and raisin, which be give they, and some of every thing they will reserve to carry to their company, wherefore we pity their be in the rain and therefore not able to get themselves victual as we think, we give they bread and fish. thus, because we find the land a place answerable to the intent of our discovery, the intent of our kind usage of the savage viz fit for any nation to inhabit, we use the people with as great kindness as we can devise or find they capable of the next day be usage of the savage viz fit for any nation to inhabit. we use the people with as great kindness as we can devise or find they capable of. the next day be saturday and the first of june, we trade with the savage. i trade with the savage all the forenoon upon the shore, where be eight and twenty of they, and because our ship ride nigh, we be but five or six. where for knife, glass, comb and other trifle to the value of four or five shilling, we have 40 good beaver skin, otter skin, sable and other small skin which we know not how to call our trade be end. many of they come aboard we and do eat by our fire and will be. skin, sable and other small skin which we know not how to call our trade be end. many of they come aboard we and do eat by our fire and will be very merry and bold in regard of our kind usage of they. towards night our captain go on shore to have a draught with the or net and we carry two of they with we who marvel to see we catch fish with a net. most of that we catch we give they and their company. then on the shore i learn the name of diverse thing of they and when they perceive i to note they down, they will of themselves fetch fish and fruit bush and stand by i to see i write their. of diverse thing of they and when they perceive i to note they down, they will of themselves fetch fish and fruit, bush, and stand by i to see i write their name. our captain show they a strange thing which they wonder at his sword and i have be touch with the loadstone. take up a knife and hold it fast when they pluck it away. make the knife turn. be lay on a block and touch it with his sword. make that take up a needle, whereat they much marvel. this we do to cause they to imagine some great power in we and for that to love and fear we when we go on shore to trade with they, their bow and arrow in one. cause they to imagine some great power in we and for that to love and fear we. when we go on shore to trade with they, their bow and arrow. in one of their canoe i see their bow and arrow, which i take up and draw a arrow in one of they which i find to be of strength, able to carry a arrow five or six score strong, and one of they take it and draw as we draw our bow, not like the indian, their bow be make of which hazel and some of beech in fashion, much like our bow, their bow. but they want nock only a string of leather, put through a hole at one end and make fast with a knot. of beech in fashion much like our bow, their bow, but they want nock only a string of leather, put through a hole at one end and make fast with a knot at the other. arrow their arrow be make of the same wood, some of ash, big and long with three feather tie on and nocked. very artificial head with the long shank bone of a dear make, very sharp, with two fang in manner of a harp iron. they have likewise dart their dart head with like bone, one of which i dart among the rock and it break. not these they use very cunning to kill fish, foul and beast. our captain have two of they at supper with we in his cabin to see. the rock and it break, not these. they use very cunning to kill fish, foul and beast. our captain have two of they at supper with we in his cabin to see their demeanour, and have they in presence at service who behave themselves very civil, neither laugh nor talk all the time and at supper feed not like man of rude education. neither will they eat or drink more than seem to content nature. they desire pease to carry a shore to their woman, which we give they with fish and bread and lend they pewter dish which they careful bring again in the evening. another boat come to they on the shore, tobacco excellent, and because they have some tobacco which they bring for their own. pewter dish which they careful bring again. in the evening another boat come to they on the shore, tobacco excellent, and because they have some tobacco which they bring for their own use. the other come for we make sign what they have and offer to carry some of we in their boat. but four or five of we go with they in our own boat. when we come on shore they give we the best welcome. they can spread fallow deer skin for we to sit on the ground by their fire and give we of their tobacco in our pipe, which be excellent. and so general commend of we all to be as good as any we ever take be the simple leaf without any composition. of their tobacco in our pipe, which be excellent, and so general commend of we all to be as good as any we ever take, be the simple leaf without any composition, strong and of sweet taste. they give we some to carry to our captain, who they call our bashabe. neither do they require any thing for it, but we will not receive any thing from they without remuneration. here we see four of their woman who stand behind they as desirous to see we, but not will to be see for before. whensoever we come on shore, they retire into the wood, whether it be in regard of their own natural modesty, be cover only as the man with the foresay beaver skin. the description of come on shore, they retire into the wood, whether it be in regard of their own natural modesty, be cover only, as the man with the foresay beaver skin, the description of their woman and child, or by the command jealous, of their husband, which we rather suspect, because it be a inclination, much note to be in savage, wherefore we will by no mean seem to take any special notice of. they they be very well favour, in proportion of countenance, though colour, black, low of stature and fat, bare head, as the man wear their hair long. they have two little male child of a year and half, old, as we judge, very fat and of good countenance, which they love tender, all naked except their their hair long. they have two little male child of a year and half old, as we judge, very fat and of good countenance, which they love tender, all naked except their leg, which be cover with thin leather buskin tew, fasten with strop to a girdle about their waste, which they gird very straight and be deck round about with little round piece of red copper. to these i give chain and bracelet, glass and other trifle which the savage seem to accept in great kindness. at our come away we will have have those two that sup with we to go aboard and sleep, as they have promise. but it appear their company will not suffer. they, whereat we may easy perceive they be much grieve. two that sup with we to go aboard and sleep as they have promise. but it appear their company will not suffer. they, whereat we may easy perceive they be much grieve. but not long after our departure they come with three more to our ship. sign to we that if one of our company will go lie on shore with they, they will stay with we. then owen griffin, one of the two we be to leave in the country, if we have think it needful or convenient, go with they in their canoe, and 3 of they stay aboard. we who our whole company, very kind, use our captain see their lodging provide, and they lodge in a old sail upon the orlop. and because they 3 of they stay aboard. we who, our whole company, very kind use our captain see their lodging provide, and they lodge in a old sail upon the orlop, and because they much fear our dog, they be tie up whensoever any of they come aboard. we, owen griffin, which lie on the shore, report unto i their manner, the ceremony of the savage in their idolatry, and as i may term they the ceremony of their idolatry, which they perform. thus, one among they, the elder of the company, as he judge, rise right up the other, sit still and look about. sudden cry with a loud voice: baugh waugh. then the woman fall down and lie upon the ground and the man all together answer the. the other sit still and look about, sudden cry with a loud voice, baugh, waugh. then the woman fall down and lie upon the ground and the man all together answer the same, fall a stamp round about the fire with both foot as hard as they can make the ground shake, with sundry outcry and change of voice and sound. many take the fire-sticks and thrust they into the earth and then rest awhile of a sudden beginning as before. they continue so stamp till the young sort fetch from the shore many stone, of which every man take one, and first beat upon they with their fire stick, then with the stone, beat the earth with all their strength and in this manner, as he report, which every man take one and first beat upon they with their fire stick, then with the stone, beat the earth with all their strength and in this manner, as he report, they continue above two hour. they lie with their wife secret. after this end, they which have wife, take they apart and withdraw themselves- several- into the wood all night. the next morning assoon as they see the sun rise, they point to he to come with they to our ship and have receive their man from we. they come with five or six of their canoe and company hover about our ship. to who? because it be the sabbath day. i sign they shall depart and at the next sun rise we will go along. of their canoe and company hover about our ship to who. because it be the sabbath day, i sign they shall depart and at the next sun rise we will go along with they to their house, which they understand as we think, and depart. some of their canoe course about the island and the other direct towards the main. this day, about five a clock after noon, come three other canoe from the main, of which some have be with we before, and they come aboard we and bring we tobacco which we take with they. in their pipe which be make of earth, very strong, black and short, contain a great quantity. some tobacco they give unto our captain and some to i, in very civil. they. in their pipe which be make of earth, very strong, black and short, contain a great quantity some tobacco. they give unto our captain and some to i. in very civil, kind manner we requite they with bread and pease which they carry to their company on shore, seem very thankful. after supper they return with their canoe to fetch we a shore to take tobacco with. they there, with who six or seven of, we go and carry some trifle, if peradventure, they have any truck among which i carry some few biscuit to try, if they will exchange for they see they so well like to eat they. when we come at shore they most kind, entertain we, take we by the hand as they try if they will exchange, for they see they so well like to eat they. when we come at shore they most kind, entertain we, take we by the hand as they have observe we do to they aboard in token of welcome and bring we to sit down by their fire where sit together thirteen of they. they fill their tobacco pipe, which be then the short claw of a lobster which will hold ten of our pipe full, and we drink of their excellent tobacco as much as we will with they, but we see not any great quantity to truck for and it seem they have not much leave of old, for they spend a great quantity yearly by their continual drink and they will see not any great quantity to truck for, and it seem they have not much leave of old, for they spend a great quantity yearly by their continual drink. and they will sign unto we that it be grow yet but a foot above ground and will be above a yard high with a leaf as broad as both their hand. they often will, by point to one part of the main eastward, sign unto we that their bashabe, that be their king, have great, plenty of fur and much tobacco. the dwell of bashabe be eastward from the great river. when we have sufficient, take tobacco with they. i show some of our trifle for trade, but they make sign that they have there nothing to exchange. eastward from the great river when we have sufficient, take tobacco with they. i show some of our trifle for trade, but they make sign that they have there nothing to exchange for, as i after conceive they have be fish and fowl, and so come thither to lodge that night by we, for when we be ready to come away, they show we great cup, make very witty of bark, in form, almost square, full of a red berry about the bigness of a, a red berry which they feed on, which they do eat and give we by handful, of which, though i like not the taste, yet i keep some because i will by no mean but accept their kindness. they show i likewise, a. and give we by handful, of which though i like not the taste yet i keep some because i will by no mean but accept their kindness. they show i likewise a great piece of fish whereof i taste, and it be fat like porpoise, and another kind of great scaly fish broil on the coal, much like white salmon, which the frenchman call aloza. for these they will have have bread, which i refuse because in manner of exchange i will always make the great esteem i can of our commodity whatsoever, although they see aboard our captain be liberal to give they to the end, we may allure they still to frequent we. then, they show i four young gosling- we have young gosling of the aboard our captain be liberal to give they to the end. we may allure they still to frequent we. then they show i four young gosling. we have young gosling of the savage, for which they require four biscuit, but i offer they two which they take and be well content at our departure. they make sign that if any of we will stay there on shore some of they will go lie aboard we at which motion, two of our company stay with they and three of the savage lodge with we in manner as the night before june 3, early the next morning be monday the three of june, when they have bring our man aboard, they come about our ship earnest by sign, desire that. the night before june 3, early the next morning be monday the three of june, when they have bring our man aboard, they come about our ship earnest by sign, desire that we will go with they along to the main for that there they have fur and tobacco to traffic with we, wherefore our captain man the light-horseman, with as many man as he can well, which be about fifteen, with rower and all, and we go along with they, two of their canoe they send away before and they which lie aboard we all night keep company with we to direct we. this we note as we go along, they in their canoe with three oar, their canoe outrow. we will, at their will, go ahead. night keep company with we to direct we. this, we note as we go along, they in their canoe with three oar, their canoe outrow. we will, at their will, go ahead of we and about we when we row with eight oar strong, such be their swiftness by reason of the lightness and artificial composition of their canoe and oar. when we come near the point where we see their fire, where they intend to land and where they imagine some few of we, will come on shore with our merchandise, as we have accustom before when they have often number our man very diligent, they scour away to their campany. not doubt we will have follow they. but when we perceive this and know not either, before, when they have often number our man very diligent, they scour away to their campany. not doubt we will have follow they. but when we perceive this and know not either their intent or number of savage on the shore, our captain, after consultation, stand off and weft they to. we determine that i shall go on shore first to take a view of they and what they have to traffic. if he who, at our first sight of they, seem to be of most respect among they and be then in the canoe, will stay as a pawn for i when they come to we, notwithstanding all our former courtesy, he utter refuse but will leave a young savage. and for he, our captain, send griffin. stay as a pawn for i when they come to we, notwithstanding all our former courtesy, he utter refuse but will leave a young savage, and for he, our captain, send griffin in their canoe while we lie hull a little off griffin at his return report. they have there, assemble together, as he number they, 283 savage. two hundred eighty three savage, every one his bow and arrow, with their dog and wolf which they keep tame at command, and not any thing to exchange at all, but will have draw we further up into a little narrow nook of a river for their fur, as they pretend these thing consider. we begin to join they in the rank of other savage who have be by traveller. a little narrow nook of a river for their fur. as they pretend these thing consider, we begin to join they in the rank of other savage who have be by traveller in most discovery, find very treacherous, never attempt mischief until by some remissness, fit opportunity, afford they certain ability to execute the same. wherefore, after good advice take, we determine so soon as we can to take some of they, lest be suspicious. we have discover their plot they shall absent themselves from. we, tuesday, the four of june, fish in the harbour our man take cod and hadocke with hook by our ship side and lobster very great, which before we have not try about eight a clock. this day we go on shore with man take cod and hadocke with hook by our ship side and lobster very great, which before we have not try about eight a clock. this day we go on shore with our boat to fetch aboard water and wood. our captain leave word with the gunner in the ship by discharge a musket to give notice if they espy any canoe come, which they do about ten a clock. he therefore be careful. they shall be kind entreat, request i to go aboard, intend with dispatch to make what haste after he possible can. when i come to the ship there be two canoe and in either of they three savage of who two be below at the fire. the other stay in their canoe about the. i come to the ship there be two canoe and in either of they three savage, of who two be below at the fire. the other stay in their canoe about the ship and because we can not entice they aboard, we give they a can of pease and bread which they carry to the shore to eat. but one of they bring back our can present and stay aboard with the other two, for he be young, of a ready capacity and one we most desire to bring with we into england, have receive exceed kind usage at our hand and be therefore much delight in our company. when our captain be come, we consult how to catch the other three at shore, which we perform thus. kind usage at our hand and be therefore much delight in our company. when our captain be come, we consult how to catch the other three at shore, which we perform. thus our manner of take the savage. we man the light horseman, with 7 or 8 man one stand before, carry our box of merchandise, as we be wont when i go to traffic with they, and a platter of pease, which meat they love. but before we be land, one of they be too suspicious, fearful of his own good, withdraw himself into the wood. the other two meet we on the shore side to receive the pease, with who we go up the cliff to their fire and sit down with they. and while we wood, the other two meet, we on the shore side to receive the pease with who we go up the cliff to their fire and sit down with they. and while we be discuss how to catch the three man who be go, i open the box and show they trifle to exchange, think thereby to have banish fear from the other and draw he to return. but when we can not, we use little delay but sudden lay hand upon they and it be as much as five or six of we can do to get they into the light horseman, for they be strong and so naked as our best hold be by their long hair on their head, and we will have be very loath. get they into the light horseman, for they be strong and so naked as our best hold be by their long hair on their head, and we will have be very loath to have do they any hurt, which of necessity we have be constrain to have do if we have attempt they, in a multitude, which we must and will, we catch five savage two canoe and their bow and arrow, rather than have want they be a matter of great importance for the full accomplishment of our voyage. thus we ship five savage two canoe with all their bow and arrow. the next day we make a end of, get our wood aboard and fill our empty cask with water. thursday, the 6 of june, we canoe with all their bow and arrow. the next day we make a end of, get our wood aboard and fill our empty cask with water. thursday, the 6 of june, we spend in bestow the canoe upon the orlop, safe from hurt because they be subject to break, which our captain be careful to prevent. saturday, the eight of june, our captain be desirous to finish all business about this harbour very early in the morning, with the light horseman coast five or six league about the land adjoin and sound all along. wheresoever we go, he likewise diligent search the mouth of the harbour and about the rock which show themselves at all time and be a excellent breach of the water. sound about the rock. go. he likewise diligent, search the mouth of the harbour and about the rock which show themselves at all time and be a excellent breach of the water sound about the rock and mouth of the harbour, so as no sea can come in to offend the harbour. this he do to instruct himself and thereby able to direct other that shall happen to come to this place. for every where, both near the rock and in all sound about the land, we never find less water than four and five fathom, which be seldom, but seven, eight, nine and ten fathom be the continual sound by the shore, in some place much deep, upon clay, oaze or soft sand, so that, if any, bind for this place. seven, eight, nine and ten fathom be the continual sound by the shore in some place much deep, upon clay, oaze or soft sand, so that if any bind for this place shall be either drive or scant with wind, he shall be able, with his direction, to recover safe his harbour, most secure in water enough by four, several passage, more their, which i think no man of judgement will desire as necessary, upon one of the land because it have a pleasant sandy cove for small bark to ride in. we land and find hard by the shore, a pond of fresh water, a pond of fresh water which flow over the bank, somewhat overgrow with little shrub tree, and search up in the island. we hard by the shore, a pond of fresh water. a pond of fresh water which flow over the bank, somewhat overgrow with little shrub tree, and search up in the island. we see it feed with a strong run which, with small labour and little time, may be make to drive a mill. in this island, as in the other, be spruce tree of excellent timber and height, able to mast ship of great burden. while we thus sound from one place to another in so good deep, our captain to make some trial of the fish himself, cause a hook or two to be cast out at the mouth of the harbour. great plenty of cod fish, not above half a league from our ship, where in fish himself, cause a hook or two to be cast out at the mouth of the harbour. great, plenty of cod fish, not above half a league from our ship, where in small time, only with the bait which they cut from the fish and three hook, we get fish enough for our whole company. though now augment for three day, which i omit not to report because it show how great a profit the fish will be. they be so plentiful, so great and so good, with such convenient, dry as can be wish near at hand upon the rock. this day, about one a clock after noon, come from the eastward, two canoe aboard we. wherein be he that refuse to stay with we for a? at hand upon the rock. this day, about one a clock after noon, come from the eastward, two canoe aboard we- wherein be he that refuse to stay with we for a pawn, and with he six other savage which we have not see before, who have beautify themselves after their manner, very gallant though their clothing be, not differ from the former. yet they have new paint, their face very deep, some all black, some red, with stripe of excellent blue over their upper lip. their ornament of gallantness, nose and chin- one of they wear a kind of coronet about his head- make very cunning of a substance like stiff hair, colour, red, broad and more than a handful in depth, which we imagine to be. wear a kind of coronet about his head, make very cunning of a substance like stiff hair, colour, red, broad and more than a handful in depth, which we imagine to be some ensign of his superiority, for he so much esteem it as he will not for any thing exchange the same. other wear the white feather skin of some fowl round about their head, jewel in their ear and bracelet of little white round bone fasten together upon a leather string. these make not any show that they have notice of the other before take, but we understand they by their speech and sign that they come send from the bashabe and that his desire be that we will bring up our ship, which they call. take. but we understand they by their speech and sign that they come, send from the bashabe and that his desire be that we will bring up our ship, which they call as their own boat, a quiden to his house, be as they point upon the main towards the east from whence they come, and that he will exchange with we for fur and tobacco. but because our company be but small and now our desire be with speed to discover up the river, we let they understand that if their bashabe will come to we, he shall be welcome, but we will not remove to he which, when they understand, receive of we bread and fish and every of they a knife, they depart for we. we, he shall be welcome, but we will not remove to he which, when they understand, receive of we bread and fish and every of they a knife, they depart, for we have then no will to stay they long aboard, lest they shall discover the other savage which we have stow. below tuesday, the 11 of june, we go up with our ship into the river. we pass up into the river with our ship about six and twenty mile, of which i have rather not write then by my relation to detract from the worthiness thereof for the river, beside that it be subject by ship to bring in all traffic of merchandise, a benefit, always account the rich treasury to any land, for which cause worthiness thereof for the river, beside that it be subject by ship to bring in all traffic of merchandise, a benefit always account the rich treasury to any land for which cause our thames have that due denomination and france, by her navigable river, receive her great wealth. yet this place of itself, from god and nature, afford as much diversity of good commodity as any reasonable man can wish. for present habitation and plant, the first and chief thing require be a bold coast and fair land to fall with the next, a safe harbour for ship to ride in. the first be a special attribute to this shore. be most free from sand or dangerous rock, in a continual good depth with a most excellent land-fall. for ship to ride in. the first, be a special attribute to this shore: be most free from sand or dangerous rock, in a continual good depth with a most excellent land-fall, which be the first island we fall with name by we saint george island. for the second, by judgement of our captain, who know most of the coast of england and most of other country, the profit of the river have be experience by employment in discovery and travel from his childhood and by opinion of other of good judgement, in our ship here be more good harbour for ship of all burden than england can afford and far more secure from all wind and weather than any in england, scotland, france or spain. for beside. be more good harbour for ship of all burden than england can afford and far more secure from all wind and weather than any in england, scotland, france or spain. for beside, without the river, in the channel and sound about the island adjoin to the mouth thereof, no better ride can be desire for a infinite number of ship. the river itself as it run up into the main very nigh forty mile towards the great mountain, the breadth of the river bear in breadth a mile. sometime three quarter and half a mile be the narrow where you shall never have under 4 and 5 fathom water hard by the shore, but 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 fathom all along and on both side every. the narrow, where you shall never have under 4 and 5 fathom water, hard by the shore, but 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 fathom all along, and on both side, every half mile, very gallant coves, some able to contain almost a hundred sail, the ground soft oaze and clay. where the ground be excellent, soft oaze with a tough clay under for anchor hold, and where ship may lie without either cable or anchor, only moor to the shore with a hauser. what flow of water? it flow, by their judgement, eighteen or twenty foot at high water. dock to grave and ship here be make by nature most excellent place as dock to grave or carine, ship of all burden, secure from all wind, which foot at high water, dock to grave and ship here be make by nature most excellent place as dock to grave or carine ship of all burden, secure from all wind, which be such a necessary, incomparable benefit that in few place in england or in any part of christendom art with great charge can make the like. the land beside the border land be a most rich neighbour, trend all along on both side in a equal plain, neither mountainous nor rocky, but verge with a green bordure of grass do make tender unto the beholder of her pleasant fertility. if by cleanse away the wood she be convert into meadow. the wood, the wood she bear be not shrubbish, fit only for fuel, but goodly tall. beholder of her pleasant fertility if by cleanse away the wood she be convert into meadow. the wood, the wood she bear, be not shrubbish, fit only for fuel, but goodly tall, fir, spruce, birch, beech, oak, which in many place be not so thick but may with small labour be make feed ground, be plentiful, like the outward land, with fresh water which stream down in many place as we pass, with a gentle wind, up with our ship in this river. any man may conceive with what admiration we all consent in joy. many of our company who have be traveller in sundry country and in the most famous river yet affirm they not comparable to this. they now behold some that be with sir walter. of our company, who have be traveller in sundry country and in the most famous river, yet, affirm they, not comparable to this. they now behold some that be with sir walter ralegh in his voyage to guiana, in the discovery of the river orenoque, which echo fame to the world. ear this river prefer before orenoque, and why give reason why it be not to be compare with this, which want the danger of many shovel and break ground wherewith that be encumber other before that notable river in the west indies call rio grande, some before the river of loyer, the river seine, and of bordeaux in france, which, although they be great and grod river, yet it be no detraction from they to be account. some before the river of loyer, the river seine and of bordeaux in france, which, although they be great and grod river, yet it be no detraction from they to be account inferior to this, which not only yield all the foresay pleasant profit but also appear infallible to we, free from all inconvenience. i will not prefer it before our river of thames because it be england rich treasure, but we all do wish those excellent harbour good, deep in a continual convenient breadth, and small tide gate to be aswell therein for our country, good as we find they here, beyond our hope in certain for those to who it shall please god to grant this land for habitation which, if it have with the other, good as we find they here, beyond our hope in certain for those to who it shall please god to grant this land for habitation which, if it have, with the other inseparable adherent commodity here to be find, then i will bold affirm it to be the most rich, beautiful, large and secure harbour river that the world afford. wednesday, the twelve of june, our captain, man, his light-horseman, with 17 man, and run up from the ship, ride in the river up to the cod thereof where we land, leave six to keep the light-horseman till our return, ten of we, with our shot and some arm with a boy to carry powder and match, march up into the country towards the mountain which we descry. light-horseman till our return. ten of we with our shot and some arm with a boy to carry powder and match, march up into the country towards the mountain which we descry at our first fall with the land unto some of they. the river bring we so near as we judge ourselves when we land to have be within a league of they. but we march up about four mile in the main. we march up into the land about 4 mile and pass over three hill and because the weather be parch hot and our man in their armour not able to travel far and return that night to our ship, we resolve not to pass any further. be all very weary of so tedious and our man in their armour, not able to travel far and return that night to our ship. we resolve not to pass any further. be all very weary of so tedious and laboursom a travel. good pasture. in this march we pass over very good ground, pleasant and fertile, fit for pasture for the space of some three mile. have but little wood and that oak like stand. leave in our pasture in england good and great fit timber for any use, some small birch, hazle and brake which may in small time with few man be cleanse and make good arable land, but as it now be will feed cattle of all kind with fodder enough for summer and winter. the soil be black bear, sundry herb. be, cleanse and make good arable land but as it now be will feed cattle of all kind with fodder enough for summer and winter. the soil be black, bear, sundry herb grass and strawberry- big than we in england in many place, be low, thick like our copiss of small young wood, and sure it do all resemble a stately park wherein appear some old tree with high wither top and other flourish with live green bough. upon the hill grow notable high timber tree mast for ship of 400 tun and at the bottom of every hill a little run of fresh water. but the further and last we pass run, with a great stream able to drive a mill, dear hare hog we may see. of every hill a little run of fresh water, but the further and last we pass run with a great stream able to drive a mill. dear hare hog we may see in some place where fallow dear and hare have be, and by the root of ground we suppose wild hog have range there. but we can descry no beast because our noise still chase they from. we we be no soon come aboard. our light-horseman return towards our ship but we espy a canoe come from the further part of the cod of the river eastward, which haste to we wherein with two other, be he who refuse to stay for a pawn and his come be very earnest import to have one of our man. river eastward which haste to we wherein with two other, be he who refuse to stay for a pawn and his come be very earnest import to have one of our man to go lie on shore with their bashabe, who be there on shore as they sign, and then the next morning he will come to our ship with many fur and tobacco. this we perceive to be only a mere device to get possession of any of our man, to ransom all those which we have take, which their natural policy can not so shadow. but we do easy discover and prevent these mean be by this savage practise, because we have one of his kinsman prisoner, as we judge by his most kind usage of. shadow, but we do easy discover and prevent these mean be by this savage practise, because we have one of his kinsman prisoner, as we judge by his most kind usage of he be aboard. we together, thursday, the 13 of june, by two a clock in the morning, because our captain will take the help and advantage of the tide in the light-horseman, with our company, well provide and furnish with armour and shot both to defend and offend, we go from our ship up to that part of the river which trend westward into the main to search that, and we carry with we a cross to erect at that point which, because it be not daylight, we leave on the shore until our return back. the main to search that, and we carry with we a cross to erect at that point which, because it be not daylight, we leave on the shore until our return back. when we set it up in manner as the former, we set up another cross for this. by the way, we diligent observe that in no place, either about the land or up in the main or alongst the river, we can discern any token or sign that ever any christian have be before, of which, either by cut wood, dig for water or set up cross- a thing never omit by any christian traveller- we shall have perceive some mention. leave but to return to our river further up, into which we then row by set up cross, a thing never omit by any christian traveller we shall have perceive some mention leave. but to return to our river, further up, into which we then row by estimation twenty mile, the beauty and goodness whereof i can not by relation sufficient demonstrate that which i can say in general, be this: what profit or pleasure soever be describe and true verify in the former part of the river, conveniency of transportation be whole, double in this, for the breadth and depth be such that any ship draw 17 or 18 foot water may have pass as far as we go with our light-horsman and by all our man judgement much further, because we leave it in so good depth and breadth which be water may have pass as far as we go with our light-horsman and by all our man judgement, much further, because we leave it in so good depth and breadth, which be so much the more to be esteem of great worth by how much it trend further up into the main, for from the place of our ship ride in the harbour at the entrance into the sound, to the further part we be in this river, by our estimation be not much less than threescore mile from each bank of this river be diverse branch stream into the main, whereby be afford a unspeakable profit by the conveniency of transportation from place to place, which in some country be both chargeable and not so fit by branch stream into the main, whereby be afford a unspeakable profit by the conveniency of transportation from place to place, which in some country be both chargeable and not so fit, by carriage, on wain or horseback. here we see great store of fish, some great leap above water which we judge to be salmon, all along be a excellent mould of ground. the wood in most place, especial on the east side, very thin chief oak and some small young birch border low upon the river, all fit for meadow and pasture ground. and in that space we go. we have on both side the river many plain plot of meadow, some of three or four acre, some of eight or nine, meadow and grass so as that space we go, we have on both side the river many plain plot of meadow, some of three or four acre, some of eight or nine meadow and grass, so as we judge in the whole to be between thirty and forty acre of good grass, and where the arm run out into the main, there likewise go a space on both side of clear grass, how far, we know, not in many place we may see path make to come down to the water. the excellency of this part of the river for his good breadth, depth and fertile border ground do so ravish we all with variety of pleasantness, as we can not tell what to commend but only admire. some compare it to the good breadth, depth and fertile border ground do so ravish we all with variety of pleasantness, as we can not tell what to commend but only admire. some compare it to the river severne, but in a high degree, and we all conclude, as i very think we may right, that we shall never see the like river in every degree equal, until it, please god, we behold the same again, for the far we go, the more please it be to every man, allure we still with expectation of better. so, as our man, although they have, with great labour, row long and eat nothing, for we carry with we no victual but a little cheese and bread, yet they be so refresh with the pleasant behold. they have with great labour, row long and eat nothing, for we carry with we no victual but a little cheese and bread. yet they be so refresh with the pleasant behold thereof. we be loath to leave this river and so loath to forsake it, as some of they affirm, they will have continue, willing with that only fare and labour 2 day. but the tide not suffer we to make any long stay, because we be to come back with the tide and our captain better know what be fit than we and better what they in labour be able to endure, be very loath to make any desperate hazard where so little necessity require. think it best to make return, because whither we have discover. what they, in labour, be able to endure, be very loath to make any desperate hazard where so little necessity require. think it best to make return, because whither we have discover be sufficient to conceive that the river run very far into the land, for we pass six or seven mile altogether fresh water, whereof we all drink, force up by the flow of the salt which, after a great while, ebb where we leave it, by breadth of channel and depth of water, be likely to run, by estimation of our whole company, a unknown way far. the search whereof our captain have leave till his return, if it shall so please god, to dispose of, he and we, for we have now, by the direction. unknown way far, the search whereof our captain have leave till his return, if it shall so please god, to dispose of, he and we. for we have now, by the direction of the omnipotent disposer of all good intent, far beyond the period of our hope, fall with so bold a coast, find so excellent and secure harbour for as many ship as any nation profess christ, be able to set forth to sea, discover a river which the all-creating god, with his most liberal hand, have make above report notable. with his foresay blessing border with a land who, pleasant fertility, bewray itself to be the garden of nature wherein she only intend to delight herself, have hitherto obscure it to any except to a purblind. border with a land who, pleasant fertility, bewray itself to be the garden of nature wherein she only intend to delight herself, have hitherto obscure it to any, except to a purblind generation who, understanding it, have please god so to darken, as they can neither discern, use or right esteem the unualuable riches in midst whereof they live sensual content with the bark and outward rind, as neither know the sweetness of the inward marrow nor acknowledge the deity of the almighty giver. have i say thus far, proceed and have some of the inhabitant nation of best understanding we see among they, who learn our language, may be able to give we further instruction, concern all the premise particular, as also of their governor and government. nation of best understanding we see among they who learn our language may be able to give we further instruction, concern all the premise particular, as also of their governor and government situation of town and what else shall be convenient, which by no mean otherwise we can by any observation of ourselves, learn in a long time. our captain now whole intend his provision for speedy return, for although the time of year and our victual be not so spend, but we can have make a long voyage in search further and trade for very good commodity yet as they may have be much profitable, the cause of our speedy return so our company be small, much more prejudicial to the whole state of our voya (). good commodity yet, as they may have be much profitable, the cause of our speedy return, so our company be small, much more prejudicial to the whole state of our voya () which we be most regardful now not to hazard for, we suppose, not a little present private profit, but a public good and true zeal of promulgate god, holy church, by plant christianity, to be the sole intent of the honourable ^ () rth of this discovery. think it general, most expedient, by our speedy return, to give the long space of time to make provision for so weighty a enterprise. friday, the 14 day of june, early, by four a clock in the morning, with the tide, your two boat () an^ a little help. make provision for so weighty a enterprise. friday, the 14 day of june, early by four a clock in the morning, with the tide, your two boat (), an^ a little help of the wind, we ank^rd at the mouth of the river. we row down to the river mouth and there come to a anchor. about eleven a clock afterward, our captain in the light horseman, search the sound all about the mouth and come to the river for his certain instruction of a perfect description. the next day be saturday, we weigh anchor and with a briese from the land we sail up to our water place and there stop, go on shore and fill all our empty cask with fresh water. our captain make his. with a briese from the land. we sail up to our water place and there stop, go on shore and fill all our empty cask with fresh water. our captain make his certain observation. our captain, upon the rock in the midst of the harbour, observe the height, latitude and variation exact upon his instrument 1, astrolabe 2, semisphere 3, ring instrument 4, cross staff 5 and a excellent compass make for the variation, the certainty whereof, together with the particularity of every depth and sound, aswell at our fall with the land as in the discovery, and at our departure from the coast. i refer to his own relation in the map of his geographical description which, for the benefit of other, he intend most exact to. discovery and at our departure from the coast. i refer to his own relation in the map of his geographical description which, for the benefit of other, he intend most exact to publish. the temperature of the climate, albeit a very important matter, the temperature of the climate have almost pass without mention because it afford to we no great alteration from our disposition in england, somewhat hot up into the main because it lie open to the south, the air so wholesome as i suppose not any of we find ourselves at any time more healthful, more able to labour, nor with better stomach to such good fare as we partly br() ught and partly find sunday, the 16 of june, the wind be fair and because healthful, more able to labour, nor with better stomach, to such good fare as we, partly br() ught and partly find sunday, the 16 of june, the wind be fair and because we have set out of england upon a sunday, make the island upon a sunday and, as we doubt, not by god appointment happy, fall into our harbour upon a sunday. so now beseech he still, with like prosperity, to bless our return into england, our country, and from thence, with his good will and pleasure, to hasten our next arrival there. we weigh anchor and quit the land upon a sunday, tuesday, the 18 day, be not run above 30 league from land, and our captain for his certain knowledge how to fall with the. anchor and quit the land upon a sunday, tuesday, the 18 day, be not run above 30 league from land and our captain, for his certain knowledge how to fall with the coast, have sound every watch and from 40 fathom have come into good deeping to 70 and so to a hundred. this day the weather be fair after the four, a clock watch, when we suppose not to have find ground so far from land and before sound in above 100 fathom, we have ground in 24 fathom, wherefore our sail be down. thomas king boatswain present, cast out a hook and before he judge it at ground, be fish and hale up a exceed great and well feed cod. then there be cast out 3. king boatswain present, cast out a hook and before he judge it at ground, be fish and hale up a exceed great and well feed cod. then there be cast out 3 or 4 more and the fish be so plentiful and so great as when our captain will have set sail. we all desire he to suffer, they to take fish a while because we be so delight to see they catch so great fish so fast as the hook come down. some with play with the hook they take by the back and one of the mate with two hook at a lead at five draught together hale up ten fish. all be general, very great. some they measure to be five foot long and three of the mate, with two hook at a lead, at five draught together, hale up ten fish, all be general, very great. some they measure to be five foot long and three foot. about this cause our captain not to marvel at the should a fish bank, for he perceive it be a fish bank which, for our farewell from the land, it please god, in continuance of his blessing, to give we knowledge of the abundant profit whereof shall be alone sufficient cause to draw man again, if there be no other good, both in present certain and in hope, probable, to be discover, to amplify this with word be to add light to the sun, for every one in the ship can easy account this present. present, certain and in hope probable to be discover. to amplify this with word be to add light to the sun, for every one in the ship can easy account this present commodity much more. those of judgement which know what belong to fish will warrant, by the help of god, in a short voyage with few good fisher, to make a more profitable return from hence than from newfoundland. the fish be so much great, better feed and abundant with train, of which some they desire and do bring into england to bestow among their friend and to testify the true report, after we keep our course direct for england and with ordinary wind and sometime calm, upon sunday, the 14 of july, about six a clock, friend and to testify the true report. after we keep our course direct for england and with ordinary wind and sometime calm, upon sunday, the 14 of july, about six a clock at night, we be come into sound in our channel. we come into sound, but with dark weather and contrary wind we be constrain to beat up and down till tuesday, the 16 of july, when by five a clock in the morning we make silly from whence hinder, with calm and small wind. upon thursday, the 18 of july, about four a clock after noon, we come into dartmouth, which haven happy. with god gracious assistance, we make our last and first harbour in england. further, i have think fit here to add some thing. after noon we come into dartmouth, which haven happy. with god gracious assistance we make our last and first harbour in england. further, i have think fit here to add some thing worthy to be regard which we have observe from the savage, since we take they first, although at the time when we surprise they they make their best resistance. not know our purpose, nor what we be, nor how we mean to use they, yet after perceive by their kind usage we intend they no harm. they have never since seem discontent with we, but very tractable love and willing by their best mean to satisfy we in any thing we demand of they by word or sign for their understanding. neither have they at any. but very tractable love and willing by their best mean to satisfy we in any thing we demand of they by word or sign for their understanding. neither have they at any time be at the least discord among themselves, insomuch as we have not see they angry but merry and so kind as if you give any thing to one of they, he will distribute part to every one of the rest. we have bring they to understand some english and we understand much of their language, so as we be able to ask they many thing. and this we have observe- that if we show they any thing and ask they if they have it in their country, they will tell you if they have it. many thing, and this we have observe: that if we show they any thing and ask they if they have it in their country, they will tell you if they have it and the use of it, the difference from we in bigness, colour or form. but if they have it not, be it a thing never so precious, they will deny the knowledge of it. they have name for many star which they will show in the firmament. they show great reverence to their king and be in great subjection to their governor and they will show a great respect to any we tell they be our commander. they show the manner how they make bread of their indian wheat and how they make butter and cheese. will show a great respect to any we tell they be our commander. they show the manner how they make bread of their indian wheat and how they make butter and cheese of the milk they have, of the rain-deere and fallo-deere which they have tame as we have cow. they have excellent colour, indigo and other excellent colour in the country and have see our indigo. they make show of it or of some other like thing which make as good a blue. one especial thing be their manner of kill the whale which they call powdawe and will describe his form, how he blow up the water and that he be 12 fathom long and that they go in company of their king with a multitude. call powdawe and will describe his form, how he blow up the water and that he be 12 fathom long, and that they go in company of their king with a multitude of their boat, their kill of the whale and strike he with a bone, make in fashion of a harp iron, fasten to a rope which they make great and strong of the bark of tree which they fear out. after he, then all their boat come about he and as he rise above water with their arrow, they shoot he to death. when they have kill he and drag he to shore, they call all their chief lord together and sing a song of joy. and those chief lord, who they call sagamo, divide the they have, kill he and drag he to shore. they call all their chief lord together and sing a song of joy. and those chief lord, who they call sagamo, divide the spoil and give to every man a share, which piece so distribute? they hang up about their house for provision and when they boil they, they blow off the fat and put to their pease, maiz and other pulse which they eat. a brief note of what profit we see the country yield in the small time of our stay there: tree oak of a excellent grain, straight and great timber, elm, beech, birch, very tall and great, of who bark they make their canoe: wich-hazell, hazel, alder, cherrytree, ash, maple, yew, spruce, asp, fir, many. a excellent grain straight and great timber, elm, beech birch, very tall and great, of who bark they make their canoe, wich-hazell, hazel, alder, cherrytree, ash, maple, yew, spruce, asp, fir, many fruit tree which we know not, fowl eagle, hernshawe, crane, duck, great goose, swan, penguin, crow, shark, raven, mew, turtle-dove, many bird of sundry colour, many other fowl in flock, unknown beast, raine-deere, stag, falo-dee, bear, wolf, beaver, otter, hare, coney, hedge-hogg, polecat, wild great cat dog, some like wolf, some like spaniel, fish, whale, seal, cod, very great, haddock, great herring, great plaise, thornback, rockefish, lobstar, great crab muscle, great with pearl in. they cockle, wilks, cunner fish, lump, whiteing sole, tortoise, oyster, frvit plant and herb tobacco, excellent, sweet and strong wild-vine strawberry abundance. thornback, rockefish, lobstar, great, crab, muscle, great with pearl in. they cockle, wilks, cunner fish, lump whiteing sole, tortoise, oyster, frvit plant and herb. tobacco, excellent, sweet and strong: wild-vine, strawberry abundance, raspberries abundance, gooseberry abundance, hurtleberry abundance, currant tree abundance, rose-bush pease, ground-nut, angelica, a most sovereign herb, a herb that spread the ground and smell like sweet marjoram, great, plenty, very good die, which appear by their paint, which they carry with they in bladder. the name of the five savage which we bring home into england, which be all yet alive, be these: 1. tahanedo, a sagamo or commander. 2. amoret, gentleman. 3. skicowaros, gentleman. 4. gentleman. 5. a servant. 1. tahanedo a sagamo or commander. 2. amoret gentleman. 3. skicowaros gentleman. 4. gentleman. 5. a servant.