a description of the east indies after our ship be lade and all thing set in as good order as it can be, upon the 21 day of february 1602.. our general take his leave of the shore, depart, leave behind he to be resident in bantan, nine person over who he appoint master william starkey, to be chief commander. likewise, he leave thirteen more which he appoint to go in our pinnace for banda, of which he appoint for chief commander over the rest, thomas tudd, merchant, and for master of the pinnace one tho keych, the general. at his departure, leave order that this pinnace shall be send away with all speed, wherefore have take in to the quantity of 56.. chest and farthel of good. keych, the general, at his departure, leave order that this pinnace shall be send away with all speed. wherefore have take in to the quantity of 56. chest and farthel of good. upon the 6. of march at night she set sail, but by reason of contrary wind, after she have spend near two month beat up and down in the sea, she be force to return again to bantan. also at our general departure he leave, we two house full of good, and likewise some good lie in the dutch house, but we be too few in number to keep one well among such a sort of beggarly slave. have not god of his great mercy preserve we neither can our general spare any more at his few in number to keep one well among such a sort of beggarly slave. have not god of his great mercy preserve we, neither can our general spare any more at his departure. it be not unknown to all that be there the quarrel betwixt the iauanes and we, before the ship depart, who seek all mean they can to be revenge, in so much that, present after the departure of our pinnace, they begin to practice the fire of our principal house with fiery dart and arrow in the night, and, not content with that, in the day time. if we have bring out any quantity of good to air, we shall be sure to have the town fire to windward, not far from we. and if in the day time, if we have bring out any quantity of good to air, we shall be sure to have the town fire to windward, not far from we. and if those fiery arrow have not, by god providence, be espy by some of our own house, as they be it be, think of we all that that house and good have be all consume, as may plain appear at the top when we come to repair it. but as the malice of the rascal sort of people begin now to appear and continue for the space of two year against we, so god mercy begin to show itself unto we and continue to the last day, as this discourse will plain show. hereafter, his name be the space of two year against we. so god, mercy begin to show itself unto we and continue to the last day, as this discourse will plain show hereafter. his name be bless for it. so soon as we have dispatch away our pinnace, we begin to lay the foundation of our house, which be 72. foot long and 36. foot brood. but by reason there be at that time a new protector choose. we be put to some trouble and cost before we can be permit to go thorrow with it. also, we air all our prize good and master starkey cause the lethers of most of the pack to be strip off by who counsel it be? i know not, but those good do not keep. our prize good and master starkey cause the lethers of most of the pack to be strip off. by who counsel it be, i know not, but those good do not keep their colour. nothing so well as the rest. as we find afterward, the 21. of march, by reason of a chyna captain that shoot a piece, the town be set a fire, in which fire be many house full of good all consume, among other, the dutch-house be burn to the ground wherein we have lie 65. farthel of good beside some pepper. also, we have some pepper lie in a chinese house which for the most part be burn and spoil so that we lose 190. sack clear. beside the damage, the rest receive our we have some pepper lie in a chinese house which for the most part be burn and spoil so that we lose 190. sack clear beside the damage the rest receive. our loss by this fire be great, but we may praise god it be no more. consider how near the fire come to both our house and how unfit they be at that time for such a danger, especial one where the fire come within three yard of it, in so much that the james of the window be so hot that one can hardly suffer his hand to touch they. and yet the old and dry thatch take not fire, to the great admiration of all people that be there, of many nation there be gather. suffer his hand to touch they. and yet the old and dry thatch take not fire, to the great admiration of all people that be there, of many nation there be gather about this house, all the villain in the country, so that all that night we that keep that house dare take no rest for fear they will throw some fire brand upon it. in the evening some of we stand in the door. there come javan, who we know to be notorious thief, and ask we how many we be that lie in that house. we demand again what they have to do, to ask, and if they will know they shall come at midnight and see at which answer they depart very much discontent but house. we demand again what they have to do, to ask, and if they will know they shall come at midnight and see at which answer they depart very much discontent. but such be their boldness there that in the day time they will come and look before our face how our door be hang and what fasten they have within. and many time we be inform by some that wish we well, that if we do not keep good watch, that there be a crew that mean to enter sudden upon we and to cut our throat in so much that we be but four at that house, what with our watch and what with the disease that reign much in that country, which be looseness of. our throat in so much that we be but four at that house. what with our watch and what with the disease that reign much in that country, which be looseness of the body, we be grow to very great weakness, and two of we never recover it. the 19 of april 1603.. there come into the road 9 sail of hollander over, who be general wyborne, vande warwycke, who short after send two of they for chyna, two for the molluckos, two lade at bantan, one go to jortan. also, he dispatch a pinnace to acchyn to will certain ship that go from thence by cap spylbecks direction to zelon to win a small fort from the portugese to come to bantan. in the mean time he acchyn to will certain ship that go from thence by cap spylbecks direction to zelon to win a small fort from the portugese to come to bantan. in the mean time he with one ship stay until their arrival. we be very much behold to this general for wine, bread and many other necessary and curtisy receive of he. he will often tell we how sir richard luson relieve he when he be likely to perish in the sea for the which he will say he be bind to be kind to english man where soever he meet they and to speak the thruth, there be nothing in his ship for the comfort of sick man. but we may command it as if it have be our own. he meet they and to speak the thruth, there be nothing in his ship for the comfort of sick man, but we may command it as if it have be our own. also. he in his own person do very much reverence the queen majesty of england when he talk of she. the 25. day of april, die thomas morgan, our second factor here, who have be sickly a long time. also m starkey begin to grow very weak. the 28. day come in our pinnace which be send for banda have lose one of her factor, william close and the rest but weak and sickly. about this time there come certain of the king officer and forbid we to go forward with our house, the reason whereof? factor, william close and the rest but weak and sickly about this time, there come certain of the king officer and forbid we to go forward with our house, the reason whereof, as i do judge, be because the new protector have not as yet receive a bribe and the sabyndar- and he be at that time not friend, he can do we little pleasure. wherefore we complain to cay tomongono gobay, the admiral, who in deed be the father of all stranger in that place. he present make a great feast and invite all the principal of the court, at which feast he begin, to discourse of our cause. tell they what a shame it be that the king and they will not keep their word to. principal of the court, at which feast he begin to discourse of our cause. tell they what a shame it be that the king and they will not keep their word to the english general and merchant and that rather than he will break his word, he will go dwell in a small cottage himself and we shall have his house. but after much ado he make, they grant that we shall go forward with our house, the which in short time after be finish. our principal merchant fear pepper will be dear by reason of the hollander ship that be there present and the rest that be to come buy up as much pepper as he can, and because our house be not as yet ready. he the hollander ship that be there present and the rest that be to come buy up as much pepper as he can, and because our house be not as yet ready, he disburse his money before the pepper be weigh, and by reason the fleming be not curious in receive their pepper. when we come to weigh we we be force to receive it as they do, or else we shall have neither money nor pepper, so that we have in that parcel much foul and bad pepper. about the fine of april, come in capt spylbeck who be at the take of the ship of s thomy with our general and have a eight part with we, whereby he somewhat hinder our market short after he come. spylbeck, who be at the take of the ship of s thomy with our general and have a eight part with we, whereby he somewhat hinder our market. short after he come in general hymskerk with the rich ship of machane, the 10. of may, we lose one more of our company, james haward. likewise m starkey cause the pinnace to be new sheathe. think she shall proceed of her voyage again. also, he go and lie at a island to see if he can recover his health there, but he grow every day weak and weak, wherefore it be think best of we all to make sale of the pinnace to captain spylbeck, who be desirous of she, and to retain her man at bantan for m. weak. wherefore it be think best of we all to make sale of the pinnace to captain spylbeck, who be desirous of she, and to retain her man at bantan, for m starkey be not likely to live. it have be no wisdom to leave the whole state of our business upon the life of one factor, and so small a crew of man as be, there beside, likewise find his time to grow near to a end. he think good upon the last of may to give over his authority and to spend the rest of his time with general warwick, who also lie upon this island for his recreation, and albeit he want nothing that either his doctor or surgeon can minister. but nothing will prevail. of his time with general warwick, who also lie upon this island for his recreation, and albeit he want nothing that either his doctor or surgeon can minister. but nothing will prevail when god please to call, so that upon the last of june he end his day. who burial general warwick, cause to be honour with a volley of slot and pike, the which, with the colour, be trail upon the ground according to the order of soldier. burial the 4. of iune, the great market on the east side of the river be by villainy of certain javan, who think to get some spoil of the chyneses good set on fire in which fire some chynese that be indebt to we lose all that they be. villainy of certain javan who think to get some spoil of the chyneses good set on fire, in which fire some chynese that be indebt to, we lose all that they be worth, so that we escape not without some loss by it. the 17. of july, decease thomas dobson, one of the factor, leave for banda. the 27 day the town be burn again on the east side of the river. the 5. of august, at 10. a clock at night there come to our house capt spylbeck, capt john powlson and some other dutch captain who tell we they have that day be with the protector about some business. who ask they if they will take our part if he shall do any violence to we. captain who tell we they have that day be with the protector about some business, who ask they if they will take our part if he shall do any violence to we, to the which they answer, as they say, that we and they be near neighbour, wherefore they may not see we wrong. they say more, that he straight charge they that whatsoever he shall do unto we, that they shall not be offend nor aid we any way. this sudden news cause we much to marvel, for not past 4. or 5. day before he send many of his slave to build the upper work of our house, for indeed, because it be somewhat high than any other house in the town, many of the chief he send many of his slave to build the upper work of our house, for indeed, because it be somewhat high than any other house in the town, many of the chief do envy at it, so that we can get no workman that dare do it and we have more trouble about this than we have. when the foundation be first lay, i be mind the very next day follow to have go to the protector and to give he a present and also to give he thanks for his man. but hear this news, i think it best first to go to cay tomongon gobay, the admiral, who i know to be our friend, to certify he what we have hear by the hollander desire he i think it best first to go to cay tomongon gobay, the admiral, who i know to be our friend, to certify he what we have hear by the hollander desire. he, as he have always profess to be our father, that he will tell we whether the protector will do we any violence or no. he tell i the protector will do we no harm without his knowledge. and further he bid: we fear nothing. for so long as he live we shall receive no violence at any man hand. always provide that we keep good watch in the night for fear of fire and thief. from thence i go present to the protector and give he a small present and also thanks for his man, the good watch in the night for fear of fire and thief. from thence i go present to the protector and give he a small present and also thanks for his man, the present he receive. but i perceive by his countenance he be angry. he tell i that that day he have much business with the king, but the next morning he will send for i, for that he have to speak with i. well think i thou can do no more than god will give thou leave. the same day the admiral send his son to he to know what his meaning be to use such threaten speech of we. but he deny they. in the morning follow he send for i. when i come, he ask to he to know what his meaning be to use such threaten speech of we. but he deny they in the morning follow he send for i when i come. he ask i what they be that have. tell i he mean to harm we. i tell he the hollander. he ask i again whether they be slave or captain. i tell he they be captain. he bid i i shall show his scryvana those captain. he say more, that if any javan or chynese have, do it, he will have send for he and have cut his throat before we. then he begin to find fault with we because we do not come to he when we have any suit but go always to the sabyndar or cut his throat before we. then he begin to find fault with we because we do not come to he when we have any suit, but go always to the sabyndar or the admiral. i answer again that he be but new, come into his place and that we have as yet no acquaintance with he, but hereafter i will come to he. then he promise i, he will do we all the friendship he can, but it be but dissimulation to borrow money of we, as hereafter shall be. declare now whether the protector lie to we in deny it, or that the hollander do dissemble with we. we can not certain tell. but he say plain, the hollander lie, and to speak thrueth, i think they. to we in deny it or that the hollander do dissemble with we. we can not certain tell. but he say plain. the hollander lie and to speak thrueth, i think they can dissemble and the protector be a villain also. the hollander, about this time spread a rumour through their own fleet that the king will force we to lend he 5000.. rial of 8. otherwye he will cause our house to be pluck down again, the which be false, for neither the king nor the protector have not at that time send to we for any, nor do not. in four month after the 17 day of august, captain spybeck have vent all his commodity and lade his ship and his pinnace with pepper. depart thence. for any. nor do not. in four month after the 17 day of august, captain spybeck have vent all his commodity and lade his ship and his pinnace with pepper, depart thence have in his company two ship more of general warwick fleet which be also lade there with pepper. with who we ship home four man to ease the company of some charge of which four? the master of our pinnace we sell be one who die before he go out of the road, master starkey, before he die, cause i to ship they home, but after they be go i wish they have be there again, for we be bring so low with looseness of body by reason of bad dyat and drink of that bad. but after they be go i wish they have be there again, for we be bring so low with looseness of body by reason of bad dyat and drink of that bad water that we think we shall all have die. the 19 of august we bring out certain pack of good to air, wherefore a javan be slave to one of the principal of the country, throw some fire work upon a thatch house a little to windwarde off we, we espy it, pursue he and take he and carry he to cay tomongon, the admiral who put he in iron. within a hour after there come more of his fellow who will have take he away perforce, wherefore the admiral man and they fall by the admiral who put he in iron. within a hour after there come more of his fellow who will have take he away perforce wherefore the admiral man and they fall by the ear and many be hurt on both side. so soon as the admiral man have beat they away, he send he to the king, but because his master be one of the king friend, he be not put to death, although by the law of the country he shall have die. neither do we great seek it, because his master be our very good friend. likewise, if any javan offend, he must be punish with death, for if they afflict any lesser punishment on they, they be so wicked and bloody a people that they will. friend. likewise, if any javan offend he must be punish with death. for if they afflict any lesser punishment on they, they be so wicked and bloody a people that they will be cowardly revenge not only of stranger but of their own master, so that if any slave do offend his master he do quite forgive he, if not he die for it. but they be very obedient and will seldom offend their master because they be for the most part as wicked as themselves. the 22. day of august, at night, there be certain javan get into a great yard hard by our house who, when we be, sing of a psalm, which we do use to do when we do set our watch these rogue. javan, get into a great yard hard by our house who, when we be sing of a psalm, which we do use to do when we do set our watch, these rogue throw stone at our window as if they will have beat down our house, and some of the stone come in at the window and miss we very narrow, wherefore i set a musket and a pike in our gate and myself, with some other of my company, go as close as we can towards the yard, but we be to pass through a chine house before we can get in. i desire the chine to open his door, but by no mean i can get he, wherefore we run against the door and break it. chine house before we can get in. i desire the chine to open his door, but by no mean i can get he, wherefore we run against the door and break it down and enter through his house, swear by the great god of heaven, which oath some of those people do use, that whosoever we find in the yard shall die. but they hear we break down the door, run out at a other back gate. all but two which be dweller in this chine house, who hide themselves in a out house, but by reason of the grievous cry out of their woman and child, and also our fury, be somewhat assuage. we do do no execution upon they, although we set our rapier to their reason of the grievous cry out of their woman and child, and also our fury, be somewhat assuage. we do do no execution upon they, although we set our rapier to their breast and make they kneel down and hold up their hand for pardon for their speech. be go for fear. then we range all the town on that side the river to see if we can find any of the rest, for we have authority at that time to have slay any javan that dwell on the other side the river if we take they on our side in the night not long after. but we be serve the like trick by chynese, the which, if we can have know they shall have pay dear for. they on our side in the night not long after. but we be serve the like trick by chynese, the which if we can have know they shall have pay dear for it. but we terrify those that dwell about we so that never after we have that abuse offer again. about this time there grow a quarrel between the hollander and the chynese and some wear, slay and hurt on both side. at the very same time that we take the javan throw of fire they have a man slay for who they be great suitor to the court for justice, affirm that he or one of his fellow have do it and will needs have have he put to death, although they can not prove it. suitor to the court for justice affirm that he or one of his fellow have do it and will needs have have he put to death. although they can not prove it one day, they be very importunate. the protector demand of they if, when they come to any country to trade, whether they bring law with they or whether they be govern by the law of the country they be in. to the which they answer that when they be aboard their ship they be govern by their own law, but when they be a shore, they be under the law of the country they be in. well, say the protector, than i will tell you the law of our country, which be this: if one kill, shore they be under the law of the country they be in. well, say the protector, than i will tell you the law of our country, which be this: if one kill a slave, he must pay 20. ryale of 8. if a freeman, 50. rial. if a gentleman, 100 ryal. the hollander request to have that under his own hand, the which they have and it be all the mend they have for kill of their man. if they will have, take 50. rial of 8.. they may have have it. about the fine of september come a junke full of man from the island of lampon which stand in the strait of sunda and be enemy to the javan and all other that be dweller in. september come a junke full of man from the island of lampon which stand in the strait of sunda and be enemy to the javan and all other that be dweller in bantan. these be so like the javan that the one be not know from the other also there be many javan consort with they. these man have their junke, ride in a creek hard by the town and be in all point like unto. the javan will bold come into the town and not only in the evening and night come into house and cut off the people head, but at noon day, in so much that for the space of a month we can take little rest for the grievous cry out of the people. cut off the people head, but at noon day, in so much that for the space of a month we can take little rest for the grievous cry out of the people. one day, while we be sit at dinner, they come and take a woman, be our next neighbour and muffle she so with a sack that she can not cry, and so carry she into a tuft of bush on our backside and there cut her throat and mean to have cut off her head if they have have time. her husband miss she and look out, may see they carry she who so soon as he cry out, we rise from dinner and pursue they, but it be too late to save her life also. and look out may see they carry she who so soon as he cry out, we rise from dinner and pursue they, but it be too late to save her life. also, they be very swift of foot so that we can come near none of they. and for any thing that we know they may be among we. for after the javan be come, we can not know they. it be think of some that they lay hide in the bush till the come of the javan and then steal out and put themselves among they. there be some javan woman that will cut off their husband head in the night and sell they to these people. they do linger much about our house, and sure if they there be some javan woman that will cut off their husband head in the night and sell they to these people. they do linger much about our house and sure, if we have not keep good watch they will have attempt the cut of our throat, if not for our head yet for our good. but after a while many of they be know and be take execute the, which be man of a very goodly stature. the reason why they do make these hard adventure be their king. give they a woman for every stranger head they bring he, wherefore many time they will dig up, such as be new bury at bantan and cut off their head. and so cozen their king also at this. stranger head they bring, he wherefore many time they will dig up, such as be new bury at bantan, and cut off their head and so cozen their king. also, at this time we be give to understand by some credible man that wish we well of who the admiral be, one who, every time he see any of our house, will bid we have a special care of our good watch, because there be certain of the principal of the land, in birth, though not in wealth nor office, who have many slave but little to maintain, they have lay a plot to have slay we in the night and to have make spoil of our good, which they take to be ten time more than it. to maintain. they have lay a plot to have slay we in the night and to have make spoil of our good, which they take to be ten time more than it be, and after to have give it out the lampoon, have do it, whereupon we be force to have light burn all night round about our house. otherwise, in dark night, they, be so black as they be, may have enter sudden upon we before we shall descry they for all the upper work of our house, by reason of the heat, be open and they be build with cane, and likewise the fence round about the house, which be but a weak building. and may quick be bear down these heathen devil, come forth two. and they be build with cane, and likewise the fence round about the house, which be but a weak building. and may quick be bear down these heathen devil come forth two or three time, think to have execute their bloody pretence. but god will not suffer they for so soon as they come within sight of our light and may hear our drum sound at the end of every watch. their heart fail they, so that they dare not give the attempt, for they suppose we be ready, not only with our small shot but with our murderer, to give they entertainment and to speak truth. they shall have find it so in deed. after they have weight long and can never find opportunity, they fall out. with our murderer to give they entertainment and to speak truth. they shall have find it so in deed. after they have weight long and can never find opportunity, they fall out among themselves and so be disperse. the 14. of october, general hymskerke with his vice set sail from bantan, have take in about 5000. sack of pepper, of which quantity i sell, he 1000 sack of the pepper. master starkey buy and be in all five ship in company, that be to say his two man of war, the ship of mackow which he have take, and two ship of general warwick fleet, the mauricius, which lade pepper at bantan, and one small ship that be lade with clove, mace and nutmeg at greessoy. the 17.. have take, and two ship of general warwick fleet, the mauricius, which lade pepper at bantan, and one small ship that be lade with clove, mace and nutmeg at greessoy, the 17. of october, at night, about eight of the clock there be. some of these damn crew of javan have break down our fence on the backside and come unto the before part of the house where stand a chest of one of our, without door for our warehouse. be at that time so pester that we can not spare it room within this chest, have some pillage in it which he have in the prize and also buy of other sailor, be his fellow and in the day time do use to open it and show. have some pillage in it which he have in the prize and also buy of other sailor, be his fellow and in the day time do use to open it and show his commodity whereby he make the javan tooth to water. we not look for such guest so early they have, carry it into the backside and almost be go withal before we descry they. but so soon as we perceive they we follow so fast that we make they leave their prize behind they which we bring back and set it in the house above the stair. also we pluck in the bridge they have make to come over a ditch which be on our backside some two hour after one of our man have occasion. above the stair. also we pluck in the bridge they have make to come over a ditch which be on our backside. some two hour after one of our man have occasion to go down, go to the place where the breach be and see they have lay the bridge again. i hear this cause two shot to stand ready to give they their entertainment. not long after, but one bold, impudent rogue come in and go upright, come up along a entry where there stand a candle in a window right before his face and also a shot stand by the candle but i think the light so dazzle his eye that he see he not in fine. he shoot and wound he, but not so sore. also a shot, stand by the candle but i think the light so dazzle his eye that he see he not in fine. he shoot and wound he, but not so sore, but that he scramble away. the other shot, mean well at he again, but his piece be moist will not off. he fall down in our backside but yet he crawl over the bridge and so get away into a thicket of bush which be on the other side. the ditch, the javan, perceive they can get nothing at our hand but lead the, which they have have many time before, and find it to be a mettle too heavy for they. they begin now to fall to work with the chynese who house at this. which they have have many time before and find it to be a mettle too heavy for they. they begin now to fall to work with the chynese who house at this time be full of our good, which they have buy insomuch that every night for a long time we have greevons cry out and we look every hour when we shall be assault, dare take no rest in the night. many chynese about we be slay and sure. if we have not defend they with our shot, many more will have be slay, for the sing of a bullet be as terrible to a javan as the cry of the hound be in the ear of the hare. for they will not abide if once they the sing of a bullet be as terrible to a javan as the cry of the hound be in the ear of the hare, for they will not abide if, once, they hear it. but these continual alarame and grievous outcry of man, woman and child grow so rife in our ear that our man, in their sleep, will still dream that they be pursue the javan and sudden will leap out of their bed and catch their weapon. their next fellow hear the doleful noise there make, will bustle up and in their sleep, wound one another. before those that have the watch can come to part they, and if they shall have set the weapon further from they than they will not have be ready if one another before those that have the watch can come to part they, and if they shall have set the weapon further from they than they, will not have be ready. if we shall have have occasion, the which we look for every minute and be but few of we, i take my turn to watch as long as any in which i have stand many time more, in fear of my own man, then of any other, and when i have hear they bustle, have catch up a target for fear, they will have serve i as they do their fellow. but all this fear be nothing to we in comparison of that which i will now speak of, the which be fire. oh, this word fire. i as they do their fellow. but all this fear be nothing to we in comparison of that which i will now speak of, the which be fire. oh this word, fire. have it be speak near i, either in english mallaye, javan or chyna. although i have be sound a sleep yet, i shall have leap out of my bed the which i have do some time, when our man in their watch have but whisper one to another of fire, in somuch that i be force to warn they not to talk of fire in the night, except they have great occasion, and not only myself but my fellow thomas tudde and gabriel towerson who, after our watch, have be out and we heavy a sleep. in the night, except they have great occasion, and not only myself but my fellow thomas tudde and gabriel towerson, who after our watch have be out and we heavy a sleep our man many time have sound a drum at our chamber door and we never hear they yet, present after they have, but whisper to themselves of fire and we all have run out of our chamber. this may seem strange, but it be most true, such be the fear we live in, and not without cause. for many time when i have watch while twelve a clock at night, i have be raise up after three time before morning by alarame of fire and i protest: before god, i will not sleep so many night. while twelve a clock at night. i have be raise up after three time before morning by alarame of fire and i protest before god. i will not sleep so many night in fear again for the best ship lade of pepper that ever come from thence. i speak not this to that end. i tender my own private life so much, but for fear of the great loss and damage the adventurer and my country shall have sustain if we shall have miscarry. neither let any that may be send thither hereafter be any whit discourage by it, for than we be stranger- and now we have many friend there and the country be grow to much better civility. and as the young king grow in age, discourage by it, for than we be stranger- and now we have many friend there and the country be grow to much better civility. and as the young king grow in age will more and more because the government will be better. in three month space the town on the east side, the river be burn five time. but god be praise. the wind always serve we and although the javan many time fire it on outside, yet it please god, still to preserve we, so that by reason it blow, but little wind it be quench before it come to hurt we. the 27. of october come in a pinnace from pattania who bring news that the p^rting^les have besiege jore, but the ship that be late. quench before it come to hurt. we, the 27. of october, come in a pinnace from pattania who bring news that the p^rting^les have besiege jore but the ship that be late at zeilon be come of and have beat they away about this time also there be much fall out between the hollander and the country people by mean of the rude behaviour of some of their mariner, and many of they be stab in the evening and at that time the common people know, not we from the hollander, for both they and we be all call by the name of englishman by reason of their usurp, our name at their first come thither to trade and as we pass along the stree we may hear be all call by the name of englishman, by reason of their usurp our name at their first come thither to trade, and as we pass along the stree, we may hear the people in the market rail and exclaim on the englishman, although they mean the hollander, wherefore fear some of our man may be slay in stead of they, we begin to think how we may make ourselves know from the hollander. and now the 17. day of november draw near, the which we hold to be our coronation day, for at that time, not the year follow, we know no other but that queen elizabeth be live. we all suit ourselves in new apparel of silk and make we all scarf of white and red. not the year follow. we know no other but that queen elizabeth be live. we all suit ourselves in new apparel of silk and make we all scarf of white and red taffeta. be our country colour also. we make a flag with the red cross through the middle and because we that be the merchant will be know from our man, we edge our scarf with a deep fringe of gold. and that be our difference. our day be come. we set up our banner of saint gorge upon the top of our house and with our drum and shott we march up and down within our own ground. be but fourteen in number, wherefore we can march but single, one after another, ply our shot and with our drum and shott we march up and down within our own ground, be but fourteen in number, wherefore we can march but single, one after another, ply our shot and cast ourselves in ring and ess, the sabyndar and diverse of the chief of the land, hear our piece, come to see we and to inquire the cause of our triumph. we tell they that that day, six and forty year, our queen be crown, wherefore all englishman, in what country, soever they be, do triumph on that day. he great commend we for have our prince in reverence in so far a country. many other do ask we why the englishman at the other house do not. so we tell they they be no englishman. have our prince in reverence in so far a country. many other do ask we why the englishman at the other house do not. so we tell they they be no englishman but hollander and that they have no king but their land be rule by governor. some will reply again and say they name themselves to be englishman at the first and therefore they take they to be englishman. but we will tell they again they be of a other country near england and speak a other language and that if they do talk with they now they shall hear they be of a other nation. the multitude of people do admire to see so few of we deliver so much shott for the javan and chynese. they. now they shall hear they be of a other nation. the multitude of people do admire to see so few of we deliver so much. shott for the javan and chynese be no good shott. in the after noon i cause our man to walk abroad the town and the market whereby the people may take notice of they. their red and white scarf and hatbande make such a show that the inhabitant of those part have never see the like, so that ever after that day we be know from the hollander and many time the child in the street will run after we cry: oran enggree, bayck, oran hollanda, iahad. which be the englishman be good, the hollander be nought. i stand in doubt many. time the child in the street will run after we cry oran enggree bayck, oran hollanda iahad, which be the englishman be good, the hollander be nought. i stand in doubt many time whether i shall put this in practice or no, for fear of be count fantastical when it shall be know in england. but by the persuasion of thomas tudd and gabriel towerson and chief the present danger, we stand in force, i to it. i be like to overpass one matter concern the hollander worth the speak of, and that be this: a little before general warwick departure hence, which be upon the second day of this month of november, the hollander feast one a other and also we aboard their ship and be merry. little before general warwick departure hence, which be upon the second day of this month of november, the hollander feast, one a other and also we, aboard their ship and be merry. they spare neither powder nor shott. it happen. one night they send two shott towards the court. one fall in a prawe hard by and split it. the other light within the court and put the king, the protector and all the rest in great fear. the next day the protector send for i because we have dine there the day before. he think we have have interest in those ship. when i come, he ask i what we mean to let sly our shott into the court. i tell he that we be, but invite. we have have interest in those ship. when i come, he ask i what we mean to let sly our shott into the court. i tell he that we be but invite thither to dinner and that we have nothing to do neither with the ship nor with the shott, neither be we there at night when those shott be discharge. he give i one of the shott be of a whole culverin and desire i that i will show it to the dutch captain and tell they from he. they shall drink their drink and spare not, but they shall keep their shott, the which i do. but the hollander say it be good sometime to let they see what they can do, if need be, for spare not. but they shall keep their shott, the which i do. but the hollander say it be good sometime to let they see what they can do if need be. for they be discontent because they have have some man slay in the evening and can have no redress. also, they have be suitor a long time to build such a house as we have but can not as yet have grant general warwick go for pattania and from thence to chyna. the 6. of december come in two ship which some six month before he have send thither, who come under the island of mackow, find a carryck there, ride at a anchor, be full lade with raw silk, musk and diverse other costly ware ready. he have send thither, who come under the island of mackow, find a carryck there, ride at a anchor, be full, lade with raw silk, musk and diverse other costly ware, ready to depart, and at that time her man be almost all a shore so that they take she without any resistance or very little. they lade there two ship and the rest they set a fire so that there be, by their own report, twice so much burn as they bring away. come back they meet with a great junke of siam with who they fight and kill they 64. man. they have some slay and hurt also. but when they have take she and know she to be of siam, they let she go again. they fight and kill. they 64. man. they have some slay and hurt also, but when they have take she and know she to be of siam, they let she go again because they have, or short, mean to send factor thither there the captain of the junke be slay who they say when they hale. he will not tell they of whence he be and when they bid he strike answer he will not. for never a sail that swim in the sea. the hollander not know musk sell great store to certain of japan which they meet at sea for little or nothing, after they have spend some forty day in bantan and their mariner vain consume their pillage, the which be great, upon the 17.. which they meet at sea for little or nothing. after they have spend some forty day in bantan and their mariner vain consume their pillage, the which be great, upon the 17. of januarie they set sail from thence be four ship in company: their two, one that lade at bantan and one that, some two month before, come from chyna and have spend four year out of their country, of which time they have be 14 month at cuchinchyn, where they, at their first, come be betray and their captain take prisoner, who they make kneel on their knee 24 hour, have their neck bare and one stand with a sharp sword ready to have strike off their head when the word shall be give they bear. kneel on their knee 24 hour, have their neck bare and one stand with a sharp sword, ready to have strike off their head when the word shall be. give they bear they down to be man of war and spy, and no merchant, these dutchman be papist wherefore in the end the portugal friar save their life and afterwards they be kind use, but their ransom cost they dear. first they be two ship, but the one be so worm-eaten that they be force to take out that lade she have into the other and to dock she up at pattany. after come to bantan, the admiral and vice, the two master and principal merchant there, dock up their bone. about this time the protector send to. to dock she up at pattany. after come to bantan, the admiral and vice, the two master and principal merchant there, dock up their bone about this time. the protector send to i diverse time to lend he 2000 piece of 8 and if not 2000, 1000, but i put he off. tell he we be leave there with good but no money. also that the people of the country ought we much the which we can not get in. likewise that as yet we have buy but little pepper, wherefore we must buy all we can to get lade against. we expect our ship. the hollander that come in so rich from mackow have so bribe he that now he begin to hearken to they concern the. can to get lade against. we expect our ship, the hollander that come in so rich from mackow, have so bribe he that now he begin to hearken to. they concern the building of a fair house also. they agree with a other chine, a rich man, to build a other for they, the which he do, from the foundation to the top, all of timber and brick. but this chine and they have exceed much trouble and cost before they can enjoy it. also, about this time i cause a porch to be build before our new pepper house door, likewise the window to be all brick up and the ceiling aloft to be search and mend with the foundation, also the which be lay upon tymbar. our new pepper house door, likewise the window to be all brick up and the ceiling aloft to be search and mend, with the foundation also the which be lay upon tymbar. by reason the ground there be soft and marish and when much rain fall it wash away the earth, whereby many time the end of those timbar will be bare. of late the sabyndar have receive a exceed great loss by fire who house all man think to be fire free, but they be deceive which cause we much to stand in doubt of our own. the 6. of february we lose one of our company, robert wallys, and many more of our man be sick and lame which come by the heat of the pepper. our own, the 6. of february we lose one of our company, robert wallys, and many more of our man be sick and lame, which come by the heat of the pepper in mill and shut it, so that ever after we be force to hire chyneses to do that work and our own man to oversee. they only the 16. of february, come in a great ship of zealand from pattania, but five or six day before her come she send in a small ship, or pinnace, will their factor to buy up all the pepper they can, which make we think that general warwick with all his ship be come to lade there, wherefore we buy up all that we find to be good and merchantable. pepper they can, which make we think that general warwick with all his ship be come to lade there, wherefore we buy up all that we find to be good and merchantable for the chynese, spoil much with water and dirt because the holland refuse none. and it be of a certain that the chynese buy one of another and sell it to the hollander again at the same price. they buy it and yet they will gain 10. ryalls of eight in 100 sack by put in water and dirt. for be it never so bad. they know their chapman. and blow which way the wind will they have ship to come thither either from the east or from the west, insomuch that one will have think. bad. they know their chapman and blow which way the wind? will they have ship to come thither either from the east or from the west, insomuch that one will have think they go to carry away the pepper grow on the tree mountain. and all the people there hear our country be cold. have ask we if we beat pepper in our mortar that we plaster our wall with to make our house warm. this ship have take much good purchase, but they swear those englishman they have with they and also charge they upon loss of their wage. they shall tell we nothing, the which we take very unkind. the captain name be jacob peterson, and now he be vice admiral to van warwick for after. loss of their wage. they shall tell we nothing, the which we take very unkind. the captain name be jacob peterson and now he be vice admiral to van warwick. for after his vice admiral be slay at zelon by the treachery of the king of candie, he succeed, he in place. he have take a portugal in the strait of mallacka laden with wine and he deal very bountiful with. we requite the courtesy we do they when their factor have their house all consume with fire. we give they both meat, drink, clothes and howse-roome and also lend they money. there be at this time three house off hollander and zelander, and all lay for several account and buy up pepper, every one so much as. howse-roome and also lend they money. there be at this time three house off, hollander and zelander, and all lay for several account and buy up pepper every one so much as they can get. the five of march the protector send to i in the king name to borrow a thousand rial of eight, wherefore i be force to lend they five hundred or else they will have fall out with i about this time there come in a junke from, with certain hollander in it, who steal away with their good because have a long time be besiege by the portugal of mallacka so that they of the town can hardly look out. they say the portugal offer the king of peace upon condition he will. long time be besiege by the portugal of mallacka so that they of the town can hardly look out. they say, the portugal offer the king of peace upon condition: he will deliver those hollander that be there into their hand or kill they himself. to the which the king answer that he will first lose his kingdom in the begin of this month of march. and to make a end of this old and wonderful year, 1603, we have two great fire on the other side the water which do much spoil, but god be thank, the wind always favour we, 1604.. and now to begin the new year, 1604.. my pen afford to speak of little else but murder, theft, war, fire and treason, and first thank, the wind always favour we, 1604.. and now to begin the new year, 1604.. my pen afford to speak of little else but murder, theft, war, fire and treason. and first, to begin with, a tragedy. we have a mullato of pegne in our house, which our ship bring from athyne. and in the great ship that come late from pattanya, there be one of his countryman who one sunday, be the eight of april, have get a bottle of wine and bring it a shore to make merry with our mullato. in the after noon they walk abroad, meet with the provost of their ship who bid their mullato to get he aboard, but he answer he will not, whereupon the provost strike he our mullato. noon they walk abroad, meet with the provost of their ship who bid their mullato to get he aboard, but he answer he will not. whereupon the provost strike he, our mullato, see his countryman misuse and be somewhat tickle in the head with wine which he do seldom use to drink, think he will revenge his countryman quarrel wherefore he present. come home the evening be come, he take a rapier and a target and also have his cryse at his back and so go forth. and because at that time there be much quarrel and brabble between the javan and the hollander, i charge our man that if they be send out in the evening about any business, they shall take their weapon with they. for and brabble between the javan and the hollander. i charge our man that if they be send out in the evening about any business they shall take their weapon with they, for fear some javan that know they not may do they a mischief in the dark. we think the cook have send he into the market for herb or some thing which he want, mistrust nothing. also there go out with he a slave of the sabindar which be bear and bring up amongst the spayniard at the manely they meet with the provost and the other mullato. together our mullato begin to quarrel with the provost and present out with his cryse and stab he then fear his countryman will bewray, he stab he also and the other mullato together. our mullato begin to quarrel with the provost and present out with his cryse and stab he. then fear his countryman will bewray. he stab he also and will have slay he. that go out with he. have he not run through a great ditch and so get from? he then meet with a poor javan and be nuzzle in blood, stab he likewise. the fleming, not able to go to the house, fall down in a lane hard by the house present. the merchant have notice by some that one of their man lay hard by wound. so soon as they come to he he tell they a english man, have slay he. wherefore the hollander come to our house and desire to their man lay hard by wound. so soon as they come to he, he tell they a english man have slay he. wherefore the hollander come to our house and desire to speak with i, who tell i that one of our man have slay one of they. i ask they if they know which it be. they say no, but they think it be our mullato present. we have he in examination who deny it stout. we look on the point of his rapier, which he have out also upon his cryse, and can discern nothing, for he have wash his cryse. before the hollander come, then i send master towerson with they and also our mullato to hear what the man can say, if he be. nothing for he have wash his cryse. before the hollander come, then i send master towerson with they and also our mullato to hear what the man can say if he be not speechless. when they come they ask he who have hurt he? he say a english man. master towerson ask he whether it be a white man or a black. because he name still a english man. we be in some doubt. the fleming be also in drink, say a white man. then present he say again: be be dark. he know not well and so give up his life. as they come back, our mullato tell they there be a other man dead and bring they to the side of the ditch where he be. and so give up his life. as they come back, our mullato tell they there be a other man dead and bring they to the side of the ditch where he be, tumble in. they ask he how he know. he say he see he by the light of their candle, which they all say be unpossible, except he have know of he before. then. come a little further, they stumble on the javan, the which, when they see, make they all amaze, fear than they shall find. more then one of the dutch merchant. look very near upon the handle of his cryse, where he may perceive a little shadow of blood, but it can hardly be discern wherefore, after they come home, i cause the sheath. very near upon the handle of his cryse, where he may perceive a little shadow of blood, but it can hardly be discern wherefore, after they come home i cause the sheath of his cryse to be cleave where we may see fresh blood within. the hollander desire to have he to their house, but i tell they, no, he shall be as safe with we. we put he fast in iron, but still he deny it. i ask he how his cryse come bloody. he say he know not. i tell he it be too apparent. then he confess he have slay the javan and say that the fleming and his countryman be by the ear when he come and have slay one another. we tell he apparent. then he confess he have slay the javan and say that the fleming and his countryman be by the ear when he come and have slay one another. we tell he the fleming than will not have, lay it to he only. we say no more to he that night, wherefore he lay he down and sleep sound, not take any thought in the world, as it shall seem. but i be sure i can take no rest that night for think what trouble i be like to have. what between the hollander for their man and the protector for the the next morning i send for the sabyndares slave who when he come at the first, deny all that he know, say he see nothing of. man and the protector for the. the next morning i send for the sabyndares slave who when he come at the first deny all that he know, say he see nothing of the matter, but be urge to speak the truth. he kneel down, desire we to be good to he and he will tell the truth. who present, tell the manner how our mullato come to the fleming and first kill he and then his countryman, and after how he pursue he. then we demand of our mullato, whether he have slay they all or no, who confess he have, do all three murder the, which we be very sorry to hear, for if he have slay, no more but the javan he shall not have die. no, who confess he have do all three, murder, the, which we be very sorry to hear. for if he have slay, no more but the javan he shall not have die for that. all this, while he continue in a careless and reprobate sense, set his fact and death very light. the hollander will have execute he present, but i will not suffer they until i have speak with the protector, for i know not then how i shall agree with he for the only this: i know that money he must and will have, but if i have find he too unreasonable, i mean to have deliver the prisoner into his hand and to have let the hollander and they agree about the matter, the hollander but if i have find he too unreasonable, i mean to have deliver the prisoner into his hand and to have let the hollander- and they agree about the matter. the hollander think every hour ten till they have his blood. come again at noon to our house we present go all to the court where the dutch merchant sit down at the left hand of the king and the protector and the vice admiral at the right hand, but i sit down above he, between the protector and he at which i think the hollander grudge. but that be all one for a englishman scorn to give place to hollander in any foreign country if they be of equal call when we have declare to the king: grudge, but that be all one for a englishman scorn to give place to hollander in any foreign country if they be of equal call. when we have declare to the king and the protector, wherefore our come be the which they be not ignorant of, the protector demand fifty rial of eight for the, we answer again that by the law of their country they can demand nothing near so much and more. i say there be no reason we shall pay any money and the party to lose his life. also, the protector say that he have nothing to do with the hollander that be slay, nor with our law, wherefore for they we may agree among ourselves, but for the the king must and will. that he have nothing to do with the hollander, that be slay, nor with our law, wherefore for they we may agree among ourselves, but for the, the king must and will have money and stand a long time upon fifty rial. i say that, rather than i will give so much, i will deliver the party to he, so he shall have man for man and he may save his life if he will. but i mean it not when i see his first demand be but fifty rial, for he know our house so well, may afterward have be draw to do we a myschief. the principal merchant of the hollander hear i talk of save his life, begin to rage and to swear he shall. well, may afterward have be draw to do we a myschief? the principal merchant of the hollander hear i talk of save his life, begin to rage and to swear he shall die if there wear no more man in the world, to which perentory speech i answer that it lay not in they to put he to death. if i listen to save he, and be it not that the deed be so odious before god and man and that i fear the blood of those christian that be murder- will cry to god from the earth for vengeance against i. i will save his life if it be, but to cross their humour only for their perentorie speech. the protector, hear we at these hot word. the earth for vengeance against i. i will save his life if it be but to cross their humour only for their perentorie speech. the protector, hear we at these hot word, fear we will have go by the ear. wherefore present, he send away the king and also tell we he have much business, desire we to make a end. he say that twenty rial be the law of the country, which we must and shall pay. and so he rise and depart. i dare say he be afraid we will have cut his throat, for he take we all to be bloody fellow. the hollander will have pay the twenty rial and will have have the execute of he. i tell they no rather than he. for he take we all to be bloody fellow, the hollander will have pay the twenty rial and will have have the execute of he. i tell they, no, rather than he shall fall into their hand, i will pay the money out of my own purse as we come from the court. they be talk of his death, say he shall have the bone of his leg and arm break and so he shall lie and die or else have his foot and hand cut off and so lie and starve to death. but i say he shall die the ordinary death of the country and no other. the hollander and we part at their house which stand in our way home when we be come home. say he shall die the ordinary death of the country and no other. the hollander and we part at their house which stand in our way home. when we be come home, i tell he he must die the next morning and will he to call upon god to forgive he his sin, especial, this last bloody deed. for though he be a pegus bear, yet he be a christian and bring up among the portingall i set other to instruct he too, but he continue, still in a obstinate mind. at this time there stand by a arabian bear who hear we give he that good counsel and see he will take none. so soon as we leave he, he go to work with he, he belong. by a arabian bear who hear we give he that good counsel and see he will take none. so soon as we leave he, he go to work with he. he belong to the dutch ship and speak the spanish tongue- marvelous well. he first lay open unto he his grievous offence and afterward the mercy of god, who have send his son into the world to redeem we and to wash away our sin. be they never so bloody if, if we will repent within one half hour, he bring he to be the penitent creature that ever i hear in my life. in the evening i send one to the executioner of the town. will he to come the next morning? but here i must not. creature that ever i hear in my life. in the evening i send one to the executioner of the town, will he to come the next morning. but here i must not omit to tell you how, the very same day, seven night before, this executioner come to i for money for kill a certain chine who have coin false rial. and because this concern much the hollander, they follow the matter hard for it be well know that all the rial we bring be good, for they be almost all of the new stamp that be coin in the tower of purpose. he tell i the hollander have. give he two rial and a half for kill the false coiner and ask i what i will give. be coin in the tower of purpose. he tell i, the hollander have give he two rial and a half for kill the false coiner, and ask i what i will give he. i answer he, i will give he nothing, for i have nothing to do with the coiner. and when he kill a man, for i i will give he five rial. the next morning, this officious hangman or executioner, not forget my late promise- demand five ryall for his fee and because he shall not think but that a englishman will be as good as his word, although it be make, but to a hangman, i give he five rial and withal give he a great charge not to torment he as he do the good as his word, although it be make, but to a hangman, i give he five rial and withal give he a great charge, not to torment he as he do the coynar, but to dispatch he at the first stab, wherefore i lend he my own cryse, which be very serviceable for such a purpose. he answer that when he kill the coynar he do not execute his own father. for their manner, be that when a javan of any account be put to death, although there be a common executioner, yet their near of kin do execute his office, and it be hold the great favour they can do they. on tuesday be the ten of april, the hollander come with a guard of shot in. kin do execute his office and it be hold the great favour they can do they. on tuesday be the ten of april, the hollander come with a guard of shot in the morning than we lead he into the field. the people of the town, both javan and chynese, hear that there be a englishman to be execute. come flock amain. but when they come many wear blank and we may hear they tell one another it be a black man. we tell they he be just of their own colour and condition and that a englishman or white man will not do such a bloody deed. the executioner as i have give he charge do his best to rid he quick out of his pain. for a englishman or white man will not do such a bloody deed. the executioner as i have give he charge do his best to rid he quick out of his pain. for belike he dream, i shall have more work for he short the which within two month after i have, to my great trouble, grief and sorrow when he lie gasp on the ground, i open, tell the hollander that that be the fruit of drunkenness and bid they ever after beware of it. so soon as we have see he bury, we return all home to our house where we dine, and after dinner the hollander and we part exceed great friend and the same evening the vice admiral have one ship more in company set. home to our house where we dine, and after dinner the hollander and we part exceed, great friend, and the same evening the vice admiral have one ship more in company set sail for holland. the fourteen day, thomas tudd, the company chief factor, leave there for banda, who have be a long time sick, depart this life, so that of seven factor leave there for that place and banda, we be now but two live and we have lose in all since the departure of our ship eight man beside the mullato that be execute and we be now ten live and one boy. the twenty day die jaspar gensbury, who be admiral of the two ship that be betray at cuchinchyna. the two and twenty of and we be now ten live and one boy the twenty day die, jaspar gensbury, who be admiral of the two ship that be betray at cuchinchyna. the two and twenty of april come in a great junke from chyna, which be think to be cast away because she tarry so late, for they use to come in february and march but by reason of her come cashys keep all the year a very cheap rate which be a great hindrance to we in the sale of our prize. good for when cashys be cheap and rial dear we can not vent a piece of stuff at half the value we do at our first come again, the chynese this year send all their ryalls they can get. rial dear. we can not vent a piece of stuff at half the value we do at our first. come again, the chynese this year send all their ryalls they can get for chyna, wherefore we be force to give they credit, or else we must lose the principal time of year for our sale pepper. the hollander have leave none but what be in our hand and the sabindar who will not sell for any reasonable prize. also, our good now begin to grow old and the colour of many sort begin to fade, for the warehouse in that place be so hot and misty that although man take never so much pain in air and turn the ware yet, they will spoil any sort of cloth. the warehouse in that place be so hot and misty that although man take never so much pain in air and turn the ware yet, they will spoil any sort of cloth which shall lie long in they. it be not long since i make a end of a most pitiful tragedy. now i must begin a story of theft and fire, the which must also end as the other do, only the first, for the most part, be christian and these be heathen dog. a long time we live in fear of fire, but now we feel the brunt and smart of it, and if god most miraculous have not preserve we, we have all perish, both life and good, the which come to pass by the we feel the brunt and smart of it. and if god most miraculous have not preserve we, we have all perish, both life and good, the which come to pass by the villainy of a chine bear. but now turn javan, who be our next neighbour, and keep a victual house and brew arack, which be a kind of hot drink that be use in most of those part of the world in steed of wine. this offspring of the devil and heir of hell have two out house which join to our pale: one, the south side of our house where his guest do use to sit, and in the one he use to brew. but now he begin a other trade and become a ingyner have south side of our house where his guest do use to sit and in the one he use to brew. but now he begin a other trade and become a ingyner, have get eight fyrebrand of hell more to he only of purpose to set our house a fire. these nine deep worker dig a well in one of these house, from the bottom of which well they bring a? i quite under the foundation of our house. but when they come up to the plank of our warehouse they be at a stand. before they can make this i, they be force to dig a very deep well in their yard to draw away the water which do abound in this i and because we shall mistrust. can make this i. they be force to dig a very deep well in their yard to draw away the water which do abound in this i, and because we shall mistrust nothing, they plant tobacco and many other herb hard by that well and will every day be water of they also. we may hear they boil of water every day, but because they be brewer and have many tub to wash and to fill, we mistrust nothing of that. ensue when they come to these plank aforenamed. they dare not cut they, for we be always some of. we walk over they both night and day. after they have wait two month and can never find opportunity to cut the board, they begin to cast their be always some of. we walk over they both night and day. after they have wait two month and can never find opportunity to cut the board, they begin to cast their cerberous head together how they shall get in. but the devil deceive they and set they wrong to work. for if they have, continue still until they have come, but across the warehouse opposite against they, they have find three thousand ryalls of eight, bury in jar for fear of fire and also that room be not board at all. so they may have come into the warehouse and have what they seek for. well, one of these wicked consortship be a goldsmith and bring up always to work in fire. tell his fellow he will. come into the warehouse and have what they seek for. well, one of these wicked consortship be a goldsmith and bring up always to work in fire. tell his fellow he will work out the plank with fire, so that we shall never hear nor see he little. do he think that we shall ever come to work with fiery hot iron? upon he this seem to be a rare device, whereupon it be put in practice. and upon the eight and twenty of may, about ten a clock at night, they put too a candle and burn a round hole through the board, so soon as the fire come through the mat of our pack, take fire which present, spread and begin to burn. all this time. and burn a round hole through the board, so soon as the fire come through the mat of our pack, take fire which present, spread and begin to burn. all this time we know not of it, nor can perceive any thing, by reason of the closeness of the warehouse, for all the window be plaster up for fear of fire over head, which we look for every minute. but for it to come that way, we never once dream. after the first watch be out, wherein i be one myself, the second watch feel a strong funke of fire, for it be, by that time, much increase, but they know not where it shall be, wherefore they go down and open the pepper house door. where come strong funke of fire, for it be by that time much increase. but they know not where it shall be. wherefore they go down and open the pepper house door where come out a extraordinary heat. yet they can perceive no fire. they search in every corner about the cooke-roome but can discern nothing than one of. they remember a hole which a rat have make behind a trunk that go through the ceiling down into the cloth warehouse. this hole we have twice or thrice. stop and seek mean to kill the rat, because so soon as we have stop it she will open it again in the night, in so much that we be force to keep mortar ready, temper in a pan to stop it. soon as we have stop it, she will open it again in the night, in so much that we be force to keep mortar ready temper in a pan to stop it at a instant if fire shall take we over head. he look behind his trunk where he may plain perceive the smoke to esteem up out of the hole. then, present, he come into my chamber and tell i our cloth warehouse be a fire. i hear this word fire, although i be fast a sleep. yet it be no need to bid i rise, neither be i long a slip on my clothes, but present, run down and open the door whereat come out such a strong funke and smoke that have almost strangle we. rise, neither be i long a slip on my clothes but present run down and open the door whereat come out such a strong funke and smoke that have almost strangle we. this smoke by reason. it have no vent, be so thick that we can not perceive where about the fire be. and all that time we have two great jar of powder stand in the warehouse which cause we great to fear, blow up. yet set all fear aside, we go to it and pluck all thing off that lie on they, which feel in our hand very hot, the powder we get out and carry into our backside. than we search bold for the fire and find it we light candle, but the thickness of in our hand very hot, the powder we get out and carry into our backside. than we search, bold, for the fire and find it. we light candle, but the thickness of the smoke put they out. then we tie twelve great wax candle together and light they all, which continue, a light we pluck out, pack so fast as we can, but by reason of the heat and smoke which choke we be, so few as we be, can do little good upon it, wherefore we let in the chynese than come in as well. those that have do it as other hope to get some spoil. those that be mind to help, we which be but few, dare not for fear of our powder, for they those that have do it as other hope to get some spoil, those that be mind to help- we, which be but few, dare not for fear of our powder, for they know well we have some there- until they have be in the backside and show where it stand, then they will have have i break up the ceiling over head and there to have pour down water, the which i will by no mean but still desire they to help pluck out. pack, for if we shall have give the fire vent, it will have flame up to the theatch before we shall have get half water enough and when we have be a fire over our head and under foot and all the house round. have flame up to the theatch before we shall have get half water enough. and when we have be a fire over our head and under foot and all the house round about, we- it have not be possible to have save the worth of one groat- then they will have have. i have break down the house where the fire be, but this be but to have many way in to have steal our good. neither can i get above two or three to help our man to pluck out pack. as for master towerson and myself, we have work enough to stand by with our sword to keep they from throw they over the pale after they be out. also, they be not without their consort. and myself we have work enough to stand by with our sword to keep they from throw they over the pale after they be out. also, they be not without their consort on the other side to receive they. when i see that these damn chyneses will do we little good but rather harm, i be almost in despair and have at that time a thousand pound in gold which i have receive of general hemskerke for pepper, in my chest above stair. i run up, think to fetch it and to throw it into a pond on our back side. but when i come to my chamber door my mind alter and i think i will go see once again what may be do and come through. pond on our back side. but when i come to my chamber door, my mind alter and i think i will go see once again what may be do and come through our house. i chance to cast my eye into our dine room, which be right over the place where the fire be, where there be chyneses that have remove the table and be break up the brick of the ceiling, among which be one unkind neighbour which be the principal actor. i bid they leave and get they down, the which they will not until i begin to let fly among they. when i have drive they down, i go down after they and desire some merchant that stand by, with who we have deal that. until i begin to let fly among they. when i have drive they down, i go down after they and desire some merchant that stand by with who we have deal that they will urge the rest of the chynese to help we pluck out pack, promise they shall be well pay for their pain. it please god to put so much good in their mind, which i think never have any before, not since, so that they fall to work of all hand and present the room be clear, out of which come fifty and odd pack, whereof sixteen be a light fire, and also they empty the next room. for we know not all this, while how the fire come, not yet how far it go. odd pack, whereof sixteen be a light fire. and also they empty the next room. for we know not all this while how the fire come, not yet how far it go, but the chynese do know, the most part of they. for when the first room be empty and the fire on the wall quench, few of they will set their hand to one pack in the next room, say that the fire be quench and the danger all past. when the fire be all out, i stand muse alone by myself how this fire can come be very much grieve in mind. then come to comfort i, two or three chynese who say i, i do not give sacrifice to god wherefore this mischance be happen. can come be very much grieve in mind. then come to comfort i, two or three chynese who say i, i do not give sacrifice to god, wherefore this mischance be happen unto i. i tell they, i do give sacrifice to god every day, but not after their manner, nor never will. but have we know then that the chynese have do it. we shall have sacryfise so many of they that their blood shall have help to have quench the fire. so soon as we be at leisure, i give to every one of they a tick of my hand, who be about forty in number, and will they to come in the morning and i will pay they for they will not set a hand. they a tick of my hand, who be about forty in number, and will they to come in the morning and i will pay they for they will not set a hand to help until i have promise to pay they. all this while our house and yard lie like a small town, that have be new sack by the enemy and good lie, some hafe burn and some tread in the mire and dirt and what with fire and water, much be spoil. so soon as it be day, the chynese come for their money, the which they be ever exceed greedy of. i proffer they a piece of eight a man, which they much scorn. i ask they if it be not enough for half a the which they be ever exceed greedy of. i proffer they a piece of eight a man which they much scorn. i ask they if it be not enough for half a hour work. they answer again that if they have not help we, we have have our house burn and so have lose all. i tell they again that it be not long since that if i have not help they, they have have their throat cut. when they can get no more, they take that some of they wish our house have be consume, although they speak it not before we, for if they have we shall have bang they, such be their wicked mind. now we begin to call to mind who have be in. although they speak it not before we, for if they have we shall have bang they, such be their wicked mind. now we begin to call to mind who have be in the warehouse the day before than we remember that there be certain mullayne there to look upon good. also, one of our man have be there with a candle, for we can never show any good but we be force to light a candle, but master towerson be there all the while, who say he never come near that room where the fire be, neither be the door ever open, but either he or i be there, who do evermore look to the candle ourselves. we think, then, that some of those mullay be hire by neither be the door ever open, but either he or i be there who do evermore look to the candle ourselves. we think then that some of those mullay be hire by some portugal have secret, as he pass by that room, toss in a ball of fire which he may bring close for the purpose. there be at this time a certain chine, a bricklayer, which wrought at the dutch house, who, in the morning, tell a fleming that have be long in the country that certain chyneses have do it, but he say they be flee. he say more: if we look well in the room, we shall find the manner. how it be. do the dutchman tell a english surgeon what he have hear, and be flee. he say more: if we look well in the room we shall find the manner. how it be. do the dutchman tell a english surgeon what he have hear and will he to come and tell we, and he himself, because he be perfect in the language, will go and inquire after they. the english surgeon come to i and desire i he may see the room where the fire be i present, call for a candle and show he the room. he go to one corner, find a little round hole which be burn through one plank of the flower, whereat i put down a long stick which i have in my hand but can feel no ground. then i call for a axe and burn through one plank of the flower, whereat i put down a long stick which i have in my hand but can feel no ground. then i call for a axe and as soft as we can we wrinch up the plank where under be a way that the great chest or pack in our house may have go down. which, when i see as secret as i can, i call three of our man and go to the house from whence the mine come, have our weapon, i set one in the door and charge he, he shall let none come out, whatsoever he be, and myself with the other two go in where in one room we find three man, there be two more in a he, he shall let none come out, whatsoever he be. and myself with the other two go in where in one room we find three man- there be two more in a other room who hear we flee out at a back door which we know not off before we see they, those three, after two or three blow give we bring away one be a dweller in the house, but the other two we can prove nothing against they. i lay they fast in iron and present. i send master towerson to the protector to certify he how the case stand and to desire he they may be seek out and have justice do upon they, which he promise shall be do but i think never a. certify he how the case stand and to desire he they may be, seek out and have justice do upon they which he promise shall be do. but i think never a good protector in the world will have be so slack in performance for such a matter as this. the dutch merchant, see we have, take some and doubt the chyneses will rise against we, come very kind with their weapon and swear they will live and die in our quarrel. when we have lay out those good that have receive some water to air than we examine this party that dwell in the house who tell we the name of six that be flee. but he will not confess that he know any thing of it. than we examine this party that dwell in the house who tell we the name of six that be flee, but he will not confess that he know any thing of it. also, he say the other two know nothing of the matter. neither can he tell, as he say, whether the rest be flee. shortly after the same day come to i the king principal scrinana, call cay callybon, who in the night time have be at our house with a great crew of man to see that no javan in our trouble shall offer we any violence. this man tell i that one of our prisoner be his kinsman and know nothing of the matter, wherefore he desire to have he release, promise that if we we any violence. this man tell i that one of our prisoner be his kinsman and know nothing of the matter, wherefore he desire to have he release. promise that if we can prove any thing against he hereafter he shall be forth come, whereupon i deliver. he, many than come to i and tell i that the other be a stranger and dwell at jortan and that he be guiltless also. but he that dwell in the house, every one say he be accessary to it. nevertheless, because that party have use much to the house and have deal with those that be dweller there, i will not take their word but still detain he. i have not know a man better belove in a town in. house and have deal with those that be dweller there. i will not take their word but still detain he. i have not know a man better belove in a town in my life than this man be there, insomuch that there be some come to. i lament and make suit for he every day, but i will always tell both he and they that if he be not guilty he shall fear nothing, for i will not shed his blood wrongful for all the good in the world. and if he be guilty, all the world shall not deliver he out of my hand. in the mean time i say he shall lie well and eat no worse than i do, whereat every man be content. he. world shall not deliver he out of my hand. in the mean time i say he shall lie well and eat no worse than i do, whereat every man be content he be a chine bear, but now turn javan and withal a very lusty, proper man as one shall see. the next day, the protector come to our house to see the i which when he see he say it be a most villainous piece of work. he say more. he have hear of town and castle that have be overthrow by undermine, but he never see a i before. we still cry to he for justice against those that have do it. he bid we do justice on those we have when we will, and so never see a i before we still cry to he for justice against those that have do it. he bid we do justice on those we have when we will, and so soon as the rest can be find, we shall have they so that if we have have no more care than he, we may have execute one that be not in fault, although he himself can and do tell i that he be guiltless. but i tell he again that i great suspect he, because we have know he a long time, very conversant with he, that be the principal dweller in the house and that he have lie many night in the house, which be the great suspicion of all. then he bid i kill. with he that be the principal dweller in the house and that he have lie many night in the house, which be the great suspicion of all. then he bid: i kill he if i will, but i tell he not for the world, except i can evident prove that he be one that do it or know of it before it be. do now we be in a jealousy that the protector and some other of the principal of the land have a interest in this act, wherefore i think good to bring this man that dwell in the house to some torture to see what i can make. he confess after three or four day that we have trim up our house, which be all soil that dwell in the house to some torture to see what i can make. he confess after three or four day that we have trim up our house, which be all soil with smoke and durt, by throw of water, and also trim and air our good that have receive some damage. we go to work with this fellow who, when he see the iron lie burn in the fire, begin pitiful to bewail his own misery. say: o father and mother, when you bring your child into the world you do not know what misery shall come unto. they then be. demand whether he be one or no. he begin a frivolous tale, say that he hear man that go by the gate. say that two other shall come unto. they then be demand whether he be one or no. he begin a frivolous tale, say that he hear man that go by the gate. say that two other put to the fire and that they two be guiltless. the confession of saw^an turn hot, then fear he with hot iron but not touch he. he confess the whole manner of all and that he do help. he say those 2 out house be build for that purpose at the first, although they put they to other use because we shall not mistrust they and more that the i be make two month before, in which time, many night before they have be in the i strive to get into our house but can not they and more that the i be make two month before, in which time many night before they have be in the i strive to get into our house but can not. then we demand of he who put to the fire and why they do it to the, which he answer that because they dare not cut the board for fear we shall hear they. they think to work they out by the fire, and that one hint and boyhie do it. i ask he what his office be. he say that himself and one vniete that be the principal dweller in the house bail out the water. we ask he how they put to the fire, he say with a candle, and that the candle go. vniete, that be the principal dweller in the house, bail out the water. we ask he how they put to the fire. he say with a candle, and that the candle go out three time and they still light it again. then i ask he whether the other of jortan do help, or if he know of it, to the which he say no and the iron be lay down. he deny again that he know of the pretence but that he have hear of all this since by other, for which denial i cause he to be well burn under the nail of his finger. then he confess again he know of all the pretence. then fear he again with a hot iron. i ask he if to be well, burn under the nail of his finger. then he confess again he know of all the pretence. then fear he again with a hot iron. i ask he if this fellow of jortan do not know of it. he say no. then we burn he the, which he endure, though with great impatience. i demand who be the first that call they together and set they a work? he say vniete. i bid he name over all those that be accessary, which he do. i tell he that some great man of the country or the rich chine have set they a work and that i will make he confess the truth who they be. then burn he, he roar out and say he will. country or the rich chine have set they a work and that i will make he confess the truth, who they be. then burn he, he roar out and say he will accuse no man that be not guilty how much soever we do. torment he. i bid he name again all that know of it, the which he do as before now. while this be in hand, master towerson and one of the dutch merchant go down into our yard where this fellow of jortan be in iron and have new be eat his manacle be off from his hand. the dutch merchant come by he and have a japan sword in his hand. he wrong it from he, but master towerson be by, they take it. be off from his hand. the dutch merchant come by he and have a japan sword in his hand. he wrong it from he. but master towerson, be by they, take it from he again before he can draw it. he be ask what he mean to do, he answer he will have slay himself for fear of be torture. but i doubt he will have kill one of they. first, we much blame he and tell he we mean not to torture he and will he not to go about such a thing any more. in the afternoon the protector send to i, will i to deliver he, but i know he to be a governor or protector which have but little wit. send he word again. in the afternoon the protector send to i, will i to deliver he, but i know he to be a governor or protector which have but little wit. send he word again that if he be guiltless he shall receive no harm. and until i know the certainty i will not deliver he, this fellow that we have already torture, be very unwilling to die, say that what he confess be because we shall not torment he and deny again that he be guilty. i see his drift. speak he fair and promise he his life if he will tell i the truth. who be the principal that set they a work, and indeed, if i have perswaswade he, i mean as i say, then he tell the if he will tell i the truth who be the principal that set they a work, and indeed if i have perswaswade- he i mean as i say- then he tell the whole story again, the which be just as it be before. also, he confess he be one, wherefore the next morning i send he to execution. as he go out of our gate, the javan, who do much rejoice when they see a chine go to execution, as also the chynese do when they see a javan go to his death, revile he. but he will answer again, say the english man be rich and the chine poor. therefore, why shall they not steal from the english if they can? the next day the admiral take. he will answer again, say the english man be rich and the chine poor. therefore why shall they not steal from the english if they can? the next day the admiral take a other of they and send he to i, who know there be but one man with he, and therefore resolve with himself not to confess any thing to we. he be, find hide in a privy, and this be he that put the fire to our house. this be a goldsmith and confess to the admiral he have slip many rial and also coin some counterfeit. some thing he confess to he concern our matter, but not much the which the other have confess before. but he will tell we nothing. wherefore, because of his coin, some counterfeit, some thing he confess to. he concern our matter, but not much the which the other have confess before, but he will tell we nothing. wherefore, because of his sullenness and that it be he that fire we, i think, i will burn he now a little, for we be now in the heat of our anger. first i cause he to be burn under the nail of his thumb finger and toe with sharp, hot iron and the nail to be tear off. and because he never blemish at that, we think that his hand and leg have be numb with tie. wherefore we burn he in the arm, shoulder and neck, but all be one with he. then we burn he quite through. that his hand and leg have be numb with tie, wherefore we burn he in the arm, shoulder and neck, but all be one with he. then we burn he quite through the hind and with rasp of iron tear out the flesh and sinew. after that i cause they to knock the edge of his shin bone with hot sear iron. then i cause cold sense of irone to be serve into the bone of his arm and sudden to be snatch out. after that all the bone of his finger and toe to be break with pincer. yet for all this he never shed tear, no, nor once turn his head aside, nor stir hand or foot. but when he demand any question he will put. break with pincer. yet for all this he never shed tear, no, nor once turn his head aside, nor stir hand or foot. but when he demand any question, he will put his tongue between his tooth and strike his chin upon his knee to bite it off. when all the extremity we can use be but in vain, i cause he to be put fast in iron again, where the emmet, which do great abound there, get into his wound and torment he worse than we have do, as we may well see by his gesture. the king officer desire i he may be shoot to death. i tell they that be too good a death for such a villain and say more that in our country gesture the king officer desire i he may be shoot to death. i tell they that be too good a death for such a villain and say more that in our country if a gentleman or a soldier have commit a fault worthy of death than he be shoot to death and yet he be befriend too. but they do hold it to be the cruel and base death that be, wherefore they be very importunate. in the evening we lead he into the field and make he fast to a stake. the first shoot carry away a piece of his arm bone and all the next shoot strike he through the breast up near to the shoulder. then he hold down his head, look upon the wound. away a piece of his arm bone and all the next shoot strike he through the breast up near to the shoulder. then he hold down his head. look upon the wound, the three shot that be make. one of our man have cut a bullet in three part, which strike upon his breast in a triangle, whereat he fall down as low as the stake will give. he leave. but between our man and the hollander they shoot he almost all to piece before they leave he now in this time, the admiral and the sabindar send we a guard of man every night for fear the chynese will rise against we. but we fear it not. yet we keep four of the man to be witness. sabindar, send we a guard of man every night for fear the chynese will rise against we. but we fear it not. yet we keep four of the man to be witness. that whatsoever we do, if they shall rise, be but in our own defence. after i have keep this fellow of jortan nine or ten day and can prove nothing against he, i give he a piece of stuff to make he a suit and set he free so soon as he be out of our gate. every one that meet he take he by the hand and great rejoice will say that now they see the englishman will do no more but justice. the three of july follow the old woman that be chief govern. by the hand and great rejoice, will say that now they see, the englishman will do no more but justice. the three of july follow the old woman that be chief, govern there. help we to a other of they, but not without a bribe, for they will do nothing there without bribe, although we tell they every day the law of god and the strict law of our country for such a matter as this, and they will give you the hear of all and say it be good. but nevertheless they will do as they listen themselves, which shall be not to follow any thing that be good and true. my opinion be that their learned man know very little, but what human nature teach they. they listen themselves, which shall be not to follow any thing. that be good and true. my opinion be that their learned man know very little, but what human nature teach they? yet their high priest, cay cally, tell the king and the protector that he find in his book that such as shall do such a deed as they have do shall die by the law. but now to my purpose, this outcast of all goodness have steal our general cryse when he be hear and have receive punishment for it, also in these day he have steal from we many time, and many time before i have have the beat of he and can have find in my heart to have kill he, but now be he have steal from we. many time and many time before i have have the beat of he and can have find in my heart to have kill he. but now be the time come that i be to pay he for all. his name be boyhye, and as i hear he be one of those that help hynt to put to the fire, wherefore, for these manifold injury all the people think i will have torment, he grievous, but he be as he seem penitent and confess all that the other do and two malefactor more which they will never confess. and because they shall see that englishmen know as well how to be merciful as to torture, if occasion serve, i let he die by a more, which they will never confess, and because they shall see that englishmen know as well how to be merciful as to torture. if occasion serve, i let he die by a cryse, only without any torture. he great entreat i that i will not torture he. i promise he i will not, on condition he will tell i the truth. who set they a work and who they be all that be the doer of it and also who know of it before it be do the which, if one may believe a villain, he do. and they be these that follow, uniete the chief sawwan, his partner that dwell in the house with he hynt onygpayo hewscamcow, which be short after slay with a crise for do, and they be these that follow uniete: the chief, sawwan, his partner, that dwell in the house with he hynt, onygpayo, hewscamcow, which be short after slay with a crise for lie with a woman himself. boyhie, iccow and laccow, which be flee to jackatea, the which iccow and lackow i have never hear off before. i make all i can to get they, but i can not except i will the mean have be at exceed great charge. there be other that belong to some javan which be great man and get into their house. we can not get they, some of which javan do offer they to sell to we and we do beat the price as one will do about a ox or a. house. we can not get they, some of which javan do offer they to sell to we and we do beat the price as one will do about a ox or a calf, but they hold they so dear that i dare not deal with they. i proffer they as much for every one as they may, buy they a other slave in their room and some benefit. but they be so fit instrument for their purpose, be practise in all villainy, that they will not part with they without a great sum for the javan and chynese, from the high to the low, be all villain and have not one spark of grace in they. and if it be not for the sabyndar, the admiral and one, and chynese, from the high to the low, be all villain and have not one spark of grace in they. and if it be not for the sabyndar, the admiral and one or two more which be clyn man bear, there be no live for a christian among they without a fort or very strong house, all of brick or stone, the principal of the chynese may have. help we to they all the same morning when the deed be do, if there have be any honesty in they, and sure the pretence of steal be know to they all before it be act, but that they will set our house on fire. i think they be ignorant, among all other, of the devil instrument here upon earth. know to they all before it be act, but that they will set our house on fire. i think they be ignorant, among all other, of the devil instrument here upon earth there be one of the king blood call pangean mandelycko, who keep one of these nine villain in his house. one day he come to our house to buy cloth we desire he, he will deliver this fellow into our hand. promise he that we will cause our general to give he thanks when he come and that he shall be no by it, but by no mean he will not. we tell he how good it will be for their country to root out such villain as they be. he answer again that we shall. but by no mean he will not. we tell he how good it will be for their country to root out such villain as they be. he answer again that we shall tell those so that have the government of the country in their hand or care for the good of the country. for he do not. some three or four day after he come again to our house and will have have. i give he credit for six or seven hundred rial of eight in cloth. but because he be a man not to be trust, i excuse the matter. say that i look every day for our ship and that i can deliver no good, but i must have pepper present whereby i may have load. trust. i excuse the matter, say that i look every day for our ship and that i can deliver no good, but i must have pepper present whereby i may have load ready. after he have be very earnest and see he can not prevail, he go out very angry and be at our gate. he look back upon our house and say it be pity, but it shall be burn again also. he will have have a chine that we have some deal with to have help he to some chynese that dwell near we to undertake the fire of our house again. he be a man, general hate of all for cruelty that he have. do the chynese tell we what he say, wherefore i will. to undertake the fire of our house again. he be a man, general hate of all for cruelty that he have. do the chynese tell we what he say, wherefore i will present have go to the court to have complain of he. but many wish i not to do so for they say he be a desperate villain and care neither for king nor protector. but if we bring he to his answer before the king will do we a mischief whatsoever come of it. the king and the governor have send oftentimes to he to deliver we that fellow he have, but he care not for they. short after we have many shrewd attempt to have fire our house for the town be fire in three. to deliver we that fellow he have, but he care not for they. short after we have many shrewd attempt to have fire our house, for the town be fire in three place at one instant in the night, a little to windeward of our house, and twice a other night. but chief, by the mercy of god who preserve we, and by the diligence of the chynese who be grow very poor, upon it it be always quench. neither have we any body to complain to that can help we, but only god, and next unto he our trust be in our sword and shot which keep the proud of they in such awe in the night that they dare not come within our reach. he keep unto he our trust be in our sword and shot which keep the proud of they in such awe in the night that they dare not come within our reach. he keep a crew of villain like unto himself who no doubt if they can have fire the upper work of our house, will have be there to have see what spoil they can have do in the tumult. but god be thank we be not without friend, which will have send we three time so many more for our guard than he be able to make and do when time come that the upper work of our house be burn and short. i must tell a long tale than this of this ungodly pangean. what trouble he make and do when time come that the upper work of our house be burn and short. i must tell a long tale than this of this ungodly pangean, what trouble he put both the king and we to and how in the end he be banish. among all these sorrowful and troublesome discourse it happen that certain chyneses which dwell hard under our pale do steal away a other chyneses wife and be hardly pursue by her husband. they have no mean to shift she away, but to put she over the pale into our ground. at that time we have new shoot, much pepper in to our warehouse which be so extreme, hot that we be force to keep the door open night and day. have ground at that time. we have new shoot much pepper in to our warehouse which be so extreme hot that we be force to keep the door open night and day have always a regard to it. in the night this be a fit place for she to hide. she in get behind the door so far as she can stand for heat and her husband will have seek all javan and chyna before he will or dare come thither to seek. in the night, after our watch be set, one of our man go into our backside, the which place we do all very much frequent night and day. but as he be come back and be a little starr-light, he see the woman stand in the our backside, the which place we do all very much frequent night and day. but as he be come back and be a little starr-light, he see the woman stand in the pepper house door, who come forth to take breath, for she have be better to have be in a stove so long he present, swear a great oath, a woman or the devil in the likeness of a woman, for it be very strange to see such cattle within the english pale at that time of night. i walk in our gallery and hear this, remember that i have read of many man that have be overthrow by the deceit of woman, begin to grow in great fear and suspicion that some chine or this envious this- remember that i have read of many man that have be overthrow by the deceit of woman- begin to grow in great fear and suspicion that some chine, or this envious pangean who i late entreat of, have send she with some secret fyrework to work the destruction of we all, wherefore i run down and cause she to be search and examine present. she tell we that her husband will have beat she, wherefore she be force to climb over our pale and to hide herself. then i cause our pepper house to be search, first by dark and afterwards with some light, for fear still of fire work. when no thing can be find, i threaten down the admiral man that watch there that they search, first by dark and afterwards with some light, for fear still of fire work. when no thing can be find, i threaten down the admiral man that watch there that they have bring in their whore, the which they all forswear. then i threaten our own man, who swear likewise to the contrary, but i not satisfy yet and purpose to know the truth, lock she up in a porch all night and take the key with i. also, i give the watch, both javan and englishman, a charge to walk before the door, the which they do, and to look well out round about the house for fear of some villainy. i be never so vex in my life with a woman, although i think many. which they do, and to look well out round about the house for fear of some villainy. i be never so vex in my life with a woman, although i think many a good man have. i consider of it in the night, think it may very well be, as the woman say, and know again that it be a ordinary thing for the chynese to beat their wife, especial she be a woman which have no friend in town, for the javan will hardly suffer they to beat their woman, wherefore now i think it will prove, but some such jest. the next morning her husband come who fall down one his marrow bone. desire i to be good to he for have so late tortour some. will prove. but some such jest. the next morning her husband come, who fall down one his marrow bone, desire i to be good to he for have so late tortour some chynese he think i will torture he, but in my conceit he need no more plague or punishment. then such a wife, wherefore i present, dismiss they both. yet this man be not so ill match. but he have a neighbour, be worse, who be sit at breakfast with four more of his friend, be all poison by one of his woman. but so soon as they perceive themselves to be, so speed they drink, every one of they, a good quantity of beazer stone, some thirty grain a piece, the which recover they all. but soon as they perceive themselves to be so speed, they drink, every one of they, a good quantity of beazer stone, some thirty grain a piece, the which recover they all. but their neck and face break out in that manner that it will have pity a body to have. see they, the woman i say, execute, and so do diverse other of our house who will witness this to be of a truth, and that all the chynese, within few day, recover their health again. the people of those part be give much to poison, which be the cause. they hold their bezoar stone in so high estimation that there be not any of account, but they will always have some ready in their house and the which be the cause. they hold their bezoar stone in so high estimation that there be not any of account, but they will always have some ready in their house and the nobleman do hoard they up for great jewel, and sure i do hold that to be the thing next under god that have preserve the most of our life, that have be long resident there. now a word or two concern the dutch ship. and short after, into fire and trouble again, the fifteen of july come in the moon from amboyna, be lade with clove in who come three young youth which be the son of three, the chief governor of that land. their come be to require aid of the english or dutch which with clove in who come three young youth which be the son of three, the chief governor of that land. their come be to require aid of the english or dutch which shall come first to bantam against certain portugese which have a small there and do sore annoy. they also there come in a small flybote which have take a pinnace or shuppe which the portugese not long before have take from captain barkell and captain bugall at mackow. they take she under a island a little to the eastward of java, she be bind for mallacka and have in she a chest of letter which shall have go for goa, wherein the portugese of mackow have write for powder shot and all kind of munition for. for mallacka and have in she a chest of letter which shall have go for goa, wherein the portugese of mackow have write for powder shot and all kind of munition for war. the upper work of our house be build of cane and be withal both high and long. every puff of wind be ready to turn it over and we be force every foot to be at much trouble and charge about, mend and set it to right, wherefore in this month of july we send a prawe to a island hard by to fetch timber for the main post round about and new build it again, but we hardly enjoy it. two month before fire consume it. also. the protector a little before have give. fetch timber for the main post round about and new build it again. but we hardly enjoy it. two month before fire consume it. also. the protector a little before have give we all the house and ground which join to our pale and belong to those chynese which undermine our house. but although it be give yet i think there be never englishmen pay so dear for so little ground in any country in the world. the house be rot, but the ground do we. great pleasure. also there be a pangean or gentleman which have a house and ground, the pale of which ground come so near our pepper house door that it be very troublesome to we when we shall carry in or out pepper. have a house and ground, the pale of which ground come so near our pepper house door that it be very troublesome to we when we shall carry in or out pepper, wherefore i buy that house with the ground so that now we have a very spacious yard. this house i fill full of pepper but because it be not board within the weight of the pepper, be shoot, bear out the side of the wall, wherefore we be force to take out all our pepper again, be two thousand and forty sack, and to board it within to our exceed great trouble and some cost. also. i hire a other house right over against we which hold six hundred and odd sack of pepper and some board it within to our exceed great trouble and some cost. also. i hire a other house right over against. we, which hold six hundred and odd sack of pepper and some other houseroom, be lend we by our friend for the pepper that we have and be now to receive, take up a great deal of their kind of houseroom by reason their building be but low. the nine and twenty of august the noon set sail from thence to holland. leave there those young man which come in hither from amboyna, who will many time come to our house, and i always give they kind entertainment and it be most certain that if we shall have any store of ship of force to come there, we time come to our house and i always give they kind entertainment and it be most certain that if we shall have any store of ship of force to come there, we shall have any thing at their hand. before the hollander, the three of september, it happen two of our man to fall together by the ear. i find they in this disorder, bang they and also commit they to the iron the next day. they be prisoner, have somewhat hard fare then their fellow, wherefore they say they will know whether i have any such authority or no, and more that rather than they will be, so use they will be revenge on i and also set the house on fire. i hear these rebellious speech. such authority or no, and more that rather than they will be so use they will be revenge on i and also set the house on fire. i hear these rebellious speech lay as many iron on they as they can bear, and whereas before they sit dry in the house, i send they into our backside where no candle nor fire shall come near they, there to abide both hunger and cold. and because they have offend before and also have receive punishment for it and yet will not beware, i think now to have send they home in the next ship that go as prisoner to the company, but by their great submission, and the hollander and other merchant in the town entreat for they, but send they home in the next ship that go as prisoner to the company. but by their great submission. and the hollander and other merchant in the town entreat for they. but, chief, the want i have of man, i be content to release they upon surety of their good behaviour. after the nine of september the protector send a proclamation that no chyneses shall weigh any pepper to. the stranger mean the english and the hollander, the which proclamation be procure by the hollander, and we know it very well. for the same day they dine with we and at dinner they tell we the protector owe they ten thousand sack of pepper. but i tell they that be not so, for they will never trust he. dine with we and at dinner they tell we the protector owe they ten thousand sack of pepper. but i tell they that be not so, for they will never trust he of so much. the same evening one of the principal of the dutch merchant come by our gate. we ask he if he hear the news he know well how to dissemble. say no. then we tell he of the proclamation he make very strange of it. say that when any of our ship shall come we shall talk with the protector and other for all these injury. but i tell he we will not give he nothing near so long a day and that i will talk with he before the next day at night. for all these injury. but i tell he we will not give he nothing near so long a day and that i will talk with he before the next day at night and tell he more than he will willing hear the next morning. i go to the old woman who command the protector and all the rest and indeed be call queen of the land by the sabyndar and diverse other, although she be not of the king blood but only for her wisdom be hold in such estimation among they of all sort that she rule as if she be sole queen of that country. after we have make our grief know to she, she present send for the protector. will we to talk with he? she rule as if she be sole queen of that country. after we have make our grief know to she, she present send for the protector. will we to talk with he before she when he come. i demand of he for what cause he have forbid we our trade. he answer he must buy ten thousand sack of pepper for the king. i tell he again that the hollander themselves have confess to i that the pepper he will buy be for they and that he owe they ten thousand sack. the which he deny, say he owe they ten thousand rial but not ten thousand sack of pepper. i tell he it be contrary to promise make to our general that we shall be forbid to say he owe they ten thousand rial but not ten thousand sack of pepper. i tell he it be contrary to promise make to our general that we shall be forbid to buy and sell free. he say still, he must and will buy pepper for the king, and when he be serve than we shall buy again. i reply again that our general have a letter to our queen write in the king name, by consent of the queen which sit there present, of the protector that then be the sabindar, the admiral and diverse other of the chief of the land. i ask he if he will now cause the king word, the queen and all they to be break, then he know not well what. other of the chief of the land. i ask he if he will now cause the king word, the queen and all they to be break. then he know not well what to say. i tell he more that king must keep their word or else they be no king, and more we tell he that such like occasion be the first fall out between our queen and the king of spain, the which cost many thousand of man life, and that it be well know to all nation that we do not only burn and spoil at home but also come into those part of the world and take away his subject good, the which himself can witness. he say the king owe the land and therefore spoil at home but also come into those part of the world and take away his subject good, the which himself can witness. he say the king owe the land and therefore there be no reason. but he shall be serve before stranger. we yield that be but reason. but we know well that it be not for the king but for the hollander, and that if the king will buy pepper- the sabyndar and the admiral know of it, but now they know no such matter- then he confess it be for the hollander. he say he owe they a great deal of money, but not so much as they report the which they lend he long time, wherefore, to pleasure they, he will buy pepper for. say he owe they a great deal of money, but not so much as they report the which they lend he long time. wherefore, to pleasure they, he will buy pepper for they. i say he may, and yet not forbid we to buy, nor yet to receive our debt, to the which he answer that all the while we weigh pepper, he shall get little and therefore we shall forbear a while. then i tell he again that the chynese be great indebt unto we, and now, by mean of his proclamation, they will not pay we, wherefore i will lay all our debt upon the king and he, and when it shall please god to send our ship thither, we will not lose one rial after pay we, wherefore i will lay all our debt upon the king and he, and when it shall please god to send our ship thither, we will not lose one rial. after that, he begin to bethink himself, say it be never his meaning to forbid we to receive our debt, and that those which proclaim it do more than he will they. then i desire he to send his proclamation again and command the chynese to make haste and pay we our debt, the which in the after noon he do. we entreat he that he will not help the hollander, for we tell he that he can not help they, but he must hinder we and that if he get by, help they one way he he will not help the hollander, for we. tell he that he can not help they, but he must hinder we and that if he get by help they one way, he will lose by hinder we another. he answer again: he will help we to if we will. we desire he. he will help neither of we, but let we shift for ourselves. tell he also that he shall get more by we when our ship come by. sit still then by help the fleming. he desire we to be content, and we shall have no wrong and so depart so soon as he be go. i ask the old queen, which all this while sit by, whether the king will buy pepper or no. she say: no wrong and so depart so soon as he be go. i ask the old queen, which all this while sit by, whether the king will buy pepper or no. she say no, the king be no merchant. but she think the hollander have give the protector a bribe to help they. but say she, you shall have no wrong, for in deed she be always our very great friend, and the protector dare not displease she. we give her great thanks and after a while depart. the same day be the ten of september, die edward buntingall, our cook. in the afternoon the proclamation come that the chynese shall weigh we our debt () none, many of they not willing to pay their debt till pepper come. edward buntingall, our cook, in the afternoon. the proclamation come that the chynese shall weigh we our debt (). none. many of they, not willing to pay their debt till pepper come to a high price, will not hear this last proclamation. but when we come to ask our debt, will say that they dare weigh we none, which be a great hindrance unto we in get in our debt and we be force to cause the protector to send his officer to some particular man before they will pay we. but it must be understand this can not be do without a bribe, for we be force both to brawl with he and to bribe he too, for a man must do both. to those kind of this can not be do without a bribe, for we be force both to brawl with he and to bribe he too, for a man must do both to those kind of people, or else he shall have nothing as he will. and they must be keep betwixt fear and love. i must not forget to tell how the protector will needs have i promise he not to buy any pepper in fouretenne day, the which i do, provide always that the hollander shall not buy neither, nor none for they. but so soon as i come home i hear word they have weigh a very small parcel of ten sack, wherefore the very same night i buy one hundred sack. the hollander now be at a nonplus. come home i hear word they have weigh a very small parcel of ten sack, wherefore the very same night i buy one hundred sack. the hollander now be at a nonplus again, for in time past when they have see any parcel of pepper as they pass by lie in any warehouse they will go in and cheapen it. but wheresoever they come the people will tell they they owe it to the english man, whereat the hollander will go out in a great chafe. but when they see they can get none than they deliver the protector money and wrought with he, as i have before rehearse, and if we have have but ten thousand rial of eight more than we have, the hollander shall have. deliver the protector money and wrought with he, as i have before rehearse, and if we have have but ten thousand rial of eight more than we have, the hollander shall have get little pepper that year in bantan. it be most certain they be very much hate there and what they do or procure be for fear of their ship wherein they abound in all these part. the twelve day of september the protector send rial up and down amongst those that be dealer in pepper in the king name, some to serve he one hundred sack, some fifty sack, some twenty, some ten, some five, as it be a beg, and indeed he take it up at the king price, which be 1/2 ah rial in hundred sack, some fifty sack, some twenty, some ten, some five, as it be a beg, and indeed he take it up at the king price, which be 1/2 ah rial in a sack, less than we pay. the chynese, with much grudge, serve he a while after he set a tax upon they to serve he so much more. then the chynese rail upon the protector and the hollander both, and many of they will not receive their money but the officer will throw it down in their house and take their name. if many in christendom have see how rial be carry up and down upon man shoulder and how they be thrust upon man, they will think they have have they on some island hatd. in christendom have. see how rial be carry up and down upon man shoulder and how they be thrust upon man, they will think they have have they on some island hatd by for fetch. on a time when i be talk with the sabyndar, i ask he whether the pepper the protector buy be for the king or no, although i know very well to the contrary before. yet i do it because i will hear what he will say. he answer no. but the hollander have complain to he that they can get no pepper. and because, say he, the protector be behold to they for money which they have a long time lend he. therefore he do it only to pleasure they. i tell he. pepper and because, say he the protector, be behold to they for money which they have a long time lend he therefore, he do it only to pleasure they. i tell he he, do we great wrong by it? he say it be very true and that the old protector will not have do so. the thirteen day of september, the king and all the principal of the land go a progress to a island some six or seven league to the eastwarde of bantan, where they hunt bullock and vnozuras and every noble man, prawe be trim in very warlike manner, have their colour and shield hang round about they. some have on their shield a half moon, some a star, some a tiger head, some a be trim in very warlike manner, have their colour and shield hang round about they. some have on their shield a half moon, some a star, some a tiger head, some a furious beast which be in that country, call a matchan. some one thing, some a other, and because the order be that every one of ability, both stranger and other, at such a time present the king as he pass by with some present. therefore, as the king prawe come down the river, i lay he aboard and give he a present. the noble man that sit with the king tell i i shall have be ready with half a dozen shot to have bring the king onward of his way. i answer they again that man that sit with the king, tell i i shall have be ready with half a dozen shot to have bring the king onward of his way. i answer they again that i live in such fear of fire that neither i nor my man dare go out of door. but they be so importunate that i may not say they nay, but present, send for some shot. for, say they, six of your shot be better than all we then present, i send for half a dozen who be attire in their best robe and with their scarf and hatbande of our country colour make a very splendent show. i bring the king to a island, about a league on his way, where all the whole train with their scarf and hatbande of our country colour make a very splendent show. i bring the king to a island about a league on his way where all the whole train go a shore. they will needs see our man march and show they their order in discharge their shot. i tell they it be not worth the see, except i have more man. they answer they can see by a few. what more can do the king? send we rice, fruit and cockay. about four a clock in the afternoon the king depart on his journey and i take my leave of he and his train, who thank. i go direct home the fifteen of september by mean of a old trort which be make of his journey and i take my leave of he and his train. who thank i go direct home the fifteen of september, by mean of a old trort which be make of candle, the town be set a fire, the which consume all the upper work of our three house to our exceed great danger, cost and trouble. the sabyndar, who be late, return from the king, come to we in the tumult. also the admiral who have charge of the court in the king and governors absence, send we a great train of his principal man. likewise one of the king uncle come to we with a great number. and also the rich chine with a very great crew. all these come to see that no body. man, likewise one of the king uncle, come to we with a great number, and also the rich chine with a very great crew. all these come to see that no body shall offer we any violence, for they know well we have enemy of great force. not that they hate we, but for our good. now we be lay open to all our enemy, for our fence, for the most part, be burn to the ground, and we have not a place to dress our victual in. yet, as good fortune be, we have one little shed in the middle of our yard, which be our court of guard, that escape where we camp a night. the dutch house escape, though, but narrow, wherefore we borrow some. little shed in the middle of our yard which be our court of guard, that escape where we camp a night. the dutch house escape though, but narrow, wherefore we borrow some of their man. for it be to be note that though we be mortal enemy in our trade, yet in all other matter we be friend and will have live and die one for the other. also, the admiral and sabyndar send we man every night so that we with our drum shoot and pike, live soldier-like until our fence be make up, and afterwards too, for this be but to show we the way, and our fence be no soon up, but we look every hour when it shall be burn down or bear down. afterwards too, for this be but to show we the way and our fence be no soon up, but we look every hour when it shall be burn down or bear down by those that will have have the cut of our throat. now we pay a piece of eight for that, which be not worth twelve penny before. yet, for fear the rain and weather will spoil our good, we be force to set sheeds over every house until we can get timber to build they again. all which make our charge of building very great, and yet we be but very bad house there. this burn of the town be a great hindrance to we in get in of pepper for the chynese. be all so. great and yet we be but very bad house there. this burn of the town be a great hindrance to we in get in of pepper for the chynese be all so busy a building that they can not go up to the mountain to fetch it about the end of this month, september, begin great dissension among the principal of the land which grow by mean of that troublesome member call pangean mandelicko who, as i have write before, do seek all the mean he can to set our house on fire, but now see he can get nothing at our hand. fall to rob of junk which come into the road with rice and other provision of victual, among other, there be one which come from he can get nothing at our hand fall to rob of junk which come into the road with rice and other provision of victual, among other, there be one which come from in this junke, be great store of rice. man and woman, he feign a matter and give it out that there be two man in the junke that have take a junke of he that be thieve upon that coast, the which afterward be prove to be nothing. so, nevertheless, this spoiler of a common wealth with a great crew of villain, his slave, seize on the junke in the night and carry away all theryce, withal the man and woman as his prisoner, the which be the next way to keep away all other junk. seize on the junke in the night and carry away all theryce, withal the man and woman as his prisoner, the which be the next way to keep away all other junk which use to bring victual to the town whereby to starve they all, for that land be not able to feed one quarter of the people that be in it. the king and his protecter send to. he command he to deliver the people and good, the which he have take, but he will not but present, fortify himself also the rest of the pangeanes that be both of the king blood and he but be all traitor to the king, maintain he, so that the king officer dare not meddle with he, the protector, send. pangeanes that be both of the king blood and he but be all traitor to the king, maintain he so that the king officer dare not meddle with he. the protector send to we will we not to aid the pangeanes, neither with powder shot nor man. also he will we to make ourselves as strong as we can, because they be mind to banish mandelick and fear they shall have some hurly-burly before they shall get he out. i answer the messenger that the protector need not to fear we will aid such a rebel but rather do our uttermost against he, and that i be sorry i have so few man that i can not lend the king some aid. also the sabyndar and the admiral. but rather do our uttermost against he and that i be sorry, i have so few man that i can not lend the king some aid. also, the sabyndar and the admiral send almost every day to we, will we to make ourselves strong and to have a special care of our watch in the night, for they all great fear that the rebel will surprise our house and the hollander in the night, which, if they can, they shall have be rich than the king especial we, for they shall have have more follower for our commodity than all the king in java beside. also, they be not ignorant of the hatred the principal rebel bear we, because i will not trust he. the rebel grow every. our commodity than all the king in java beside. also, they be not ignorant of the hatred the principal rebel bear. we, because i will not trust he. the rebel grow every day strong and strong, and all the people of the country, and also stranger, begin to be in great fear. i be force to borrow some small ordinance of chyna merchant, which be our friend, and with chain and bush to fortify ourselves. our man, be busy every day. make of chain, langrell and crosbar. shoot all trade of merchandise be lay aside. neither do any in the town look after, buy or sell. and every day we shall have the rebel espyal come into our yard who will be very inquisitive. what and wherefore those do any in the town look after, buy or sell. and every day we shall have the rebel espyal come into our yard who will be very inquisitive what and wherefore those be which our man be all so hard at work upon. we will plain tell they that we look every night for such a man come, wherefore we make provision for his entertainment. they will view the shot very much and show it one a other and many time will go aside and whisper to themselves. one day, in the middle of this broil there come to our house one of the pangeanes which not long ago be king of jackatra and now be keep out by a kinsman of he who hold it and do there come to our house one of the pangeanes which not long ago be king of jackatra and now be keep out by a kinsman of he who hold it and do homage to the king of bantan for it. this pangean live like a malcontent and be every day conversant with the principal rebel who, as we do judge, send he to our house. he ask to see some cloth, the which i show he no, soon he have see it, but he ask i if i will give he credit for one hundred rial worth or two hundred rial worth. he have be once with i before when i deny he and he be force to bring a chyna merchant to give his word for he. worth, or two hundred rial worth. he have be once with i before when i deny he and he be force to bring a chyna merchant to give his word for he, wherefore i marvel he shall come again so soon and as i do before. so i give he the denial again. then present he bid we carry it away, ask i if i have any piece or powder to spare. i tell he no, i have to serve my own turn and no more he be very importunate with i to let he have some. i answer he again that i have none, but what be for provision for our house. therefore i can sell he none of that, though he will give never so much. some. i answer he again that i have none but what be for provision for our house. therefore i can sell he none of that, though he will give never so much. after that he fall a reason with we, where we lie a night, whether we lie below or above, upon the top of our warehouse, which have at that time but a shed upon it, i tell he, we lie sometime below and sometime above, according as we see occasion, but wheresoever we be, i tell he our dog lay always ready below the most part of they, and we have some above too. your dog, say he, which be they. then we point he first to one piece, then to a other, and indeed we most part of they, and we have some above too. your dog say he which be they. then we point he first to one piece, then to a other, and indeed we have a dozen stand very orderly, say he call you they dog. we tell he they will bark if occasion serve. after he have view our shot and our fortification, he depart. short after this man have a crew of two hundred man come from a town some seven mile of where he dwell, who in the night time come down the great river in prawe present, the alarm be give that the pangranes be up and will seize upon the king and the court which, after much hurly-burly, in the end prove nothing. these man. in prawe present, the alarm be give that the pangranes be up and will seize upon the king and the court which, after much hurly-burly, in the end prove nothing. these man, and likewise all the pangeanes man, keep, as the lord stanleys man do in king richard the three time. no man know which side they will take, but the king and all his part be in, exceed great fear of they and dare not trust they. wherefore they send for the king of iackatra to come with all speed and bring all the force he can make for they be almost assure that when they shall begin with this principal rebel, that all the rest of the pangeanes will join with they. all this while we he can make, for they be almost assure that when they shall begin with this principal rebel, that all the rest of the pangeanes will join with they. all this while we look for nothing but for throtecutting every night, and we count ourselves no better then dead man. only we make account to sell our life dear, and because we will be sure to be ready, we walk every night with our match light in our hat and also have our tuchbox and prune iron for ordinance in our hand. for if we shall have prune our piece, they will have cloy, and so have fail we, when we shall have need. neither have we powder to discharge they once in two or three day for so prune our piece, they will have cloy, and so have fail we when we shall have need. neither have we powder to discharge they once in two or three day, for so we may have want. we know well that if they come, it will be one the sudden and with such a cry will have run against our pale that we shall have have no time to light a match, nor yet have hear what one another say for their noise. neither can i forget what a foolish part the hollander play we in this dangerous and fearful time. it happen, one night, when we set our watch, one of my man put a shot in his piece and discharge it upright. the shot fall down in dangerous and fearful time it happen. one night when we set our watch, one of my man put a shot in his piece and discharge it upright. the shot fall down in one of the hollander out house through the thatch where be certain mallay which lie at their house at supper the mallaye as they say. but i do not believe they bring the shot to they and ask they if they can not live there secure from shot who, when they see it their principal merchant, cause six of their man to come up stair into their house and out of a window to shoot close over our yard. i be at that present walk alone in our yard and very much trouble in mind in stair into their house and out of a window to shoot close over our yard. i be at that present walk alone in our yard and very much trouble in mind, in so much that three of the shot be pass close over my head before i mind. they then hear more still which come very near i and be withal moonlight. i think that some rogue have get into a window and have make a mark at i, wherefore i step behind the corner of a house for many time walk there i have have stone throw at i and come with such violence that they have split out piece of board where they light miss i very narrow at this time when the hollander be in. stone throw at i and come with such violence that they have split out piece of board where they light miss i very narrow at this time when the hollander be in hand with their shot, their be certain thief that be break of a chynese house and be moonlight, as i say before also. the shot come over the thief head. they think that some body have shoot at they, wherefore they to go. likewise, at the very instant the owner of the house have espy they and get a crew together to pursue they. no soon be the last shot over my head, but i hear a most grievous cry and uproar come down the street towards our house as the chynese, if a polecat in no soon be the last shot over my head. but i hear a most grievous cry and uproar come down the street towards our house as the chynese, if a polecat in the night chance to come out of the wood among their hen, it be enough to make one hundred of they cry out as if there be one thousand man in arm against they. every one of we betake we to our weapon. very think that now they be come. who hourly, we expect and be glad that they come at such a time as we have every thing, so ready, the thief, after they be a little past our pale, care not for the chynese, but turn again and cry payyon, payyon, which be we. as we have every thing so ready, the thief, after they be a little past our pale, care not for the chynese, but turn again and cry payyon, payyon, which be, we be ready if you dare, whereby they bring the chynese to a stand right against our pale. we think all this, while they have, be our enemy. i have much ado to keep our man from shoot through the pale which, if they have, they have slay many of the townsman, anon, after we hear a chine that we know speak, so that then i think how the matter go, wherefore i bid one of my man shoot over the pale. the thief hear that, as stout as they be, take their heel, amain, and the i think, how the matter go, wherefore i bid one of my man shoot over the pale. the thief hear that, as stout as they be, take their heel, amain and the chynese after they, like a sort of hound which, when the fox turn again, dare not bark. now we wonder whence this six shot shall come. we know well that no javan can deliver six shot so orderly together. but after we understand it be the hollander, we blame they much for do so in such a dangerous time, although they mean we no hurt. the twentieth of october come in the king of jackatra with a crew of one thousand five hundred, fight man beside straggeler and have a thousand more come after he challenge. hurt. the twentieth of october come in the king of jackatra with a crew of one thousand five hundred fight man beside straggeler and have a thousand more come after he challenge the rebel and likewise all the pangeanes to fight with he and his company. only he have indeed a great quarrel against they all, for but a little before they fight mean to put he out of his kingdom, but now the rebel keep their fortification and will not come out. the six and twentieth of october, the king of jackatra and the admiral send for we to know if there be no mean to fire they a reasonable distance of out of the reach of their bace, of which they have a great number. we send for we to know if there be no mean to fire they a reasonable distance of out of the reach of their bace, of which they have a great number. we tell they, if there have be a ship in the road it may easy have be do, but for we to do it we think we shall hardly find thing wherewithal. the admiral ask i what thing we will have. i tell he camphor fault, peeter and brimstone, as for some thing we have already. the admiral say he will help we to all these and desire we we will help they also. he have a long bow and arrow fit for such a purpose, but i think a musket have be better. we be mind. these and desire we, we will help they also. he have a long bow and arrow fit for such a purpose, but i think a musket have be better. we be mind to have cause the king ordinance to have be plant and shoot red hot bullyt among they, which i think will have make work both with they and their thatch house and fortification make of cane. the principal rebel have seek all the mean he can to fire we. now we mean very to see if we can fire he. but whether it be for fear of the king of jackatra or hear we be about such a matter, the pangranes and the rebel both come to a agreement within two day after the which agreement for fear of the king of jackatra, or hear we be about such a matter? the pangranes and the rebel both come to a agreement within two day, after the which agreement be this: that the principal rebel shall, within six day, depart out of the king of bantams dominion, have with he only thirty of his household, the which he do for the space of ten day. we look every hour, both night and day, when the king force and the pangeanes will join battle, for they be both ready, but the javan be very loath to fight if they can choose. the reason they say be their wealth lie altogether in slave, so that if their slave be kill, they be beggar, wherefore they have always. loath to fight if they can choose the reason they say be their wealth lie altogether in slave, so that if their slave be kill they be beggar, wherefore they have always rather come to a sea feast than a pitch battle. in this time of trouble, what with overwatch and with sudden wake out of our sleep, we be continual in fear of our life. some of our man be distract of their wit, especial one who sometime in the night will fall into such a frantic rage that two or three of his fellow can hardly keep he in his bed. neither can he tell in the morning that he be any such man. i will not wish a more forward man in any time of can hardly keep he in his bed, neither can he tell in the morning that he be any such man. i will not wish a more forward man in any time of danger than he be when he be in his perfect sense. but it be a great vexation to the stout man that be to be much break of his sleep. and when he do sleep in such fear of his life as we do there, a long time short after his departure the king of jackatra also depart. who promise we that if there shall ever come english ship or pinnys thither they shall be very kind use we be very much behold to he, for in these trouble we be one day talk with the shall ever come english ship or pinnys thither. they shall be very kind use we be. very much. behold to he, for in these trouble we be. one day talk with the admiral and he we ask they if they think the pangeans will join with the rebel, who answer they will, and that they be a sort of beggarly poor man and will seek the spoil of all such merchant as we which come thither to trade. and the admiral say that if we have not have a strong house and keep especial good watch, they will have cut our throat long ago. the king bid we keep good watch, still promise that if they come to molest we in that time or while he be in. they will have cut our throat long ago. the king bid we keep good watch, still promise that if they come to molest we in that time or while he be in town, he will come himself and all his force to our aid. the town be now somewhat at peace, without brawl or fear of war. as for blow, i know not one be give before we send prawe for timber and begin to build our house again, which shall never have be for i, but that we fear our ship will have some weak man in they, and if we shall not have have lodging for all sort, it will have go worse with they than it do. and notwithstanding, we do our best in that. man in they, and if we shall not have have lodging for all sort, it will have go worse with they than it do. and notwithstanding we do our best in that matter, we find all to be little enough for their preservation. the three of november come in the sun from tarnata, be lade with clove, which stay here twenty day and then depart for holland. the seventeen day of november, which we take to be our coronation day and have all our piece and chamber lie lade since the trouble, we invite the hollander to dinner, in the middle of which we drink a health to our queen and also shoot off all our odinance so that the like peel be never shoot within the town. to dinner, in the middle of which we drink a health to our queen and also shoot off all our odinance so that the like peel be never shoot within the town and the people say we have parrot or monkey that give fire to some piece, for they think it have be unpossible for so few man to keep such a stir as we do. what between our small shot and our great, indeed our queen be dead long before? although we know it not yet, god be thank. we lose not our labour. sith, god have send we both a king and a queen too, and here it be not fit. i shall omit one thing, and yet to make relation of it, some may think god have send we both a king and a queen too, and here it be not fit. i shall omit one thing, and yet to make relation of it. some may think i do it of a vain glory to myself and those that be with i. but if any do so think, in this or in any other matter which i have write, they shall do i great wrong. for it be well know to some man of account that if it have not be by their procurement, these discourse shall never have be write, nor a number of they never once be speak off by i. now to the matter. there be that resort to this town of bantan a number of many nation of which nor a number of they never once be speak off by i. now to the matter. there be that resort to this town of bantan a number of many nation, of which diverse of they be liedger. these people have hear much fame of the english nation in time past, before ever they see any of. we have a especial eye to our carriage and behaviour and we be grow a common admiration amongst they all that we, be so few, shall carry such a port, as we do never put up the least wrong that be offer, either by javan or chynese, but always do justice our own self, and when the protector do wrong, we himself. it be know that we do not spare to tell. be offer either by javan or chynese, but always do justice our own self, and when the protector do wrong, we himself. it be know that we do not spare to tell he of it sound and in such sort that he want very much of his will. it be well, know also that at the first come of our ship, the javan offer we much wrong in purloin our good, but so many as we take be either slay, wound or sound beat the javan think we dare not do so when our ship be go, wherefore they do practice to steal both day and night, but they find it all one the which they do admire at. for it be most certain, and i have hear go, wherefore they do practice to steal both day and night, but they find it all one the which they do admire at. for it be most certain- and i have hear many stranger speak it that have be present- when we have beat some javan that they never know, not hear of any nation, but we that be liedger there that dare once strike a javan in bantan, and it be a common talk among all stranger and other how we stand at defiance with those that hate we for our good and how little we care for they never offer any the jest wrong to the mean in the town and receive from the better sort a commendation before the hollander or any other nation and we care for. they never offer any the jest wrong to the mean in the town and receive from the better sort a commendation before the hollander or any other nation, and it will be a thing, general talk off in all part of the world what different carriage we have be of, when it be likely there will be no english there. now, every day the hollander look for their ship, have little pepper nor know where to buy any, for that the chynese will rather deal with. we give as much as they than they, and which be more when our rial be go. they give we credit till the arrival of our ship, which be uncertain to we when they may have have ready money. they and which be more when our rial be go. they give we credit till the arrival of our ship, which be uncertain to we, when they may have have ready money and thanks of the hollander in the begin of the last harvest the hollander perceive they shall get little pepper. be very importunate with we to share all the pepper we buy between we in equal half, so that they will have receive the one half of our debt which we know to be all sure, except some small driblet. give we rial and we shall have receive the one half of their debt which be owe for the most part by javan and great man too, so that god know when they will be pay. we shall have receive the one half of their debt, which be owe for the most part by javan, and great man too, so that god know when they will be pay, and to have give they ryalls for so much, as we shall have receive also, what pepper we have buy for cloth, they will have have the one half, and what they have buy for money, we shall have have the one half. their reason, which be very good, be to keep down the price to which, if i have consent, we have have little lade against. i expect our ship we have what by debt, what by sale, five sack for their one. they have owe they as much as we, but we know it. little lade against. i expect our ship we have what by debt, what by sale, five sack for their one they have owe they as much as we, but we know it to be in such man hand as will be long a pay. short. after that they begin to work with the protector as i have before rehearse, at which time they deliver so many ryall into his hand. aa will not be pay, they again in haste about this present time, the emperor of damacke, who not many year before for tyranny have be depose by the king thereabouts, go by sea from bantam to a other town upon that coast, be by one of his own son stab in his bed, sleep all november and depose by the king thereabouts, go by sea from bantam to a other town upon that coast, be by one of his own son, stab in his bed, sleep. all november and the beginning of december we be busy both in building and get in and make clean of pepper. the fourteen day of december come in a dutch pinny which tell we of the death of the late queen elizabeth and of the great plague and sickness that have be over all, all christendom, the which strike more terror into our mind than all the trouble we have pass. but they can tell no news of our shppe, which cause we much to doubt. only they tell we the king of scot be crown and that our trouble we have pass. but they can tell no news of our shppe, which cause we much to doubt. only they tell we the king of scot be crown and that our land be in peace, which be exceed great comfort unto we. also, they tell we of the peace which be likely to be betwixt england and spain, the which we be sorry for because we see what good purchase the hollander get in those part and we always hope to have the like when our ship shall come the twenty day of december. come in all the dutch fleet. and because we hear of no letter, for we in the piany i make have and go aboard the dutch admiral to bid he welcome, also to in all the dutch fleet and because we hear of no letter, for we in the piany i make have and go aboard the dutch admiral to bid he welcome, also to inquire for letter the which we find in the vice admiral, the two and twenty day of december, by mean of some of our friend vn-ietee that be the principal that undermine our house, be descry and take have, be long in the mountain and for want of food be force to repair to certain house near the town, from whence he be bring to the rich chynas house. so soon as i hear of he i send master towerson to the protector to certify he of it and withal to tell he we will short. to the rich chynas house. so soon as i hear of he, i send master towerson to the protector to certify he of it and withal to tell he we will short execute he. for since the time that this mischief happen i never go out of sight of our house myself, but once, until our ship come in the, which be when the protector cross we so much that then i be constrain and my fear be so great that i think all will be burn before i shall come back again. likewise, three time every week i use to search all the chynese house round about we, for fear of more undermine. the same day, towards evening, we descry our ship, come into the road to every week i use to search all the chynese house round about we, for fear of more undermine. the same day, towards evening we descry our ship, come into the road to all our extraordinary great joy. but when we come aboard of our admiral and see their weakness also hear of the weakness of the other three ship, it grieve. we much know that bantan be not a place to recover man that be sick but rather to kill man that come thither in health. at my first come aboard i find out general captain henry middleton, very sickly and weak, to who i make relation. in brief, what trouble we have pass. also i certify he that neverthesse we have lade ready for two ship which henry middleton, very sickly and weak, to who i make relation. in brief, what trouble we have pass. also i certify he that neverthesse we have lade ready for two ship which be some content unto his mind, which be very much grieve for the weakness of his man. they have hardly fifty sound man in their four ship, and of the sick man a number die. also, those that come thither in health, many never go out of the road. the four and twenty day our vice-admiral captain coulthirst come a shore with some other merchant, on which day we execute this villain which we have late take, but it be happy for he. we have other business to go about, otherwise he shall have die nothing. merchant, on which day we execute this villain, which we have late take. but it be happy for he. we have other business to go about, otherwise he shall have die nothing so easy a death as he do. after who execution? we think ourselves reasonable, well, satisfy for the trouble and misery they have put, we too, for now we have slay the four principal and one more be kill for steal of a woman. as i have before write at my come away, there remain four alive, of the which two be at jackatra, one with mandelicko the traitor and one with caysanapatty lama, the which we can not as they come by, but i doubt not. but master towerson will do his best to get. one with mandelicko the traitor and one with caysanapatty lama, the which we can not as they come by, but i doubt not. but master towerson will do his best to get they hereafter, for he and i both, if we live this hundred year, shall never forget the extreme horror and trouble they bring we. to the same day, our vice admiral be accompany with we that have be resident there before, and also some other of the new merchant, go to the court to certify the king that our general have letter from the king of england with a present for he and more to tell he, our general be weary, have be long upon the sea and so soon as he be a little refresh. king of england with a present for he and more, to tell he our general be weary, have be long upon the sea and so soon as he be a little refresh he will come himself to see he and also to deliver the letter and present. the five and twenty day be christmas day, we dine aboard with our general, but i shall have speak before of a counsel that be hold on sunday, be the 23 day, wherein it be think of all that the dragon and the ascension be fit to go for the mulluckoes, for diverse reason which need not here be rehearse, and the hector and susan to load pepper and to be despee home, and the same week after we be busy. the mulluckoes for diverse reason, which need not here be rehearse, and the hector and susan to load pepper and to be despee home. and the same week, after we be busy in get of fresh victual herb, fruit and flower for the recovery of our man, which be most pitiful, pay with the scurvy on sunday follow. being the thirty day of december, our general invite the dutch admiral to a feast where all the hollander take the licker so well that they be sick on it most part of the week, follow by their own confession. and whereas they purpose to set sail on the monday for the mulluckoes, what by mean they be ill at ease, and also that the dutch admiral will bid our own confession, and whereas they purpose to set sail on the monday for the mulluckoes, what by mean they be ill at ease and also that the dutch admiral will bid our general again they stay until the monday after, so that by this mean we get a week time of they which fall out great to our general advantage at the mulluckoes, as i have hear by all that i have talk within our ship. monday be the 31. day. our general come a shore and be accompany with all the merchant that be in health and diverse other. he go to the court and deliver the king letter and present the which be as follow: one fair basin and ewer, two fair stand cup, all parsell. health and diverse other. he go to the court and deliver the king letter and present the which be as follow: one fair basin and ewer, two fair stand cup, all parsell gilt, one gild spoon and six musket with their furniture. the which be kind receive, a day or two after our general spend in, visit our chief friend as the sabyndar, the admiral, the rich chynee, and also give they present who, very thankful, receive they. thursday be the three of januarie, the dutch admiral invite our general and all his merchant to dinner where the hollander, as it be ever their order at a feast, take in their drink sound, or else it be no feast with they, and true, we want none but it. where the hollander, as it be ever their order at a feast, take in their drink sound, or else it be no feast with they, and true we want none. but it be not our country fashion to pour it in after that abundant manner as they will. after this day we fall all to work, both a shore and aboard, to pack up and take good for the mulluckoes, but after our man be a little recover of the scurvy, the flux, take they so that we continue, still very weak in man, in so much that it be unpossible in man judgement that ever we shall be able to accomplish our business in that manner as god be. thank it be who sure hear the prayer. much that it be unpossible in man judgement that ever we shall be able to accomplish our business in that manner as god be. thank it be, who sure hear the prayer of some, both in england and also amongst we, and look down in mercy upon our weakness, do raise we up again. on monday, be the seven of januarie, the dutch fleet, be nine tall ship beside pinnyss and stoop, set sail for amboy^a and the mulluckoes, so that we rest very doubtful a long time whether our ship shall get any lade in those part that year by reason of their number of ship which be go before we. neither can our ship possible go soon by mean of our weakness. the ten of januarie. those part that year, by reason of their number of ship which be go before we, neither can our ship possible go soon by mean of our weakness. the ten of januarie, the ship that be bind home begin to take in pepper, but they be so oppress with sickness that they can make no dispatch. our 2 ship set sail for banda and the mulluckoes, the eighteen day, our ship have take in all the good which we think meet for these part, set sail for the land of banda, have their man, for the most part extreme, weak and sickly, but how they spend their time until their return to bantan, i must refer to their own report present after the departure of these ship, the most part extreme, weak and sickly, but how they spend their time until their return to bantan, i must refer to their own report present. after the departure of these ship, the protector send unto we to agree about custom, the which we have think we have know since our first ship depart, but he ask many duty which we never hear of before. and because i will not grant to pay they, he command the porter. they shall carry no pepper. wherefore to prevent this shall not be a hindrance to we in lade our ship, for we have hindrance enough beside, i be force to agree with he to pay in hand, according to that ^ate as our ship pay before, and to let the full ship, for we have hindrance enough beside. i be force to agree with he to pay in hand according to that ^ate, as our ship pay before, and to let the full agreement rest until the return of our general. and he think he do we great kindness herein. it please, god, to take away the two master of these two ship which we be now: a lade, samuel spencer, master of the hector, and abakkuk pery, master of the susan. also william smith, the principal master, m^te o^ the hector and m^ny other of their principal man, with a number of their ordinary sailor, so that we be not only constrain to hire man to do they all the ease we can there, but likewise to hire. principal man with a number of their ordinary sailor, so that we be not only constrain to hire man to do they all the ease we can there, but likewise to hire so many as we can get of goossaratt^ and chyneses to help bring home our ship. all which have be to our exceed, great trouble, cost and charge. the one and thirty of march die anthony simkyns. the four of february die master hogsam, merchant. with much turmoil we get they both lade by the sixteenth of february the depar^ture of the hector and the susan, but it be the four of march before they can make their ship ready to set sail. some two or three day before which time die captain roger stiles, who the susan, but it be the four of march before they can make their ship ready to set sail, some two or three day before which time die captain roger stiles, who be not likely to live when our general depart, wherefore doubt he. he give order that captain william keelin^, who he leave there shall succeed, he in place, if god call he, which otherwise shall have remain there until his return, if not after. likewise, he appoint master edward hyghlord for commander of the susan. also, he leave master surfly^, the doctor of physic and preacher, to go home in the hector. more, he leave twenty four of all sort for the house, whereof many be sick and never recover, the four of march, as before. and preacher to go home in the hector more he leave twenty four of all sort for the house, whereof many be sick and never recover. the four of march, as before i have say, the hector and susan set sail for england. the hector have sixty three person in she of all sort, english and other, but many of her own man be sick. the susan, so never as i can learn, have forty seven of all sort, also many englishman sick. i pray god send we good news of she. william crane be master of the hector and richard hackins master of the susan. by reason of contrary wind they be force to come to a anchor under a island until the six at night when of the hector and richard hackins, master of the susan. by reason of contrary wind they be force to come to a anchor under a island until the six at night when they set sail again to the water place unto the, which the hollander, very kind, lend they a pilot and also seven or eight man more to help they to water present. after the departure of these ship the hollander buy up all the pepper they can, and i think our ship will want most part of their lade which be go to the east-ward also, buy so much old pepper as i can and likewise put forth money to be pay in new pepper. the harvest follow, for pepper now be scarce in bantam by. east-ward also buy so much old pepper as i can and likewise put forth money to be pay in new pepper. the harvest follow, for pepper now be scarce in bantam. by reason the hollander have man in every place that yield pepper, so that the ship of those part which be wont to bring it to bantam now do not come. the ten day i send a praw to the water place with some rice which they want for their stranger. the twenty of march, die thomas smith, anno 1605. the five and twentieth day, die thomas keyling. now we look every hour for the hector boat which shall be leave at bantam, wherein be many of our own man belong to our house and also of die thomas keyling. now we look every hour for the hector boat which shall be leave at bantam, wherein be many of our own man belong to our house, and also of the hollander man which be all go to help our ship to water. we look for this boat within ten day after our ship depart from bantam, but we hear no n^wes of they in four and twenty day after, wherefore we think some mischance have befall they. the hollander that be with they will needs have they keep upon sumatra side in their return from the ship, where run such a currant against they that they can get nothing a head. after they perceive they can do no good, they cross all the strait of return from the ship where run such a currant against they that they can get nothing a head after they perceive they can do no good. they cross all the strait of sonda to the cost of java. where go a shore to buy victual. they be very kind use of the people upon that cost. the six and twentieth of march: we send a prawe to inquire along the cost for such a boat who hear in every place where they come that they be go past. they return and god be thank our boat and man be come in a day before they. the eight and twentieth day: die ralph far^^l. the hollander bind for cambey. the six of april: die william wingfield. the eighteen day: and man be come in a day before they. the eight and twentieth day die ralph far^^l, the hollander, bind for cambey. the six of april die william wingfield. the eighteen day die alexander travel. the nine and twentieth day die georg mountney. the thirty day die william wheelar, goldsmith. the six of may come in a ship from holland who have come all along by the cost of goa and meet there with two ship more of holland which be bind out for cambaya, 4 portugal ship. take they three have take four portingal^ ship wherein they find great riches, only one of they be lade, with great horse which they set one fire and consume both ship and horse. this ship come out of holland in. wherein they find great riches, only one of. they be lade with great horse, which they set one fire and consume both ship and horse. this ship come out of holland in june 1604, but they can certify we of no further news than our ship have do. now i must speak somewhat of the manner and order of the king circumcision and of the triumph that be hold there every day for the space of a month and more before his go to church, whereby all the better sort of the people of that country have be buisy from the time of the come in of the chyna funk, which be in february, triumph at the circumcision of the young prince of bantam and march, until the have be buisy, from the time of the come in of the chyna funk, which be in february, triumph at the circumcision of the young prince of bantam, and march, until the four and twentieth of june, about make preparation for the same. the first of june die one of our man, georg hart. but now to my matter. there be a great pageant, make the forepart of which be in likeness of a huge devil. upon this pageant be set three chair of estate, the middlemost be for the king, which be place high than the other by some two foot. on either of his hand be place the son of pangran goban, who be heir apparent to the crown. if the king shall die without issue, the other by some two foot. on either of his hand be place the son of pangran goban, who be heir apparent to the crown. if the king shall die without issue, this pageant be place, one a green, before the court gate and rail in round about the manner of their country, be that when any king come new to the crown or at the circumcision of their king, all that be of ability must give the king a present, the which they must present in open manner, with the great show they be able to make, and those that be not able to do it of themselves do join a company of they together and so perform it both stranger and other, about the five and to make, and those that be not able to do it of themselves do join a company of they together and so perform it both stranger and other. about the five and twentieth of june, those show begin and continue all that month and the next, except certain rainy day. the protector begin the first day and every noble man and other have their day, not as they be in birth but in readiness, and sometime two and three company in a day. because the javan have no good shot, the protector borrow shoot both of we and the hollander, but when they come to set forth there be a great strife between our man and the hollander who shall go before? they will by no mean go. we and the hollander, but when they come to set forth, there be a great strife between our man and the hollander. who shall go before. they will by no mean go behind our man, neither will our man go behind they. they be proud because they be many more in number, and our man be proud because they have much gay apparel, for they be all in their silk suit, have scarf and hat band of their country colour, which make a very fair show, and they have on their tardd coat greasey thrum cap, and those that have shirt on they hang out between their leg, whereby it appear that pride consist not in apparel altogether, but in mind. the hollander will go foremost, but our and those that have shirt on, they hang out between their leg, whereby it appear that pride consist not in apparel altogether but in mind. the hollander will go foremost, but our man will not go after they but go in the rearward after the javan- but when i hear of it i wish they have have wit to come home every morning. the king guard, which be both of shot and pike, be place without the rail round about. the pageant be common in number, about 300.. man, but some principal day of show there be upward of 600.. the which be place in file according to our martial discipline. but in march we do much differ, for whereas we common march three, five, seven or nine, be upward of 600.. the which be place in file according to our martial discipline. but in march we do much differ, for whereas we common march three, five, seven or nine, they never go but one, and so follow one another so close as they can bear their pike upright. as for shot, they have not be use unto their drum, be huge pan, make of a mettle, call tombago, which make a most hellish sound. they have also their colour and company suitable. but their standard and ensign be not like we. their ensign staff be very high, bend compass at the top like the end of a long bow, but the colour on it be hardly a yard in breadth, hang down from the top. staff be very high, bend compass at the top like the end of a long bow, but the colour on it be hardly a yard in breadth. hang down from the top with a long, the first day being the great day of show. there be certain fort make of cane and other trash, set up before the king pageant, wherein be certain company of javan place to defend they and other company be appoint to assault they and many time the assaultant will fire they. now a word or two in what manner the king be bring out every day and what show be present before he. always, a little afore the show come, the king be bring out upon a man shoulder, bestride his neck and be bring out every day and what show be present before he. always a little afore the show come, the king be bring out upon a man shoulder, bestride his neck and the man hold his leg before he and have many rich treasure carry over and round about he. but i shall have speak before of his principal guard that come out before he and be place in the rail round about the pageant. after the king come out, a number of the principal of the land which give their attendance upon the king and as it shall seem they have their day and time, appoint they the show that be bring come in this manner: first a crew of shot be lead by some gentleman slave. as it shall seem. they have their day and time, appoint they the show that be bring come in this manner: first a crew of shot be lead by some gentleman slave. after, follow the pike, in the middle of which be carry their colour and also the music, which be ten or twelve pan of tombaga carry upon a coulstaffe between two. these be tunable, and every one a note above another. always two go by, they which be skilful in their country music and play on. they have thing in their hand, of purpose to strike they also. they have other kind of music which go both afore and after, but these pan be the principal. after the pike, follow a crew of targetter with dart. to strike they also. they have other kind of music which go both afore and after, but these pan be the principal. after the pike follow a crew of targetter with dart than be bring in many sort of tree with their fruit grow upon. they then follow many sort of beast and fowl, both alive and also so artificial. make that except one have be near they be not to be discern from those that be alive. after this follow a crew attire like masker which before the king do dance vault and show many strange kind of tumble trick. of these there be both man and woman. after all. these follow sometime two hundred, sometime three hundred, woman all carry present only at every ten woman. strange kind of tumble trick. of these there be both man and woman, after all. these follow sometime two hundred, sometime three hundred woman all carry present. only at every ten woman there go one old, motherly woman, soldier, to keep they in order which carry nothing. these present be of rice and cash, the which be lay in frame, make of split cane, curious, set out for show with paint and gild paper, but the present itself be not common, worth above twelve penny or thereabouts. after they follow their rich present which be common, a fair tuck and some fair cloth of their own country fashion, be curious, wrought and g^lded or embroider with gold for the king own wear, the which be carry also by a fair tuck and some fair cloth of their own country fashion. be curious, wrought and g^lded or embroider with gold for the king own. wear the which be carry also by woman. have two pike bear upright before they. also, every present which be for the king wear, have a rich tier also bear over it. last of all, follow the heir to that party which send the present which be their young son if they have any. be very rich, attire after the country manner with many jewel about their arm and middle of gold, diamond, rubis and other stone. have also rich treasure bear over they. a number of man and woman attend on they. after he have do his obeisance to the king, he gold, diamond, rubis and other stone have also rich treasure. bear over they a number of man and woman attend on they. after he have do his obeisance to the king, he sit down upon a mat, be lay upon the ground, which be their order in general. the present be all bear by the king pageant into the court where there be some officer appoint to receive they. after all which pass one within the king pageant, speak out of the devil mouth and command silence in the king name. then begin the chief of the revel and music and now and then the shot discharge a volley. also the pikeman and targetter with dart do show all there feat of arm the shot be very unskilful. the revel and music, and now and then the shot discharge a volley. also the pikeman and targetter with dart do show all there feat of arm, the shot be very unskilful but the pike and target be very expert. and always when they come to charge their enemy they come towards he dance because his adversary shall have no steady aim to throw his dart or make a thrust at he. likewise, among some of these show there come in junke sail, artificial make be, load with cash and rice. also in these be signification of historical matter of former time, both of the old testament and of chronicle matter of the country and king of java. all these invention the javan have be teach in former. of historical matter of former time, both of the old testament and of chronicle matter of the country and king of java. all these invention the javan have be teach in former time by the chynese, or at lest the most part of they, for they themselves be but blocke-head, and some they have learn by gossarat, turk and other nation which come thither to trade among all other. we be to make a show the best we can. the which must be understand, can not be great by reason of our small number. yet it be pretty and such as they have not see the like before. the manner whereof i will declare we buy a very fair poungarnet tree, be full of fruit. grow on it. be pretty and such as they have not see the like before, the manner whereof i will declare. we buy a very fair poungarnet tree, be full of fruit, grow on it, both ripe and half ripe, some young and some bud. this tree we dig up by the root, which we set in a frame, be make of r^tanes or carrack riches, somewhat like a bird cage, but very wide. at the root of this tree we place earth and upon that green turf so that it stand as i^ it have be still grow. upon these turf we put three siluer-heard c^nnyes, which our advise admiral have give i, and at the top and round about upon the bow, we with ^hride make fast a number. upon these turf we put three siluer-heard c^nnyes, which our advise admiral, have give i, and at the top and round about upon the bow, we with ^hride make fast a number of small bird which will ever be ch^rping. see that the tree, be as it have be, grow pretty strange beast the like whereof they have never see, feed about it, full of fair fruit, and bird ^erily sing on the top. likewise we have four very furious serpent which the chin^ses there can make artificial. upon these we hang the cloth which be for the king one wear, which be piece curious, wrought and g^lded after their fashion, some other piece of stuffe, their be also, which be for the king to bestow upon some. for the king, one wear which be piece curious, wrought and g^lded after their fashion. some other piece of stuffe, their be also, which be for the king to bestow upon some mean of his follower. more we give he one fair petronell damask, a case of pistol damask with very fair case. several belong to they, the which have great silk string with tassel of gould. now we have no woman to carry these thing, wherefore we borrow thirty of the pretty boy we can get, and also two proper tall javan to bear pike, before they, master towerson, have a very pretty boy, a chine son who father be a little before slay by theive. this youth we attire as gallant as the king who we before they, master towerson, have a very pretty boy, a chine son, who father be a little before slay by theive. this youth we attire as gallant as the king, who we send to present these thing and to make a speech to he signify that if our number have be equal to our good will, we will have present his majesty with a far better show than we do with many other. compliment. upon the 14. of july we send these thing to the court in this manner: foremost go a trumpeter than ten musketeer, all very well furnish with their country colour, after which go four porter bear the tree than follow the two pikeman, after who go the boy that bear the petronel and pistol. all very well furnish with their country colour. after which go four porter, bear the tree than follow the two pikeman, after who go the boy that bear the petronel and pistol. next the boy that bear the serpent with the king cloth over, which be rich treasure, bear according to the order. last follow the youth which shall present they who have also a rich canopy bear over he. likewise seven boy of his bigness in suitable livery, attend on he beside diverse other of his scholefellowe which follow he for good will the king and diverse other about he take great delight in the coney also our man carry some firework with they which be very delightful to the young king and his playfellow. but the and diverse other about. he take great delight in the coney. also, our man carry some firework with they which be very delightful to the young king and his playfellow. but the woman cry out for fear they will set the court on. she and some of the chief command to fire no more. but augustine spalden, our interpreter, be a bold youth, say that if the king bid he he will fire more, whatsoever they say, then the king bring they into a brick castle which be very dark, where they fire all they have and make the king and all his train very good sport. now a word or two of the king of jackatra who the 18 of july come to present his show before and make the king and all his train very good sport. now a word or two of the king of jackatra who the 18 of july come to present his show before the king of bantan, also to give his present and to do his homage, the which be perform the 23. day in this manner: in the morning early the king of bantans guard, which be on this day a extraordianry number, be place in file, their pike set upright in the ground and their shot lie in order. every man sit by his arm, be clothe in red coat. about eight a clock, myself with some other of our merchant and man go to see this show and take up our stand near the king pageant. be clothe in red coat about eight a clock, myself with some other of our merchant and man go to see this show and take up our stand near the king pageant. the king guard will often bid we sit down, but we will answer they. they must first bring we a form for indeed there be no nation suffer to stand in the king or any great man presence if they be near they. but we and the hollander we be command by the officer to sit down as well as the rest. but we be to stout, know they have no such commission to stoop under thire yoke. but for other nation they will bring they if they refuse, although the ground and place where they be to stout, know they have no such commission to stoop under thire yoke. but for other nation they will bring they if they refuse, although the ground and place where they shall sit be never so dirty. but the javan who can endure to have any stand over. they will remove a good distance from we, and many of the king guard forsake their weapon and will go sit a far off. neither can they endure that one shall lay his hand on their head, the which be not for any point of religion, as some will affirm, but only of mere pride. many time when i have come into a chyness house where javan have sit in the floor, i sit down on a chest as some will affirm, but only of mere pride. many time when i have come into a chyness house where javan have sit in the floor, i sit down on a chest as our order be. they have all start up and run out at door. the chynese will tell we if any nation shall do so, but we or the hollander, they will stab they. but they dare not meddle with we. but now to my former matter about nine a clock, the king be bring out in the same manner as i before have mention. some two hour after the king of jackatra come have a guard of some one hundred person about he. so soon as ever he come in sight. the king guard all rise. some two hour after the king of jackatra come, have a guard of some one hundred person about he. so soon as ever he come in sight, the king guard all rise up and every man prove his weapon, the which we have never see before when any show come in, so that it shall seem that there be great fear. not that the king of jackatra will offer any violence, but there be a number of other petty king who have great troop of man, the which king be his mortal enemy, wherefore fear they may rise against he. we plain perceive the king of bantams guard have their charge to be ready to defend the king of of jackatra if such a matter shall happen when. may rise against he. we plain perceive the king of bantams guard have their charge to be ready to defend the king of of jackatra if such a matter shall happen. when he come near the innermost file of the king guard, he can not pass to the king, but he must needs go through a rank of these petty king who he know do most deadly hate. he wherefore fear the cowardly stab which be use among that nation, he begin to look very ghastly and wild on it, although he be as stout a man as any be in all those part, pass they. he will not but sit down upon a leather that be lay on the ground, the which every gentleman have carry after. man as any be in all those part pass they. he will not but sit down upon a leather that be lay on the ground, the which every gentleman have carry after he for the purpose. so soon as he be set, he send to the king to know if it be his pleasure, he shall come unto he. whereupon the king send two of the principal noble man about he to conduct he to his presence who, after the king of jackatra, have do his obeisance the young king, embrace he and welcome he, according to the country order. after this be past, the king of jackatra sit down in a place appoint for he. all this while there be some other pretty show present about twelve. to the country order. after this be past, the king of jackatra sit down in a place appoint for he. all this while there be some other pretty show present. about twelve a clock come his show. in presence, the soldier, about 300.. in number than follow so many woman with cash and strange fowl, both alive and artificial. likewise, there be bring in many strange beast, both alive and also artificial, among which be one furious beast call by they a matchan. this beast be somewhat big than a lion and very princely to behold. if he be at liberty. he be spot white and red, have many black stroke which come down from the reins of his back under his belly. i have see one of if he be at liberty he be spot white and red, have many black stroke which come down from the reins of his back under his belly. i have see one of. they jump at the least eighteen foot by many man estimation for his prey. they do kill many people near the town of bantan and many time the king and all the country go a hunt of they, not only in the daytime but in the night. this matchan which i now speak of be in a great cage of wood which be place upon trucke of old carriage and be draw in with buffel. he lay for all the world like a traitor on a hurdel there be draw in in like manner a huge upon trucke of old carriage and be draw in with buffel. he lay for all the world like a traitor on a hurdel. there be draw in in like manner a huge giant which by our estimation may be some three hundred foot in height. also a devil, come in in like order more there be draw in a garden, have many sort of herb and flower in it, in the middle of which garden be a fish pond wherein be diverse sort of small fish and all sort of fish which they do know in those part, be bring in either alive or artificial make. among these thing come in many masker, vauters, tumbler, the which be very strange and savage-like attire, which do dance and show those part be. bring in either alive or artificial make. among these thing, come in many masker, vauters, tumbler, the, which be very strange and savage-like attire, which do dance and show many strange feat before the king there be. draw in likewise a very fair bedstead, whereon be a fair quilt bed, also twelve bolster and pillow of silk embroider with gold at the end, the post of the bedstead be very curious. carve and gild with a fair canopy wreak with gold. a number of other pretty toy be. bring in and present of the which i neither do nor can take view of, but only of the principal. last of all, come in his young son, ride in a chariot that it be draw with. the which i neither do nor can take view of, but only of the principal, last of all, come in his young son ride in a chariot that it be draw with buffele, which i think be very unseemly in deed. they have but few horse, the which be small- nag, i never see any of they put to draw, but only to ride on and to run a little after the barbarey fashion, as i have hear some barbarey merchant say, the which exercise they use every saturday towards evening, except in the time of lent, which be a little before we, the second day after this show be present be friday and the sabbath, the king be carry in his pageant to church where he be. lent, which be a little before we the second day after this show be present be friday and the sabbath. the king be carry in his pageant to church where he be circumcise. his pageant be bear by many man. it be report to i by the king, nurse 400.. but i think she lie, for i think there can not stand so many under it. the 24. of july our general come into the road from tarnata. so soon as we discern the ship and see it be the dragon, i take a praw and go aboard to bid he welcome, who declare to i the danger they have pass and somewhat of the unkindness of the hollander, although he have save some of their life and go aboard to bid. he welcome who declare to i the danger they have pass and somewhat of the unkindness of the hollander, although he have save some of their life and that, though with great pain and travel, he have get a good quantity of clove towards his lade, wherefore, after thanks to god for his safe return, with the news of the moluccas, which i will leave to the report of those that be there, certify ou^ general that i doubt not to provide he of the rest of his lade. the 24. day come in the great enchusen of holland from tarnata and the king of jacatra come to see our general. the 11. of august come in two ship from cambaia who have take come in the great enchusen of holland from tarnata and the king of jacatra come to see our general the 11. of august. come in two ship from cambaia who have take great wealth from the portugese. the same day come in one ship from tarnata the 16. day. come in the ascension from banda. the 8. of september the dutch merchant invite out general and all his merchant and master to a feast where there be great cheer and also great friendship be make between we. the 15. day of september two dutch ship set sail for holland. the one be a small ship which have lade pepper at bantan, the other have take in some clove at tarnata. the rest of her lade be of prize. sail for holland. the one be a small ship which have lade pepper at bantan. the other have take in some clove at tarnata. the rest of her lade be of prize good which be take out of the ship which come from cambaia the 21. day come in the dutch admiral from banda. the 22. day our general send some of his merchant to the dutch house to bid he welcome. i must not leave out one matter which happen since the come in of the ascension from banda, the which be this: there be certain javan which belong unto two of the principal man of that land, next unto the king, who have steal nine musket and caliver out of the assention goner room short after. certain javan which belong unto two of the principal man of that land, next unto the king, who have steal nine, musket and caliver out of the assention goner room short after two of they come to steal more be take by our people with the manner our general send i aboard to examine they and to bring they ashore. they first tell i they belong to great man which be our very good friend but i mistrust they do dissemble with. i bid they confess the truth and they shall find some favour than they confess true who slave they be, and say the piece be forth come. after they come ashore, our general send the king and the protector word of it and desire he may. confess true, who slave they be, and say the piece be forth. come after they come ashore. our general send the king and the protector word of it and desire he may have his piece again. the protector send to the master of these two slave, for they, but they love the piece better than their man, say they have no piece but what they have buy with their money. yet they send to our general to desire he to defer their execution for a day or two, the which be grant. but because the master be no great good willer to the king, the protector in the king name send the executioner to put they to death with a guard of pike when they come to the be no great good willer to the king. the protector in the king name send the executioner to put they to death with a guard of pike. when they come to the place of execution our general take pity of they will have, give they their life. but the hangman say their life be in the king hand and not in our general, wherefore, because the king have send he, he will execute they and therewithal be go to do his office. i see he so forward, step to he and wunge his cryse out of his hand. in the mean time, master towerson ask the rich chine, which be there with diverse other, if our general may not pardon they, if he please, the rich chine with his hand. in the mean time, master towerson ask the rich chine, which be there with diverse other, if our general may not pardon they, if he please. the rich chine, with a very frown countenance, answer with these word: bree, any one, orybb, mackan, taye, bree, edup, the english of which word, for manner sake, i will omit- present after this same fatal officer dispatch what he come for, which the two thief very pasient suffer, as the manor of all that nation be when they be bind to it, they do hold it the great glory that can be to die resolute, without any show of fear, and sure so they do, in as careless manner as it be possible for flesh and blood, the experience. great glory that can be to die resolute, without any show of fear, and sure so they do, in as careless manner as it be possible for flesh and blood, the experience of which i have see by diverse, both man and woman. one will think these man shall be good soldier, but it be not. so their valour be. but when there be no remedy against the people of those part of the world, they be reasonable, tall man, but they dare not meddle with christian, except they have some exceed great advantage of number or other mean. the 26. day of september. by mean of a javan shut, of a piece, the town be set on fire, but by reason. we have good help of our or other mean the 26. day of september. by mean of a javan shut, of a piece, the town be set on fire, but by reason. we have good help of our marryvar, who, be many of they ashore at that time. our house be preserve, but the dutch house be to leeward. although they have never so much help can not be save the upar work of one of the principal house, which do join to their great house, be burn and the out house wherein lay cables, hallser, pickel, pork and diverse other thing, whereby they sustain great loss. some that have serve five year lose all that they have get. in those part it shall seem they be aboard their ship when the fire happen. whereby they sustain great loss. some that have serve five year lose all that they have get. in those part, it shall seem, they be aboard their ship when the fire happen, whereby they can not preserve their one not long after this. but the town on our side, the way be twice. fire by javan in the night, which put we to great trouble in carry and recarr^ng our thing, but by labour of our mariner and the chynese it be quench. the three day of october, our general make a feast for his farewell, whereunto he invite the dutch-admirall with also all the rest of hi^ captain, master and merchant, where we be all exceed merry and great friendship be make between we, and i pray. whereunto he invite the dutch-admirall with also all the rest of hi^ captain, master and merchant, where we be all exceed merry and great friendship be make between we, and i pray god they may still continue it which be there resident, for they shall be sure to find danger and troulbe enough beside, although nothing so much as we have do before. and if we do continue trade in those part, their must be a house, build fire-free, whatsoever it cost, and if we give over our trade there it will purchase more infamy to our nation in all those part and in chyna than ever we have hitherto gain credit for. it will be- think of they all- that either poverty be the cause or that. our nation in all those part and in chyna than ever we have hitherto gain credit for. it will be- think of they all- that either poverty be the cause, or that we dare not come there for fear of the hollander. i can allege some other reason, but those that be best able to do it will not be teach by. i. the hollander have a hope, howsoever they come by it, that we mean to give over our trade of the, which they be not a little proud, think to be lord of all those part. when we be go there happen quarrel between they and we while our ship rid in the road which grow by the pride and disorder of the base, sort of those part. when we be go, there happen quarrel between they and we, while our ship rid in the road which grow by the pride and disorder of the base, sort of they who, when their drink be in, do not spare to come to our house in great troop, use some peremptory speech to our man and likewise hurt some with their knife, whereby we be force twice or thrice to go by the ear with they, in which fray the hollander be beat and pursue to their one gate. many be wound, some of they, their army have cause to remember it so long as they shall live. the 4. day of october, our general be, accompany with diverse merchant and other, go to the court. they, their army, have cause to remember it so long as they shall live. the 4. day of october, our general be, accompany with diverse merchant and other, go to the court to take his leave of the king and his noble. the 6. day of october be sunday, about 10 a clock, our general, withal that be bind home, go aboard who go by the dutch-house, go in and take his leave of the dutch-admirall and the rest of his merchant also there, go aboard with he master gabriel towerson, who be to stay for agent there, and some other merchant who after dinner some go a shore and some stay until the next day, about 3. a clock, we weigh anchor and with some ordinance bid. agent there and some other merchant who after dinner some go a shore and some stay until the next day. about 3. a clock we weigh anchor and with some ordinance bid the town and the dutch ship farewell. about 11. or 12. a clock at night we come to a anchor under a island where the next day we take in wood which our general have send man before hand to cut ready. the 7. day, towards evening we weigh anchor again and set sail. mr towerson and some other of the merchant than take their leave to go ashore, who we commit to the protection of the almighty and ourselves to the curtisy of the sea, desire god to bless both than and we and if. their leave to go ashore, who we commit to the protection of the almighty and ourselves to the curtisy of the sea, desire god to bless both than and we and, if it be his will, to send we a happy meeting in england. the description of java maior, with the manner and fashion of the people, both javan and chinese, which do there inhabit, maior be a island which lie in 140 degree of longitude from the middle part of it and in 9 degree of latitude. be also about 146 league long east and west and some 90 broad south and north, the middle part of which land be for the most part all mountain, the which be not so steep but that people do travail. west and some 90 broad south and north, the middle part of which land be for the most part all mountain, the which be not so steep, but that people do travail to the top of they, both on horseback and on foot. some inhabitant dwell upon those hill which stand next to the sea, but in the very middle of the land, ^o far as ever i can learn, there be no inhabitant, but there be wild beast of diverse sort, whereof some do repair near the valley adjoin to the sea and devour many people towards the sea, for the most part be low moorish ground wherein stand their principal town of trade, the chief whereof lie on the north and north-east side of the island. people towards the sea, for the most part be low moorish ground wherein stand their principal town of trade, the chief whereof lie on the north and north-east side of the island as chiri^gin, bantan, jackatra and jortan or greesey, the which low ground be very unwholesome and breed many disease especial unto stranger which come thither and yield no merchandise worthy trade for or speak of, but pepper, the which have be bring in time pass from all place of the land to bantan as the chief mart town of that country, the which ^owne for trade do far exceed achin or any town or city thereabouts, and pepper be wont to be bring thither from diverse other country which of late year be not by reason. for trade do far exceed achin or any town or city thereabouts, and pepper be wont to be bring thither from diverse other country which of late year be not by reason that the dutchman trade to every place to buy it up. this town of bantan be about 3 mile in length, also very populous, there be three great market keep in it every day, one in the forenoon and two in the afternoon. that especial which be keep in the forenoon, do so abound with people that they throng together as in many fair in england. yet i never see any kind of cattle to sell by reason that there be very few tame in the country. their food be altogether rise with some hen and in england. yet i never see any kind of cattle to sell by reason that there be very few tame in the country. their food be altogether rise with some hen and some fish, but in no great abundance. the javan house be altogether build of great cane and some few small timber be slight building in. many of the principal man house be good workmanship show as carving etc. and some of the chief have a square brick room be build in no better form than a bricke-kill which be only to put in all their household stuff when fire come, but they seldom or never lodge nor eat in they. there be many small river run through the town. also there be a good rhode for. their household stuff when fire come, but they seldom or never lodge nor eat in they. there be many small river run through the town. also there be a good rhode for ship whereby if they be people of any reasonable capacity it will be make a very goodly city. also it be wall round with a brick wall, be very warlike, build with flanker and turret. scour every way. i have be tell by some that it be first build by the chinese and by other that it be first build by the portugese, wherefore i can say certain by which of they it be first build, but it be most likely by the chinese by reason of the oldness of it, for in many place it i can say certain by which of they it be first build, but it be most likely by the chinese by reason of the oldness of it, for in many place it be fall to decay for want of repair. at the very west end of this town be the china town, a narrow river part. they which run cross the end of the china town up to the king court and so through the middle of the great town and do ebb and flow so that at a high water both galley and juncke of great burden may go up to the middle of the great town. this china town be for the most part build of brick. every house, square and flat overhead have board and great burden may go up to the middle of the great town. this china town be for the most part build of brick. every house, square and flat, overhead, have board and small timber or split cane lay over, cross on which be lay brick and sand to defend they from fire. over these brick warehouse be set a shed, be build up with great cane and thatch and some be build up with small timber but the great number with cane. only of late year, since we come thither, many man of wealth have build their house to the top, all fire-free. of the. which sort of house? at our first come there be no more but the sabindars house and the rich china merchant house which their house to the top, all fire-free, of the which sort of house at our first come, there be no more but the sabindars house and the rich china merchant house which nevertheless, by mean of their window and shed round about they have be consume with fire. in this town stand the english and dutch house, which be build in the same manner, only they be very much big and high than the ordinary house, and the dutchman of late, though with great cost and trouble, have build one of their house up to the top, all of brick, fire-free, as they suppose the king of this place be absolute and since the depose and death of the late emperor of damacke be hold the principal king. top all of brick, fire-free as they suppose. the king of this place be absolute and since the depose and death of the late emperor of damacke be hold the principal king of that island. he use always marshal law upon any offender who he be dispose to punish more. if any private man, wife or wife be take with dishonesty so that they have good proof of it, they have power in their own hand to cause they present to be put to death, both man and woman, and for their slave they may execute they for any small fault. if the king send for any subject or stanger dwell or be in his dominion. if he send a man, the party may refuse to come. but they for any small fault. if the king send for any subject, or stanger, dwell or be in his dominion, if he send a man, the party may refuse to come, but if once he send a woman, he may not refuse nor make no excuse. moreover, if any inferior body have a suit to a man of authority, if they come not themselves, they always send a woman. neither do they ever come or send, but they present the party. they sue too with some present. be their suit, never so small. to every wife that a be a free man marry, he must keep 10 woman slave which they as ordinary use as their wife. and some of they keep for every wife 40 slave for that a be a free man marry, he must keep 10 woman slave which they as ordinary use as their wife. and some of they keep for every wife 40 slave for. so they keep 10. they may have as many more as they will, but they may have but 3 wife only. the javan be general exceed proud, although extreme poor by reason that not one among a hundred of they will work. the gentleman of this land be bring to be poor by the number of slave that they keep, which eat fast than their pepper or rise grow. the chinese do both plant, dress and gather the pepper and also sow their rise live as slave under they, but they suck away all the wealth. their pepper or rise grow. the chinese do both, plant, dress and gather the pepper, and also sow their rise, live as slave under they, but they suck away all the wealth of the land by reason that the javan be so idle and a javan be so proud that he will not endure one to sit a inch high in height above he, if he be, but of the like call they be, a people that do very much thirst after blood. if any javan have commit a fact worthy of death and that he be pursue by any whereby he think he shall die, he will present, draw his weapon and cry amucke, which be, as much to say, i be resolve not spare to murder. be pursue by any whereby he think he shall die, he will present, draw his weapon and cry amucke, which be, as much to say i be resolve not spare to murder either man, woman or child which they can possible come at. and he that kill most die with great honour and credit. they will seldom fight face to face one with another or with any other nation, but do altogether seek revenge of their enemy, cowardly albeit they be for the most part man of a goodly stature, their law for murder be to pay a fine to the king, and that but a small sum, but evermore the friend of the party. murder will be revenge on the murderer or his kindred, so that the pay a fine to the king, and that but a small sum, but evermore the friend of the party. murder will be revenge on the murderer or his kindred, so that the more they kill one a other, the more fine or profit have their king. their ordinary weapon which they wear, be call a crise. it be about two foot in length, the blade be wave and crooked too, and fro indenture like and withal exceed sharp. most of they have the temper of their mettle poison, so that not one among five hundred that be wound with they in the body escape with his life. the handle of these weapon be either of horn or wood, curious carve in the likeness of a devil, the which be wound with they in the body, escape with his life. the handle of these weapon be either of horn or wood, curious carve in the likeness of a devil, the which many of they do worship in their war. their fight be altogether with pike, dart and target. of late some few of they have learned to use their piece, but very untoward the gentility. both man and woman never go abroad, but they have a pike bear before they. the apparel of the better sort be a tuck on their head and about their loin a fair pintado, all the rest of their body naked. sometime they will wear a loose coat, somewhat like a mandilion of velvet, chamlet cloth or some other kind of silk. loin a fair pintado, all the rest of their body naked. sometime they will wear a loose coat, somewhat like a mandilion of velvet chamlet cloth or some other kind of silk, but it be but seldom and upon some extraordinary occasion. the common sort wear on their head a flat cap of velvet, taffeta or calico cloth, the which be cut in many piece and seam with a fair stitch to make they sit flat and compass about their loin. they wear a kind of calico cloth which be make at clyn in manner of a silk girdle but at the least two yard broad, be of two colour also. there come from thence many sort of white colour which they themselves do both die paint and a silk girdle but at the least two yard broad, be of two colour also. there come from thence many sort of white colour which they themselves do both die paint and guild according to the fashion of that country. likewise they can weave a kind of stripe stuff both of cotten and rind of tree, but by mean of their lay^sinesse there be very little of that wear. the man for the most part have very thick curl hair on their head in which they take great pride and often will go bare head to show it. the woman go all bare head. some of they have their hair tuck up like a carthorse tail, but the better sort do tuck it up like our ride gelding. show it. the woman go all bare head. some of they have their hair tuck up like a carthorse tail, but the better sort do tuck it up like our ride gelding tail. about their loin. they wear of the same stuff which i have before mention, always have a fair girdle or pintado of their country fashion throw over one of their shoulder which hang down loose behind they. the principal of they be most religious, but they very seldom go to church. they do acknowledge christ to be a great prophet, who they call naby isat, and some of they do keep of mahomet priest in their house. but the common people have very little knowledge in any religion. only they say there be a god. naby isat, and some of they do keep of mahomet priest in their house. but the common people have very little knowledge in any religion. only they say there be a god which make heaven and earth and they also. he be good, they say, and will not hurt they. but the devil be nought and will do they hurt, wherefore many of they, for want of knowledge, do pray to he only for fear lest he shall hurt they. and sure, if there be man of learning which be perfect in their language to instruct they, a number of they will be draw to the true faith of christ and also will be bring to civility. for many, which i have reason with, concern the law of they a number of. they will be draw to the true faith of christ and also will be bring to civility for many, which i have reason with concern, the law of christian have like all well, except only their plurality o^ woman. for they be all very lascivious. give both man and woman the better sort which be in authority, be great taker of bribe and all the javan in general. be bad pay master when they be trust notwithstanding their law for debt. be so strict that the creditor may take his debtor, his wife, child and slave and all that he have and sell they for his debt. likewise, they be all much give to steal from the high to the low, and sure in wife, child and slave and all that he have and sell they for his debt. likewise, they be all much give to steal from the high to the low, and sure in time past they have be no better than man-eater before traffic be have with they by the chynese which, as i have hear some of they say be not above one hundred year, since they delight much in ease and music and for the most part they spend the day sit across legged like a tailor whitling of stick, whereby many of they become very good carver to carve their cryse handle, and that be all the work of most of they endeavour to do. they be very great eater, but the gentleman allow their slave. very good carver to carve their cryse handle and that be all the work of most of they endeavour to do. they be very great eater, but the gentleman allow their slave nothing but rice sod in water with some root and herb. and they have a certain herb call bettaile, which they usual have carry with they wheresoever they go in box or wrap up in cloth like a sugarloaf, and also a nut call p^^ange, which be both in operation very hot, and they eat they continual to warm they within and keep they from the flux. they do likewise take much tobacco and also opium. the javan themselves be very dull and blockish to manage any affair of a common wealth whereby all stranger go. from the flux. they do likewise take much tobacco and also opium. the javan themselves be very dull and blockish to manage any affair of a common wealth whereby all stranger go beyond. they that come into their land, and many of the country of clyn which come thither to dwell do grow very rich and rise to great office and dignity among they, as their sabenda^, their caytomongon and other, but especial the chyneses who, like jew, live, crooch under they but rob they of their wealth and send it for chyna. the chynese be very crafty people in trade, use all kind of cozen and de^eit which may possible be devise they have no pride in. they nor will refuse any labour, except they turn javan. very crafty people in trade, use all kind of cozen and de^eit which may possible be devise. they have no pride in they nor will refuse any labour, except they turn javan, as many of they do when they have do a murder or some other villainy. than they be every whit as proud and as lofty as the javan for their religion. they be of diverse sect, but the most of they be atheist and many of they hold opinion that when they die, if they be good man they shall be bear again to great riches and be make governor, and if they be wicked man than they shall be turn into some ugly beast as a frog or a toad they burn, sacrifice every new. great riches and be make governor, and if they be wicked man, than they shall be turn into some ugly beast, as a frog or a toad. they burn sacrifice every new moon, mumble prayer over they with a kind of sing voice, and as they sing they ring a little bell which at the end of every prayer, they ^ing out as fast as ever they can. this ceremony they also use when any among they of account lie a die. the manner of their sacrifice be this: they furnish their altar with goat, hen, duck and diverse sort of fruit, the which be sometime dress to eat and sometime raw, and then be dress afterwards and eat. all that they burn be only paper, paint and duck and diverse sort of fruit, the which be sometime dress to eat and sometime raw, and then be dress afterwards and eat all that they burn, be only paper, paint and cut out in curious work and value by they at a certain price. i have many time ask they to who they burn their sacrifice, and they have answer: i to god. but the goserats and turk which be there, say they burn it to the devil. if they do so they be ashamed to confess it. they be many of they well see in astronomy and keep a good account of their month and year. they observe no sabbath, nor one day better than other, except they lie the foundation of a house or begin in astronomy and keep a good account of their month and year. they observe no sabbath, nor one day better than other, except they lie the foundation of a house or begin some other great work, which day they ever after observe as a holiday. when any of they that be wealthy die in bantan, their body be burn to ash, which ash they put up close in ^arres and carry it to china to their friend. i have see when some of they have lie a die. they have set up 7. odowre, burn 4. of they be great and burn light, and they be set upon a cane which lie cross upon two crotche, about six foot from the ground and three set on the ground. of. they be great and burn light and they be set upon a cane which lie cross upon two crotche about six foot from the ground and three set on the ground right under. they be very small and burn dim. i have demand the meaning of it many time, but i can never have other answer but that it be the fashion of china and sure many such like thing. they do not know why or wherefore, but only that it have be a fashion among they. they delight very much in play and sing, but they have the worst voice that one shall hear any people have, the which play or interlude they hold as service to their god, in the begin of which they often but they have the worst voice that one shall hear any people have. the which play or interlude they hold as service to their god, in the begin of which they often use to burn a sacrifice, the priest many time kneel down and kiss the ground three time, one present after a other. these play be make common when they think their juncke or ship be set forth from china, likewise when they be arrive at bantan, and also when they set out from bantan towards china. sometime they begin at noon and end not till the next day morning- be most common in the open street, have staige set up for the purpose. moreover, they have among they some soothsayer which sometime rage and run up. till the next day morning, be most common in the open street, have staige set up for the purpose. moreover, they have among they some soothsayer which sometime rage and run up and down the street like mad man, have sword draw in their hand, tear their hair and throw themselves against the ground. when they be in this frantic take, they affirm, and other chinese believe, that they can tell what shall come to pass aforehand, whether they be possess with the devil or no, which reveal something to they. i know not, but many chinese use they when they send a juncke of any voyage to know whether they shall speed well or no. and by their report it have fall out according as those souhsayer. chinese use they when they send a juncke of any voyage to know whether they shall speed well or no, and by their report it have fall out. according as those souhsayer have tell they the javan use play too, but they have no more but some history paint on a card or map, the which one make relation of with such ^esture as befit the matter. likewise there be puppet play make by certain people of clyn which dwell there, the which puppet be apparel like unto the christian manner, and they have lion and diverse kind of beast artificial make with which they perform their sport. very pretty, but these hold the play no point of religion or service to their god^ as the people of. diverse kind of beast, artificial make with which they perform their sport. very pretty, but these hold the play no point of religion or service to their god^ as the people of china do. the chinese be apparel in long gown, wear kirtle under. they hang something low than their gown. they be sure the most effeminate and cowardly people that live. on their head they wear a cawl. some of they be make of silk and some of hair. the hair of their head be very long which they bind up on a knot right on the crown of their head. the nobility and governor wear hood of sundry fashion. some be one half like a hat and the other like a french hood, other be of on the crown of their head. the nobility and governor wear hood of sundry fashion. some be one half like a hat and the other like a french hood, other be of net-warke, with a high crown and no brim. those people be tall and strong of body, have all very small black eye and very few of they have any hair on their face. they will steal and do any kind of villainy to get wealth. their manner at bantan be to buy woman slave, for they bring no woman out of china by who they have many child. and when they return to their own country, not mind to come to bantan again, they sell their woman, but their child they carry with they. as for they have many child and when they return to their own country, not mind to come to bantan again, they sell their woman, but their child they carry with they. as for their good, they take a order to send some at every ship, for if they die in bantan all the good they have there be the king and if once they cut their hair they may never return to their country again. but their child may always provide that they never cut their hair.