a sea fight have take our journey towards virginia in the begin of february last pass in a ship call the black hodge, her burden 160. tun, man only with 8. iron piece and a poor falcon. we soon over pass both the tedious endurance and fearful danger of such a voyage and come at last, by the 14. of march, under 13. and half latitude, within 20 league of matalina, by 6. of clock in the morning, the weather somewhat thick and the wind afford a reasonable gale whereby we descry. a ship lie at hull, as if she be careless either to go backward or forward, which cause we to edge with she as desirous to know what she be. but she present, set up all. her sail and take a course of south and by west, run quick, out of sight, in the space of three or four glass this make we keep our course for matalina, which we attain by the next day at night, be the 15. of march, and so waste the island of dominico. we bear with guardalupo and there anchor to take in fresh water which we want. then come aboard we, certain indian and 6. frenchman, who have remain there some 16. month, be cast upon the land by shipwreck and so be unprovided for a further journey. they inform we of a spanish man of war that pass along some seven day before, discharge her ordinance at the inhabitant and put the island in great fear. notwithstanding. some two day before there anchor another ship who, captain, with some soldier, come a shore with wine and other provision, as if they mean to make merry and show all the sign of friendship and contentment. but she stay but one night at anchor and so depart without further notice. what course she mean to take, nor can the inhabitant guess by reason. their fear enforce their flight into the mountain, lest they shall be surprise. only we be advertise by certain indian that they determine for st vincents leave word that when the great fleet pass along they shall inform the general that captain bartholomew be go up in prosecution of his direction. this be the ship we descry at hull, and so resolve she. must needs be some spanish man of war, because no merchant or ship of burden will lose the advantage of so fair a wind to transport she to any port of traffic and spend the time in hull as if she lie of purpose to discover some prize and take the advantage of such passenger as be to go to menis, be the common trade way both for english and dutch. and so, as it appear afterward, she stir that course of purpose, both to deceive the islander and to betray we who they have. descry a far off from guardalupa, we depart the 18. of march, haste to menis and suspect the worst, hold a loof a half road to be the more free from the spaniard. by reason we determine to repair our ship and refresh ourselves. at menis the ship be much beat with a dangerous storm, some 70. league from our own coast. the people much distemper, as have be a 11. week imprison in a ill condition ship and peradventure want many necessary, which common. we prepare for long voyage, but such be the pleasure of god that we be prevent and disappoint in these purpose for fall with menis by the 20. of march and compass the further point to stand in the handsome with the shore. we perceive two tall ship at anchor right over-against the water place with their top sail loose and their boat go a shore for their man. at first we suppose they hollander in. respect of their building and the hollander colour's bear by their admiral in the main top. the vice admiral have his foretop ma^^ down and no colour display which increase our former opinion. add withal that i^ must needs be prize or some other ship sub^e^t to the misfortune of a fight, but drive by necessity of water and willing to refresh ourselves a shore, we trim our ship and come to anchor fair by. they send our boat in friendly manner to hale. they both unprovided and unarmed, which return with certificate that they be spaniard, wherein not full satisfy by reason of our former apprehension that it be otherwise, the better to be resolve. we send out our boat again as well to be assure what. to trust unto as to gain sometime to prepare our ship and trim she more commodious, be pester, with good and fardel between the deck and altogether unprovided for any fight, either offensive or defensive. the boat approach the hindmost ship, which i call the vice-admiral and hale. she demand who they be, but in steed of resolve, we, she, command they to come aboard and will answer no otherwise, whereupon the boat row from they as resolve. all be not well and so make haste unto. we again, yet can not prevent a volley of small shot pour, very dangerous, among they, insomuch that they have their clothes shoot through their oar shiver and the side batter with bullet. yet, thanks be to god, neither be a. man hurt nor any thing lose, which, as if they have have notice of the same escape, rate their rage so much the more, for by that time the boat be out of reach of their small shot. they follow it to the ship with great ordnance and when they perceive they be safe, come aboard. they take it so ill that they thunder against our ship with the soarer rage and most violent volley, which we can not answer, have no piece in our gunner room, nor indeed any other well mount for such a sea fight. by this time we understand what they be and resolve. we shall not depart quiet without mischief. whereupon our master set we on work to have bring our ordnance into. frame and so to order our ship that we may defend ourselves if need be. but many thing fail we. we practise to weigh our anchor, which be not to be do so sudden. consider our encumbrance on ship board. we then resolve to weigh it up with the boat. have not so many shot thunder among we that we wonder at our escape? by this time their vice admiral heave up her anchor to her warp and lay herself to wind-ward if either we shall pass forward or anchor short again so that we perceive they mean to assault we on all hand. for she let fly a whole broad side upon we and come furious up to our lee quarter without damage or resistance of our. part, to which, sure they be, the rather induce, because the admiral have receive her man from shore, her top sail, loose, all ready, and many thing commodious to their purpose, begin to weigh anchor and make towards we amain. but when we be thus terrify and threaten by they and thus encumber and disanimate among ourselves, know withal, by reason of our ill prepare ordnance, the disadvantage and hazard to be board at anchor by two good ship. well, prepare for spoil and ruin, we hoist up our sail and determine to set forward. have not the vice-admiral come on our starboard side and beat upon we so hardly that we fall to our business and answer their unkindness according with many fair shot which prove most. effectual especial from a demi culverin which at last, shoot she between wind and water so that she be compel from we and bear off to sea. leave her admiral, only single with we, who at last come fair in our quarter to wind-ward, take in her holland flag and advance her spanish colour. and so hale we. we, quiet and quick, answer both what we be and whither we be bind, discover the effect of our commission and relate the cause of our tarry there for water, neither purpose to annoy any subject of the king of spain, nor by way of affront to brave either merchant or man of war. then she charge we to strike our sail for the king of spain and veil the bonnet according to the prerogative they have in those sea. we reply with: enlarge the particular of the league between the king, our master and their king. add withal that as we intend no ill, we will take no wrong, whereupon the master leave the poop and sequester himself from such open conference. have they not call for the captain again who at last present himself till they command he to come aboard with his commission, which he refuse yet. wish they to send their boat aboard, and then they shall see it most willing. but instead either of answer we further with kind word or accept of our reply in good part, they make two great shot at we and pour among we such a volley of small shot before we can get off the poop that we thank god they do no more harm. yet we be much amaze they do so much. not thus content they wave we mith their bright sword a revile we with opprobrious term, mis-^earming we dog and invent more odious name against we than we can imagine that christian dare urge one another withal. at last they lay we aboard, which enforce we to raise up our main sail and to give the word to our small shot which all this while lie close. well, resolve and prepare, but sudden break forth, we ply they in such sort that we make they give back and shrink from their former forwardness. the fight continue some half hour in our quarter and, according to the terror of such encounter, we be compass as it be in fire and smoke, until they discover the waist of our ship naked and be encourage with the hope of reciprocal damage, whereupon they brave, run upon our side and lay we aboard, lufe to hasten with pike and sword to enter, to which be add such fury that if they have not be prevent, we shall have shrink under the rage of a barbarous slaughter. but it please god so to direct our master with advice and encourage. our man with valour, that our pike be former place under our half deck and certain shot lie close for that purpose under the portel of the ship encounter. they so brave that their fury be not only rebate but their hastiness intercept and the whole company beat back especial upon the wind-ward side where the charge be hot and the fight bloody. for there the throng be great and man have work enough to make proof of their courage and fortune. diverse of our man be hurt and many fall on their side. if a man retire wound with, we two i be sure be slay among they. if their pike reach as far as our body, we be long enough to fasten in their side. if a partison from they gash our arm, a halberd from we light on their head. yea, we come so near that sword cut, pike a sunder and target be hew with the blow so that if a fight be worth the describe it. be pity that some great commander on both side behold not this to record the action to memory and recompense the man with sufficient reward. in the end, they be violent repulse by we enforce to a retreat until they be reinforce back again by their commander who stand upon term of honour as be man of war and design for that purpose. think it a indignity to be so afront and countermand which cause a second charge and that be answer with a. second beat back till the captain himself grow enrage as not brook to be so much overmate and constrain they to come on a fresh, which they do so effectual that questionless it have wrought a alteration, if the god that toss monarchy and tear the mountain in his fury have not teach we to toss our pike with prosperous event and pour out a sudden volley of small shot upon they, whereby that worthy commander be slay at the foot of a pike and many of his soldier drop down on the top of the hatch. this we see with our eye and rejoice at with our heart, so that we may perceive as it be good success come on and deliverance to break through the thick. cloud of that vengeance which be prepare against we, for present, our master, take advantage of their discomfiture, though with some commiseration for that valiant captain, so slay that he not only ply they a fresh with great ordinance, but have more false shot under the pike which be bestow to good purpose and amaze our enemy with the suddenness. among the rest, one lucas, our carpenter mate, must not be forget, who perceive a way how to annoy they as they be, thus puzzle and, in a confusion, draw out a minion which he, noble, set a work under the half deck, till at the last he bring it to the doxe of the half deck and there bend it upon they, but in such a manner. that when it be fire, the case full of stone and piece of iron fall upon they like hail and clear their deck in such a sort that it slay many. and in short time we see few assailant, but only such as creep from place to place, very covert, and seem willing to obscure themselves from the fury of our shot, which now be thick than they. for although as far as we may commend our enemy, they have do some thing worthy of admiration, yet either want man or overtake with the unlooked for valour of our company, they now begin to shrink and give. we leave to be wanton with our advantage. yet be our great ordnance, only four that we can use in this. fight, but it shall seem they serve the turn as well as four time four, for they shoot her diverse time between wind and water, and so prevail that at last we see many sign of their willingness to leave. we but by reason she be fast in a of our cable which, in haste of weigh our anchor hang loose. she can not be divide, nor make that way she purpose until one of our man cut it with a axe without direction and be slay for his labour. but when she perceive she be loose after she have be a board two hour and a half, good lord, what have she make? and how quick be we divide both. great and small shot, play on both. side which last until the remoteness be above a caliver shoot and we discover the vice admiral, come to her assistance who begin a far off to ply we with great shot and put we in mind. we have another work in hand whereupon we man our ship a new, separate the dead and hurt body by themselves from we and be so encourage that we wave she and in a manner make towards she to fight a fresh. for when we perceive that the admiral make not a shot more at we, we very imagine that either she be prepare herself with a new supply or want man to make her serviceable or resolve to go away from we consider she have lose her captain yet loath. to be secure, and imagine the vice: admiral may come and board. we find we play till the admiral do make herself better ready. we prepare ourselves, wonder yet that she come no near we than falcon shoot, wherewith she ply. we still on the lee until at last she receive another payment from our demi culverin, which shoot she through and make she bear with the shore into smooth water where she remain till 2. of the clock after midnight, and so we have time to reform our disorder and make ourselves better ready for the next day. variety by break of day she come up again with the admiral, with she, as if they determine indeed to devour we at once. but as it seem it be but a bravado, though for the time. they forsake not our quarter within musket, shoot for all that night and morning they be quiet neighbour and keep we company without any great annoyance, with their top sail down, not know, as it shall seem, what to do with we, or else suspect their own hurt and leak. they dare not trust themselves too far from land, nor to the fury of another encounter. all that night we have time and leisure to overlook our loss and prepare for they if they assail we again, and indeed we be better provide then before and better accommodate in our ship as free it from former encumbrance and afford far more scope for our ordnance. to play upon they. but god be, thank it, fall out otherwise. for though we may perceive they speak together and with many yard a cross, intend to keep we company, yet do they not make much haste up nor trouble. we, with many shot till the next day the admiral make show of a encounter and we, after prayer be end, provide to fight with they. but sudden we perceive the vice admiral hang a stern, cut her main sail to come up and stir very ill, which astonish we the more because we can not imagine the reason. consider she be the best sailor and now spare her admiral a foretop sail, show all the sign of retract and no desire to come too near we. any more at length. the admiral shake in the wind and by apparent sign give we notice of slack her course, whereby we may run a head and follow the sea at our pleasure. so we perceive the vice admiral with all her sail to make towards a island call sana, which the admiral either take notice of, as know the danger she be in, or give direction according, consider there be no good to be do with we for present. she tack about and lose we bear towards that island also, which we easy discover with her whole length. but the ship be quick, out of sight, although we see the breach of the all along and how the admiral depart from we, which cause we to imagine that she be force a shore by her leak, receive in the fight and dare not adventure for fear she shall have be sink altogether and questionless. the admiral have never go from our side, nor try any fortune, but our courtesy, if we can by any mean have bring over our demi culverin on our fight side, which be endeavour by our master and gunner. but as you have hear our ship be so encumber, it be in vain, and we little dream either of pirate or adversary in those sea, make less account to be intercept in. this manner. but such be the condition of human life that common mischief come unlooked for and when they come, accompany one another with much variety, especial at sea, where i will be bold to say that a fight be more terrible to frailty and yield great occasion of astonishment than a main battle at land or the surprise of a town in the fury of a execution. this fight continue five or six hour and be the more unwelcome because we be so unprovided and have no intent nor give any occasion to disturb they. as for the loss of man and accidental trouble, if religion have not teach we what, by god providence be, bring to pass, yet morality and daily experience may inform we of. the danger of war and peril at sea by storm, tempest, shipwrack, encounter with pirate, meet with enemy, cross wind, long voyage, unkown shore, barbarous nation, devour, monster and a hundred inconvenience of which human policy be not capable, nor man conjecture apprehensive. we lose doctor bohune and seven other be slay out right, two die short after of their wound and 16. be shoot through in some part or other of the body. who wound, god be thank be, recure and without maim or further impeachment of health, be now recover and settle in virginia according to our first intend purpose and commission. i reckon not such as be hurt with pike and other offensive weapon, because there be no danger in their cure and the skilful surgeon show his art and good speed with facility. how many they lose we can tell, nor what man of name be entertain among they. only i be sure we see many lie slay on the deck and more cast over board in the fight, beside the scupper, run with blood, and the very sea in their quarter be colour with a scarlet hue and look fearful upon we all o the ambition and turbulence of man, nature and the ill condition of revenge that can be content with fair satisfaction unless it be answer with death and blood. i speak not of the unjustifiable proceed of pirate- because the devil have any excuse for such theft- from the necessity of life and the terror of poverty, which can be prevent in great and stir spirit without course of active employment or some endeavour or other, but of the insatiate pride of the. heart and the wicked disposition of malice, which be never satisfy, but with the death and destruction of a enemy, as be apparent in this encounter. for we can not imagine why they shall adventure thus upon we, unless to make we prize and subject to the spoil of robbery. as for the pretence of their king prerogative, there be not so much as a thought of afront. they in that kind, have they not insult as it be over we in a overdare manner and command we to that which we know be dishonourable to our nation and disgracious to ourselves. but for fear of lavish and burst out of frailty, i will now desist either from complain of they or exscuse ourselves, and only conclude there. be some hreat fault commit among we all, on both side, which the god of heaven determine to punish in this manner. and that god of heaven direct we to make use of his judgement, that we not only pray to he for the diversion of his wrath from our sin, but yield he all possible praise and thanksgiving for any deliverance or blessing whatsoever, and more particular for this, our unlooked for escape from so great a danger. the buhthen of their admiral be 300. tun have 22. piece of brass and all provision of a man of war, indeed their vice-admiral 300. tun and 16. cast piece nor much inferior to she for trim and correspondent equipage, and both to the outward show over-masterfull and dare. for one poor merchant and passenger be but a 160.. tun have 8. iron piece and one falcon, overload with stuff and ware, encumber with passenger toil, with a storm tire, with a long voyage, affright with want and every way insufficient to answer any such enemy. but as it in the scripture, it be all one to thou, o god, whether there be few or many, and gedeons 300. shall slay many thousand of the midianite. as for deliverance, the people of israel shall pass through the red sea dry foot. jonas shall be cast safe on shore out of the whale belly, and paul shall escape shipwreck, save his life with all his passenger in the island of malia. for to conclude with the purpose in hand, there be one thing most remarkable: as a inducement to this, our deliverance that captain chester embrace doctor bohune be mortal wound and thus recomfort. he say: o doctor bohune, what a disaster. be this the noble doctor. no whit, exanimate reply. fight it out, brave man, the cause be good and lord receive my soul. slay outright doctor bohune. thomas demeter, gent th read, william garret th. gabriel peies, david bather, raph, etc. die after francis annis, gent ed nerobery, sailor wound, yet cure, william bird, gent alexander boventine, william bannington, gent will joice quarter, mr john wake, john wilson, sailor george tailor, sailor william lucas, sailor john robbins, steward philip durwine, three french man: robert anthony browne, gent.