the true travel adventure and observation of captain john smith in europe, asia, africa and america, beginning about the year 1593.. and continue to this present, 1629.. chap i: his birth, apprenticeship, go into france, his beginning with ten shilling and three penny, his service in netherlands, his bad passage into scotland, his return to willoughby and how he live in the wood. he be bear in willoughby in lincolnshire and a scholar in the two free-schoole of alford and louth. his father, ancient, descend from the ancient smith of crudley in lancashire, his mother from the rickands at great heck in yorkshire. his parent die when he be about thirteen year of age. leave he a competent mean which he not be capable to manage little regard. the rickands at great heck in yorkshire. his parent die when he be about thirteen year of age, leave he a competent mean which he not be capable to manage. little regard his mind be. even then set upon brave adventure, sell his satchel, book and all he have. intend secret to get to sea. but that his father death, stay he. but now the guardian of his estate, more regard it than he. he have liberty enough, though no mean, to get beyond the sea. about the age of fifteen year he be bind a apprentice to mr thomas sendal of linne, the great merchant of all those part, but because he will not present, send he to sea. he never see his master in eight year. apprentice to mr thomas sendal of linne, the great merchant of all those part, but because he will not present, send he to sea. he never see his master in eight year after, at last he ^ound mean to attend mr perigrine barty into france, second son to the right, honourable perigrine, that generous lord willoughby and famous soldier where come to his brother robert, then at orleans, now earl of linsey and lord great chamberlain of england. be then but little youth under tutorage, his service be needless. within a month or six week they send he back again to his friend who when he come from london they liberal, give he but out of his own estate ten shilling to be rid of he such oft. send he back again to his friend who, when he come from london, they liberal, give he but out of his own estate ten shilling to be rid of. he such oft be the share of fatherless child. but those two honourable brethren give he sufficient to return for england. but it be the least thought of his determination for now, be free at liberty in paris. grow acquaint with one master, david hume, who make some use of his purse. give he letter to his friend in scotland to prefer he to king james. arrive at roan, he better bethink himself. see his money near, spend down the river. he go to haver grace where he first begin to learn the life of a soldier. peace be at roan he better bethink himself see his money near spend down the river. he go to haver grace where he first begin to learn the life of a soldier. peace be conclude in france. he go with captain joseph duxbury into the low-countries under who colour have serve three or four year. he take his journey for scotland to deliver his letter at ancusan. he embark himself for lethe but as much danger as shipwreck and sickness can endure he have at the holy i will in northumberland near berwick, be recover into scotland. he go to deliver his letter after much kind usage among those honest scot at ripweth and broxmoth, but neither money nor mean to make he a courtier. he return to willoughby in. go to deliver his letter after much kind usage among those honest scot at ripweth and broxmoth, but neither money nor mean to make he a courtier. he return to willoughby in lincolnshire where within a short time be glut with too much company wherein he take small delight. he retire himself into a little woody pasture a good way from any town environ with many hundred acre of other wood. here, by a fair brook, he build a pavilion of bough where only in his clothes he lay his study. be machiavil, art of war and marcus aurelius his exercise. a good horse with his lance and ring. his food be think to be more of venison than any thing else. what he want his man bring. and marcus aurelius. his exercise, a good horse with his lance and ring, his food be think to be more of venison than any thing else. what he want, his man, bring he the country. wonder at such a hermit, his friend persuade one signior, theadora polaloga rider, to henry earl of lincoln, a excellent horseman and a noble italian gentleman, to insinuate into his wooddish acquaintance. who language and good discourse and exercise of ride draw he to stay with he at tattersall long. these pleasure can not content he, but he return again to the low-countries, chap 2, the notable villainy of four french gallant and his revenge smith, throw overboard captain roche of saint malo. relieve he thus, when france and netherlands have, teach he. the low-countries, chap 2. the notable villainy of four, french gallant, and his revenge smith, throw overboard captain roche of saint malo. relieve he thus when france and netherlands have teach he to ride a horse and use his arm with such rudiment of war as his tender year in those martial school can attain unto, he be desirous to see more of the world and try his fortune against the turk. both lament and repent to have see so many christian slaughter. one another opportunity cast he into the company of four french gallant. well, attend a notable villan^ of four, ^rench gallant. feign to he, the one to be a great lord, the rest his gentleman, and that they be all devote. that way over-persuade he. attend a notable villan^ of four ^rench gallant feign to, he the one, to be a great lord, the rest his gentleman, and that they be all devote. that way over-persuade he to go with they into france, to the duchess of mercury, from who they shall not only have mean but also letter of favour to her noble duke, than general for the emperor rodolphus in hungary, which he do with such ill weather as winter afford. in the dark night they arrive in the broad, shallow inlet of saint va^leries. some in picardy, his french lord, know he have good apparel and better furnish with money than themselves, so plot with the master of the ship to set his and their own trunk a shore leave. french lord know he have good apparel and better furnish with money than themselves, so plot with the master of the ship to set his and their own trunk a shore, leave smith aboard till the boat can return, which be the next day after, towards evening. the reason he allege be the sea go so high he can come no soon and that his lord be go to amiens where they will stay his come. which treacherous villainy when diverse other soldier and passenger understand they have like to have, slay the master and have they know how will have run away with the ship. come on shore, he have but one carralue, a carralue be in value a penny be force to sell his cloak to. they know how, will have run away with the ship. come on shore, he have but one carralue, a carralue be in value a penny, be force to sell his cloak to pay for his passage. one of the soldier, call curzianvere, compassionate his injury, assure he, this great lord depreau, be only the son of a lawyer of mortaigne in base brittany, and his attendant cursell, nelie and monferrat, three young citizen as arrant, cheat as himself. but if he will accompany he, he will bring he to their friend, but in the interim supply his want. thus, travel by deep codebeck, humphla, pount-deme in normandy. they come to cane in base normandy, where both this noble curzianvere and the great prior of the great abbey of his want, thus travel by deep codebeck, humphla, pount-deme in normandy. they come to cane in base normandy, where both this noble curzianvere and the great prior of the great abbey of s steven, where be the ruinous tomb of william the conqueror, and many other of his friend kind, welcome he and bring he to mortaigne, where he find depreau and the rest, but to small purpose. for mr curzianvere be a banish man and dare not be see, but to his friend yet the bruit of their cozenage occasion, the lady collumber, the baron larshan, the lord shasghe and diverse other honourable person to supply his want and with they to recreate himself so long as he will. but such pleasant pleasure suit little with his. larshan, the lord shasghe and diverse other honourable person to supply his want and with they to recreate himself so long as he will. but such pleasant pleasure suit little with his poor estate and his restless spirit that can never find content to receive such noble favour as he can neither deserve nor requite. but wander from port to port to find some man of war, spend that he have. and in a forest near dead with grief and cold, a rich farmer find he by a fair fountain under a tree. this kind peasant relieve he again to his content to follow his intent. not long after, as he pass through a great grove of tree, ^ere he incoun one of the thief between pounterson and relieve, he again to his content to follow his intent. not long after, as he pass through a great grove of tree, ^ere he incoun one of the thief between pounterson and dina in britain. it be have chance to meet cursell, more miserable than himself, his pierce injury have so small patience as without any word they both draw and in a short time cursell fall to the ground where from a old, ruinate tower the inhabitant see they be satisfy when they hear cursell confess what have former pass and that how, in the divide that they have steal from he, they fall by the ear among themselves. that be actor in it. but for his part he excuse himself to be innocent as well of divide that they have steal from he. they fall by the ear among themselves that be actor in it. but for his part he excuse himself to be innocent as well of the one as of the other. in regard of his hurt, smith be glad to be so rid of. he direct his course to a honourable lord, the noblenesle of the earl of ployer. the earl of ployer who, during the war in france, with his two brethren, viscount poomory and mercy, who have be bring up in england by he, he be better refurnish than ever when they have show he saint malo mount, saint michael lambal, simbreack, lanion and their own fair castle of tuncadeck, gingan and diverse other place in britanny and their refurnish than ever when they have show. he, saint malo, mount, saint michael, lambal, simbreack, lanion and their own fair castle of tuncadeck, gingan and diverse other place in britanny and their british cornwall, take his leave. he take his way to reins, the britain chief city, and so to nantes, poitiers, rochel and bordeaux. the ^umour of the strength of bayon in biskay cause he to see it, and from thence take his way from leskar in biearne and paw in the kingdom of navarre, to tolouz (@) gascoigne, bezer and carcassone, narbone, montpellier, nimes in languedock, and through the country of avignion by arles to marcellos in province, there embark himself for italy. the ship be enforce to tolonne and put again to sea. ill weather. in languedock and through the country of avignion, by arles to marcellos, in province, there embark himself for italy, the ship be enforce to tolonne and put again to sea. ill weather so grow upon they. they anchor close aboard the shore, under the little isle of s mary against niece in savoy. here, the inhuman provincial, a inhuman act of the provincials in cast (@), overboard with a rabble of pilgrim of diverse nation, go to rome, hourly curse he, not only for a hugonoit but his nation. they swear be all pirate and so vild rail on his dread sovereign queen elizabeth, and that they never shall have fair weather so long as he be aboard. they, their disputation, grow to that passion that they throw. vild rail on his dread sovereign queen elizabeth, and that they never shall have fair weather so long as he be aboard. they, their disputation, grow to that passion that they throw he overboard. yet god, bring he to that little isle where be no inhabitant but a few kine and goat. the next morning he espy two ship more ride by they, put in by the storm that fetch he aboard. well, refresh he, and so kind use he that he be well content to try the rest of his fortune with they after he have. relate unto they his former discourse. what for pity, and the love of the honourable earl of ployer, this noble britain, his neighbour, captain roche of saint malo, capt la roche. have relate unto they his former discourse. what for pity. and the love of the honourable earl of ployer, this noble britain, his neighbour captain roche of saint malo, capt la roche, relieve he regard and entertain he for his well respect. friend, with the next fair wind they fail along by the coast of corsica and sardinia and cross the gulf of tunis, pass by cape bona to the isle of lampadosa, leave the coast of barbary till they come at cape rosata, and so along the african shore for alexandria in egypt. there, deliver their fraught, they go to scandaroone rather to view what ship be in the road than any thing else. keep their course by cypress and the coast of asia, sail by rhodes. their fraught. they go to scandaroone rather to view what ship be in the road than any thing else. keep their course by cypress and the coast of asia, sail by rhodes, the archipellagans, candia and the coast of grecia and the isle of zaffalonia. they lay to and again, a few day betwixt the isle of corfue and the cape of otranto, in the kingdom of naples, in the entrance of the adriatic sea. chap 3: a desperate sea-fight in the straits, his passage to rome, naples and the view of italy. betwixt the two cape, they meet with a argosy of venice, it seem, the captain desire to speak with they. a desperate sea-fight who, untoward answer be such as slay they a man, whereupon the cape, they meet with a argosy of venice, it seem the captain desire to speak with they. a desperate sea-fight who, untoward answer be such as slay they a man, whereupon the britain present give they the broadside than his stern and his other broadside also, and continue the chase with his chase piece till he give they so many broadside, one after another, that the argosy sail and tackle be so tear. she stand to her defence and make shoot for shot twice in one hour and a half. the britain board she, yet they clear themselves but clap she aboard again. the argosy fire he which, with much danger to they both be present quench. this rather augment the britain rage than abate his courage. for clear themselves, but clap she aboard again. the argosy fire, he which, with much danger to they both, be present, quench this, rather augment the britain rage than abate his courage. for have, reaccommodate himself again, shoot she so oft between wind and water, she be ready to sink than they yield. the britain lose fifteen man, she twenty beside diverse, be hurt. the rest go to work on all hand, some to stop the leak, other to guard the prisoner, that be chain, the rest to rifle. she the silk, velvet, cloth of gold and tissue, pyaster, chicqueene and sultany, which be gold and silver, they unload in four and twenty hour. be wonderful, where of have sufficient and tire with toil, they cast she off with tissue, pyaster, chicqueene and sultany, which be gold and silver, they unload in four and twenty hour, be wonderful where of have sufficient and tire with toil. they cast she off with her company with as much good merchandise as will have fraught such another britain, that be but two hundred ton, she four or five hundred to repair his defect. he stand for the coast of calabria but hear there be six or seven galley at mesina. he depart thence for malta, but the wind come fair. he keep his course along the coast of the kingdom of sicilia, by sardinia and corsica, till he come to the road of antibo in peamon, where he set smith on shore with five hundred chicqueene and a little box. the kingdom of sicilia by sardinia and corsica, till he come to the road of antibo in peamon, where he set smith on shore with five hundred chicqueene and a little box- god send he- worth near as much more. here he leave this noble britain and embark himself for lygorne. be glad to have such opportunity and mean to better his experience by the view of italy, and have pass tuscany and the country of sieana, where he find his dear friend, the two honourable brethren, the lord willoughby and his brother, cruel wound in a desperate fray. yet to their exceed great honour, the pope, holy stair, bring from jerusalem, whereon they say christ, go up to pontious pilate, then to viterbo and many other city. a desperate fray. yet to their exceed great honour the pope holy stair, bring from jerusalem, whereon they say christ, go up to pontious pilate. then to viterbo and many other city. he come to rome, where it be his chance to see pope clement the eight with many cardinal. creep up the holy stair, which they say be those our saviour christ. go up to pontius pilate, where blood fall from his head. be prick with his crown of thorn. the drop be mark with nail of steel upon they none dare go. but in that manner say so many ave-maries and pater-noster, as be their, and to kiss the nail of steel, but on each side be a pair of such like stair up which you. that manner, say so many ave-maries and pater-noster as be their, and to kiss the nail of steel. but on each side be a pair of such like stair up which you may go, stand or kneel, but divide from the holy stair by two wall. right against they be a chapel where hang a great silver lampe which burn continual, yet, they say, the oil neither increase nor diminish. a little distant be the ancient church of saint john de lateran, where he see he say mass which common he do upon some friday once a month. have salute father parson, that famous english jesuite, and satisfy himself with the rarity of rome, he go down the river of tiber to civita vechia, where he embark himself. a month have. salute father parson, that famous english jesuite, and satisfy himself with the rarity of rome, he go down the river of tiber to civita, vechia, where he embark himself to satisfy his eye with the fair city of naples and her kingdom nobility. return by capua, rome and seana. he pass by that admire c^tie of florence, the city and country of bolonia, ferrara, mantua, padu and venice who gulf. he pass from malamoco and the adriatic sea for ragouza, spend some time to see that barren break coast of albania and dalmatia to capo de islria, travel, the main of poor slavonia, by lubbiano, till he come to grate in the seat of ferdinando, archduke of austria, now emperor of almania, where he meet. to capo de islria, travel the main of poor slavonia by lubbiano, till he come to grate in the seat of ferdinando, archduke of austria, now emperor of almania, where he meet a english man and a irish jesuite, who acquaint, he, with many brave gentleman of good quality, especial with the lord ebersbaught with who try such conclusion as he project to undertake, prefer he to baron kisell, general of the ar^llery, and he to a worthy colonel, the earl of meldritch, with who go to vienne in austria, under who regiment, in what service and how he spend his time. this ensue discourse will declare chap 4, the siege of olumpagh. a excellent stratagem by smith. another, not much worse, the siege of olumpagh after the. and how he spend his time. this ensue discourse will declare chap 4, the siege of olumpagh, a excellent stratagem by smith. another, not much worse, the siege of olumpagh. after the loss of caniza, the turk, with twenty thousand, besiege the strong town of olumpagh so straight as they be cut off from all intelligence and hope. of succour till john smith, this english gentleman acquaint baron kisell, general of the archduke artillery. he have teach the governor, his worthy friend, such a rule that he will undertake to make he know any thing he intend and have his answer will they bring he, but to some place where he may make the flame of a torch. see to the town. kisell inflame with this strange invention. intend and have his answer will they bring he, but to some place where he may make the flame of a torch see to the town. kisell inflame with this strange invention. smith, make it so plain that forthwith he give he guide who in the dark night, bring he to a mountain where he show three torch, equidistant from other, which plain appear to the town. the governor present, apprehend and answer again with three other fire in like manner. each know the other be and intent. smith, though distant seven mile, signify to he these word: on thursday at night i will charge on the east at the alarm sally. you, ebersbaught, answer he will, and thus it be do. first he write his message as. these word. on thursday at night i will charge on the east at the alarm sally. you ebersbaught, answer he will, and thus it be. do first he write his message as brief you see, as can be, than divide the alphabet in two part, thus: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, k, l, 1., 1., 1., 1., 1., 1., 1., 1. 1. 1. 1. m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, v, w, x, 2., 2., 2., 2., 2., 2., 2., 2., 2., 2., 2. y, z, 2. 2.. the first part from a to l- a excellent stratagem- be signify by show and hide one link^ so oft as there be letter from a to that letter, you mean the other part. part from a to l- a excellent stratagem. be signify by show and hide one link^ so oft as there be letter from a to that letter, you mean the other part from m to z. be mention by two light. in like manner, the end of a word be signify by show of three light. ever stay your light at that letter, you mean till the other may write it in a paper and answer by his signal, which be one light it be. do begin to count the letter by the light every time from a to m. by this mean also the other return his answer whereby each do understand other the guide all this time. have well view the camp. return to kisell, who from a to m, by this mean also the other. return his answer whereby each do understand other the guide all this time. have well view the camp. return to kisell who doubt of his power be but ten thousand, be animate by the guide. how the turk be so divide by the river in two part, they can not easy second each other. another stratagem, to which smith add this conclusion that two or three thousand piece of match fasten to diverse small line of a hundred fathom in length, be arm with powder, may all be fire and stretch at a instant before the alarm upon the plain of hysnaburg. support by two staff at each line, end in that manner will seem like so many. all be fire and stretch at a instant before the alarm upon the plain of hysnaburg. support by two staff at each line end in that manner will seem like so many musketeer which be put in practice and be discover by the turk. they prepare to encounter these false fire. think there have be some great army, while kisell with his ten thousand be enter the turk quarter who run up and down as man amaze, it be not long ere ebersbaught be pell-mell with they in their trench in which distract confusion, a three part of the turk that besiege that side towards knousbruck be slay. many of the rest drown, but all flee the other part of the army be so busy to resist the. part of the turk that besiege that side towards knousbruck be slay. many of the rest drown but all flee the other part of the army be so busy to resist the false fire that kisell, before the morning, put two thousand good soldier in the town and with small loss be retire the garrison. be well relieve with that they find in the turk quarter which cause the turk to raise their siege and return to caniza and kisell with much honour be receive at kerment and occasion the author. a good reward and preferment to be captain of two hundred and fifty horseman under the conduct of colonel voldo. earl of meldritch, chap v. the siege of stowlle-wesenburg. the effect of smith firework, a worthy exploit. to be captain of two hundred and fifty horseman under the conduct of colonel voldo. earl of meldritch, chap v, the siege of stowlle-wesenburg. the effect of smith firework, a worthy exploit of earl rosworme, earl meldritch, take the bashaw prisoner. a general rumour of a general peace now spread itself over all the face of those torment country. but the turk intend no such matter but levy soldier from all part. he can, the emperor, also by the assistance of the christian prince, provide three army: the one lead by the archduke mathias the emperor brother and his lieutenant, duke mercury, to defend low hungary. the second by ferdinando, the archduke of and the duke of mantua, his lieutenant, to regain caniza. the three by gonzago governor. brother and his lieutenant, duke mercury, to defend low hungary. the second by ferdinando, the archduke of and the duke of mantua, his lieutenant, to regain caniza. the three by gonzago, governor of high hungary, to join with georgio busca to make a absolute conquest of transilvania. the siege of alba, duke mercury, with a army of thirty thousand, whereof near ten thousand be french besiege, stowlle-wesenburg, otherwise call alba, a place so strong by art and nature that it be think impregnable at his first come, the turk sally upon the german quarter, slay near five hundred and return before they be think on the next night. in like manner, they do near as much to the bemer and hungarian, of which fortune still presume think to. five hundred and return before they be. think on the next night in like manner. they do near as much to the bemer and hungarian, of which fortune still presume, think to have. find the french quarter as careless, eight or nine hundred of they be cut in piece and take prisoner. in this encounter, grandvile, a brave french colonel receive seven or eight cruel wound, yet follow the enemy to the port. he come off alive, but within three or four day die. earl meldritch by the information of three or four. christian escape out of the town upon every alarm where there be great assembly and throng of people, the effect of good (@) work^ cause captain smith to put in practice his fiery dragon. he of the town upon every alarm where there be great assembly and throng of people, the effect of good (@) work^ cause captain smith to put in practice his fiery dragon he have demonstrate unto. he and the earl von sulch at comora, which he thus perform, have prepare forty or fifty round-bellied earthen pot and fill they with hand gunpowder, then cover they with pitch, mingle with brimstone and turpentine and quarter as many musket-bullet that hang together, but only at the centre of the division. stick they round in the mixture about the pot and cover they again with the same mixture. over that a strong cerecloth, then over all a good thickness of towze-match well temper with oil of lin-seed, campheer and powder of brimstone. and cover they again with the same mixture. over that a strong cerecloth, then over all a good thickness of towze-match well temper with oil of lin-seed campheer and powder of brimstone. these he fit place in sling graduate so near as they can to the place of these assembly. at midnight, upon the alarm, it be a fearful sight to see the short flame course of their flight in the air. but present after their fall, the lamentable noise of the miserable slaughter turk be most wonderful to hear. beside they have fire that suburb at the port of buda in two or three place which so trouble the turk to quench that have there be any mean to have assault they? they can hardly have resist. at the port of buda in two or three place which so trouble the turk, to quench that have there be any mean to have assault, they they can hardly have resist the fire and their enemy, the earl rosworme, contrary to the opinion of all man will needs undertake to find mean to surprise the sege and suburb of the city, strong defend by a muddy lake which be think unpassable, the duke have plant his ordnance batter the other side, a worthy exploit of earl rosworme. while rosworme, in the dark night, with every man, a bundle of sedge and bavin still throw before they so jade up the lake as they surprise that unregarded suburb before they be discover, upon which unexpected alarm the turk. man a bundle of sedge and bavin still throw before they so jade up the lake as they surprise that unregarded suburb before they be discover, upon which unexpected alarm the turk flee into the city and the other suburb, not know the matter, get into the city also, leave their suburb for the duke who, with no great resistance, take it with many piece of ordnance. the city be of no such strength as the suburb with their own ordnance. be so batter that it be take perforce with such a merciless execution as be most pitiful to behold. earl meldritch, take the bashaw prisoner, the bashaw notwithstanding, draw together a party of five hundred before his own palace where he intend to die, but see most. most pitiful to behold. earl meldritch. take the bashaw prisoner, the bashaw notwithstanding, draw together a party of five hundred before his own palace where he intend to die, but see most of his man slay before he by the valiant captain, earl meldritch, who take he prisoner with his own hand and, with the hazard of himself, save he from the fury of other troop that do pull down his palace and will have rend he in piece. have he not be thus preserve the duke, think his victory much honour with such a prisoner. take order he shall be use like a prince and with all expedition, give charge present to repair the breach and the ruin of this famous city that have be in the take order. he shall be use like a prince and, with all expedition, give charge present to repair the breach and the ruin of this famous city that have be in the possession of the turk near threescore year. chap 5: a brave encounter of the turk army with the christian duke. mercury overthrow assan bashaw. he divide the christian army, his nobleness and death mahomet, the great turk. during the siege have raise a army of sixty thousand man to have relieve it but hear it be lose. he send assan bashaw, general of his army, the bashaw of buda, bashaw amaro^, to see if it be possible to regain it. the duke understand there can be no great experience in such a new levy army as. army, the bashaw of buda, bashaw amaro^, to see if it be possible to regain it. the duke understand there can be no great experience in such a new levy army as assan have have put a strong garrison into it and with the brave colonel rosworme, culnit, meldritch, the rhine-grave vahan and many other, with twenty thousand good soldier set forward to meet the turk in the plain of girke. a brave encounter of the turk army with the christian. those two army encounter as they marehed where begin a hot and bloody skirmish. betwixt, they regiment against regiment as they come in order till the night part they here, earl meldritch be so environ among those half circular regiment of turk. they suppose he their prisoner. they regiment against regiment as they come in order. till the night part they here, earl meldritch be so environ among those half circular regiment of turk. they suppose he their prisoner and his regiment lose. but his two most courageous friend, vihan and culnit, make such a passage among they that it be a terror to see how horse and man lie, sprawl and tumble some one way, some another on the ground. the earl there at that time make his valo^ shine more bright than his armour, which seem then paint with turkish blood. he slay the brave zanzack bugola and make his passage to his friend, but near half his regiment be slay. captain smith have his horse sl^^e under, he and himself sore wound. he slay the brave zanzack bugola and make his passage to his friend. but near half his regiment be slay, captain smith, have his horse sl^^e under, he and himself sore wound. but he be not long unmount for there be choice. enough of horse that want master. the turk. think the victory sure against the duke who, army by the siege and the garrison he have, leave behind he be much weaken, will not be content with one, but he will have all and leave. the duke shall return to alba. he send that night twenty thousand to besiege the city. assure they he will keep the duke or any other from relieve. they two or three day they lay each by other, entrench themselves, the turk. twenty thousand to besiege the city, assure they he will keep the duke or any other from relieve. they, two or three day they lay each by other, entrench themselves. the turk, dare the duke daily to a set battle. who, at length, draw out his army, lead by the rhine-grave culnit and meldritch, who, upon their first encounter, charge with that resolute and valiant courage as disorder not only the foremost squadron of the turk, but enforce all the whole army to retire to the camp duke mercury, overthrow assan rassa, with the loss of five or six thousand, with the bashaw of buda and four or five zanzacks, with diverse other great commander, two hundred prisoner and nine of ordnance, at that instant appear as it. five or six thousand with the bashaw of buda and four or five zanzacks with diverse other great commander, two hundred prisoner and nine of ordnance- at that instant appear as it be another army- come out of a valley, over a plain hill that cause the duke at that time to be content and to retire to his trench, which give time to assan to reorder his disorder squadron. here they lie nine or ten day and more supply repair to. they expect to try the event in a set battle. but the soldier on both party, by reason of their great want and approach of winter, grow so discontent that they be ready of themselves to break up the leaguer. the bashaw retire himself to buda. both party, by reason of their great want and approach of winter, grow so discontent that they be ready of themselves to break up the leaguer. the bashaw retire himself to buda, have some of the rear troop cut off. amaroz bashaw, hear of this, find such bad welcome at alba and the town, so strong repair with so brave a garrison, raise his siege and retire to the duke, understanding that the archduke ferdinando have so resolute, besiege caniza as what by the loss of alba and the turk retreat to buda be void of hope, of any relief? doubt not, but it will become again. the christian duke mercury divide his army to the furtherance, whereof the duke divide his army into three. part the earl. hope of any relief? doubt not, but it will become again. the christian duke mercury divide his army to the furtherance, whereof the duke divide his army into three part the earl of rosworme go with seven thousand to caniza. the earl of meldritch, with six thousand he send to assist georgio busca against the transilvanian. the rest go with himself to the garrison of strigonium and komara. have thus worthy behave himself. he arrive at vienne where the archduke and the nobility with as much honour receive he as if he have conquer all hungaria. his very picture, they esteem, will make they fortunate, which thousand keep as curious as a precious relic, to requite this honour, prepare himself to return into france to raise new force. his very picture they esteem, will make they fortunate, which thousand keep as curious as a precious relic. to requite this honour, prepare himself to return into france to raise new force against the next year, with the two archduke, mathias and maximilian, and diverse other of the nobility. be with great magnificence, conduct to nurenburg there by they royal feast, duke (@) and his brother in law ere sudden, how it chance be not know, but the next morning he be find dead and his brother in law die two day after. who heart after this great triumph, with much sorrow, be carry into france, chap 7, the unhappy siege of caniza. earl meldritch serve prince sigismundus, prince moses besiege regal smith. three single combat his patent. this great triumph with much sorrow be carry into france. chap 7: the unhappy siege of caniza. earl meldritch, serve prince sigismundus, prince moses, besiege regal smith three single, combat his patent from sigismundus and reward the worthy lord rosworme. have not a worse journey to the miserable siege of caniza. the unhappy siege of caniza, where, by the extremity of a extraordinary continue tempest of hail, wind, frost and snow in so much that the christian be force to leave their tent and artillery and what they have, it be so cold that three or four hundred of they be freeze to death in a night and two or three thousand lose in that miserable flight. in the snowy tempest, though, they do know no enemy at. four hundred of they be freeze to death in a night, and two or three thousand lose in that miserable flight in the snowy tempest, though they do know no enemy at all to follow they than the noble earl of meldritch, have to transilvania, where hear of the death of michael and the brave duke mercury and know the policy of busca and the prince. his royalty be now beyond all belief of man in possession of the best part of transilvania. persuade his troop in so honest a cause to assist the prince against the turk rather than busca against the prince. the soldier be, wear out with those hard pay and travel, earl meldritch. serve prince sigismundus upon hope to have free liberty to make. the turk rather than busca against the prince. the soldier be wear out with those hard pay and travel earl meldritch. serve prince sigismundus upon hope to have free liberty to make booty upon what they can get possession of from the turk. be easy persuade to follow he whithersoever. now this noble earl be a transylvanian bear and his father country, yet inhabit by the turk. for transilvania be, yet in three division, though the prince have the heart both of country and people, yet the frontier have a garrison among the unpassable mountain, some for the emperor, some for the prince and some for the turk to regain which small estate he desire. leave of the prince to try his fortune and to make use of. for the emperor, some for the prince and some for the turk, to regain which small estate he desire. leave of the prince to try his fortune and to make use of that experience. the time of twenty year have teach he in the emperor service, promise to spend the rest of his day for his country defence in his excellency service. the prince, glad of so brave a commander and so many expert and ancient soldier, make he campe-master of his army. give he all necessary relief for his troop. and what freedom they desire to plunder the turk. the earl have make many incursion into the land of zarkam, among those rocky mountain, where be some turk? some tartar earl meldritch make incursion to discover regal. to plunder the turk. the earl have make many incursion into the land of zarkam, among those rocky mountain, where be some turk, some tartar earl meldritch make incursion to discover regal, but most bandittoes, rennegadoe and such like, which sometime he force into the plain of regal, where be a city not only of man and fortification, strong of itself, but so environ with mountain that make the passage so difficult that in all these war no attempt have be make upon it to any purpose. have satisfy himself with the situation and the most convenient passage to bring his army unto it. the earth no soon put on her green habit than the earl overspread, she with his arm troop to possess himself first of the. convenient passage to bring his army unto it. the earth no soon put on her green habit than the earl overspread she, with his arm troop to possess himself, first of the most convenient passage, which be a narrow valley betwixt two high mountain, he send colonel with his regiment, disperse in company to lie in ambuscado, as he have direct they, and in the morning to drive all the cattle they can find before a fort in that passage who he suppose will sally see, but some small party to recover their prey which take such good success that the garrison be cut off by the ambuscado and seize on the sconce which be abandon meldritch, glad of so fortunate a beginning, it be six day ere. such good success that the garrison be cut off by the ambuscado and seize on the sconce which be abandon. meldritch, glad of so fortunate a beginning, it be six day ere he can, with six thousand pioner, make passage for his ordnance. the turk have such warning, strengthen the town so with man and provision that they make a scorn of so small a number as meldritch. bring with he before the city, which be but eight thousand, before they have pitch their tent the turk sally in such abundance as for a hour they have rather a bloody battle than a skirmish. but with the loss of near fifteen hundred on both side, moses besiege regal, the turk be chase till the city ordnance cause the. have rather a bloody battle than a skirmish, but with the loss of near fifteen hundred on both side. moses besiege regal the turk be chase till the city, ordnance cause the earl to retire the next day. zachel moses, general of the army, pitch also his tent with nine thousand foot and horse and six and twenty piece of ordnance. but in regard of the situation of this strong fortress they do neither fear, they nor hurt. they be upon the point of a fair promontory environ, on the one side, within half a mile, with a unuseful mountain, and on the other side with a fair plain where the christian encamp but so command by their ordnance. they spend near a month in entrench themselves and with a unuseful mountain and on the other side with a fair plain where the christian encamp but so command by their ordnance. they spend near a month in entrench themselves and raise their mount to plant their battery, which slow proceed. the turk oft deride that their ordnance be at pawn, and how they grow fat for want of exercise and fear lest they shall depart ere they can assault their city. send this challenge to any captain in the army that to delight the lady who do long to see some courtlike pastime, the lord turbashaw, do defy any captain that have the command of a company who dare combat with he for his head. the matter be discuss, it be accept, but so many question. lord turbashaw do defy any captain that have the command of a company who dare combat with he for his head. the matter be discuss, it be accept, but so many question grow for the undertake, it be decide by lot which fall upon captain smith. before speak of three single combat, truce be make. for that time, the rampire, all beset with fair dame and man in arm, the christian in battalio, turbashaw, with a noise of howboye, enter the field. well, mount and arm on his shoulder be fix a pair of great wing compact of eagle feather, within a ridge of silver, rich, garnish with gold and precious stone. a janisary, before he bear his lance on each side, another lead his horse where long. compact of eagle feather, within a ridge of silver, rich, garnish with gold and precious stone, a janisary, before he bear his lance, on each side another lead his horse, where long he stay. nor ere smith, with a noise of trumpet. only a page, bear his lance, pass by he, with a courteous salute, take his ground with such good success that at the sound of the charge, he pass the turk through the sight of his beaver face, head and all that, he fall dead to the ground where alight and unbrace his helmet, cut off his head and the turk take his body and so return, without any hurt at all, the head he present to the lord moses, the general, who kind accept it. cut off his head and the turk take his body and so return, without any hurt at all. the head he present to the lord moses, the general, who kind accept it, and with joy to the whole army. he be general, welcome the death of this captain, so swell in the heart of one grualgo, his vow friend, as rather enrage with madness than choler, he direct a particular challenge to the conqueror to regain his friend head or lose his own with his horse and armour for advantage which, according to his desire, be the next day undertake as before. upon the sound of the trumpet, their lance fly in piece upon a clear passage, but the turk be near, unhorse their pistol be the next. the next day undertake as before. upon the sound of the trumpet, their lance fly in piece upon a clear passage, but the turk be near unhorse. their pistol be the next which mark smith upon the placard, but the next shoot the turk. be so wound in the left arm that be not able to rule his horse and defend himself. he be throw to the ground and so bruise with the fall that he lose his head as his friend before he with his horse and armour, but his body and his rich apparel be send back to the town. every day the turk make some sally, but few skirmish will they endure to any purpose? our work and approach be not yet advance to that. be send back to the town every day. the turk make some sally, but few skirmish will they endure to any purpose. our work and approach be not yet advance to that height and effect which be of necessity to be perform. to delude time smith with so many incontradictible persuade, reason obtain, leave that the lady may know he be not so much enamour of their servant head. but if any turk of their rank will come to the place of combat to redeem, they shall have his also upon the like condition, if he can win it. the challenge present be accept by bonny mulgro. the next day both the champion enter the field as before each discharge their pistol have no lance but such martial can win it. the challenge present be accept by bonny mulgro. the next day, both the champion enter the field as before each discharge their pistol have no lance but such martial weapon as the defendant appoint, no hurt be. do their battleax be the next who pierce bill. make sometime the one, sometime the other to have scarce sense to keep their saddle special. the christian receive such a blow that he lose his battle-axe and fail not much to have fall after it. whereat the suppose conquer turk have a great shout from the rampire, the turk prosecute his advantage to the uttermost of his power, yet the other what? by the readiness of his horse and his judgement and dexterity in such a business beyond. rampire the turk, prosecute his advantage to the uttermost of his power. yet the other what? by the readiness of his horse and his judgement and dexterity in such a business beyond all man expectation. by god assistance, not only avoid the turk violence, but have draw his falchion, pierce the turk so under the culet through back and body that although he alight from his horse, he stand not long ere he lose his head, as the rest have do. chap 8: georgio busca a alban, his ingratitude to prince sigismundus. prince moses, his lieutenant, be overthrow by busca, general for the emperor rodolphus sigismundus, yield his country to rodolphus busca, assist prince rodoll in wallachia. this good success give such great encouragement to the whole army. be overthrow by busca. general for the emperor, rodolphus sigismundus. yield his country to rodolphus busca, assist prince rodoll in wallachia. this good success give such great encouragement to the whole army that with a guard of six thousand three spare horse before each, a turk head upon a lance, he be conduct to the general pavilion with his present moses. receive both he and they with as much respect as the occasion deserve. embrace he in his arm, give he a fair horse, rich, furnish a and belt worth three hundred, ducat and meldritch. make he sergeant, major of his regiment. but now to the siege. have mount six and twenty piece of ordnance, fifty or sixty foot above the plain. make they so plain. tell his he sergeant, major of his regiment. but now to the siege. have mount six and twenty piece of ordnance, fifty or sixty foot above the plain make they so plain, tell his meaning that within fifteen day, two breach be make, which the turk, as valiant, defend as man, can that day be make a darksome night, but by the light that proceed from the murder musket and peacemaking canon, while their slothful governor lie in a castle on the top of a high mountain and, like a valiant prince, ask what be the matter when horror and death stand, amaze each at other to see who shall prevail. to make he victorious moses command a general assault upon the slope front of the high promontory, regal assault. horror and death stand, amaze each at other to see who shall prevail. to make he victorious, moses command a general assault upon the slope front of the high promontory, regal assault, and take where the baron of budendorfe and oberwin lose near half their regiment by log bag of powder and such like, tumble down the hill they be to mount ere they can come to the breach notwithstanding, with a incredible courage they advance to the push of the pike with the defendant that, with the like courage, repulse till the earl meldritch, becklefield and zarvana with their fresh regiment. second they, with that fury that the turk retire and flee into the castle from whence, by a flag of truce, they desire composition, the earl. and zarvana with their fresh regiment. second they with that fury that the turk retire and flee into the castle. from whence by a flag of truce they desire composition. the earl remember his father death, batter it with all the ordnance in the town and the next day take it all he find can bear arm. he put to the sword and set their head upon stake round about the wall. in the same manner they have use the christian when they take it. moses have repair the rampire and throw down the work in his camp. he put in it a strong garrison, though the pillage he have get in the town be much, have be for a long time a impregnable den of thief. yet his camp. he put in it a strong garrison, though the pillage he have get in the town be much, have be for a long time a impregnable den of thief. yet the loss of the army, so intermingle the sour with the sweet, as force moses to seek a further revenge that he sack veratio, solmos and kupronka, and with two thousand prisoner, most woman and child, come to esenberg, not far from the prince palace where he there encamp sigismundus come to view his army be present with the prisoner and six and thirty ensign where celebrate thanks to almighty god in triumph of those victory he be. make acquaint with the service smith have do at olumpagh, stowle-wesenburg, and regal for which, with great honour, ensign where celebrate thanks to almighty god in triumph of those victory he be. make acquaint with the service smith have do at olumpagh, stowle-wesenburg, and regal for which, with great honour, he give he three turk head in a shield for his arm by patent under his hand, and seal with a oath ever to wear they in his colour, his picture in gould and three hundred ducat yearly for a pension. the same in english: bathor by the grace of god, duke of transilvania, wallachia and moldavia, earl of anchard, salford and growenda, to who this write may come or appear, know that we have give leave and licence to john smith, a english gentleman, captain of 250.. soldier under the most generous and honourable henry. who this write may come or appear, know that we have give leave and licence to john smith, a english gentleman, captain of 250.. soldier under the most generous and honourable henry volda, earl of meldritch, salmaria and peldoia, colonel of a thousand horse and fifteen hundred foot in the war of hungary and in the province aforesaid under our authority, who service do, deserve all praise and perpetual memory towards we, as a man that do for god and his country, overcome his enemy. wherefore, out of our love and favour, according to the law of arm we have ordain and give he in his shield of arm, the figure and description of three turk head which, with his sword, before the town of regal in single. of arm we have ordain and give he in his shield of arm the figure and description of three turk head which, with his sword, before the town of regal, in single combat he do overcome, kill and cut off in the province of transilvania. but fortune as she be very variable, so it chance and happen to he in the province of wallachia in the year our lord, 1602.. the 18. day of november, with many other as well noble man as also diverse other soldier be take prisoner by the lord bashaw of cambia, a country of tartary, who cruelty bring he such good fortune, by the help and power of almighty god, that he deliver himself and return again to his company and fellow soldier. a country of tartary, who cruelty. bring he such good fortune by the help and power of almighty god that he deliver himself and return again to his company and fellow soldier, of who we do discharge. he and this he have in witness thereof, be much more worthy of a better reward and now intend to return to his own sweet country. we desire therefore all our love and kind. kinsman, duke, prince, earl, baron, governor of town, city or ship in this kingdom or any other province, he shall come in that you free. let pass this the aforesaid captain, without any hindrance or molestation, and this do with all kindness. we be always ready to do the like for you. seal at lipswick in misenland. let pass this, the aforesaid captain, without any hindrance or molestation, and this do with all kindness. we be always ready to do the like for you. seal at lipswick in misenland, the nine of december in the year of our lord, 1603.. with the proper privilege of his majesty bathor, to all and singular, in what place, state, degree, order or condition whatsoever, to who this present writing shall come, william segar, knight, otherwise garter, and principal king of arm of england, wish health. know that i, the aforesaid garter, do witness and approve that this aforesaid patent i have see, sign and seal under the proper hand and seal manual of the say duke of transilvania, and a true copy of the same as a thing. this aforesaid patent i have see sign and seal under the proper hand and seal manual of the say duke of transilvania, and a true copy of the same. as a thing for perpetual memory, i have subscribe and record in the register and office of the herald of arm. date at london: the nineteen day of august in the year of our lord, 1625.. and in the first year of our sovereign lord charles. by the grace of god, king of great britain, france and ireland, defender of the faith, etc. william segar, chap 9: sigismundus, send ambassador unto the emperor the condition reassure he yield up all to busca and return to prague. bvsca, have all this time be raise new force, be command from the. sigismundus, send ambassador unto the emperor. the condition: reassure he, yield up all to busca and return to prague. bvsca, have all this time be, raise new force. be command from the emperor again to invade transilvania, which be one of the fruitful and strong country in those part. be now rather a desert or the very spectacle of desolation, their fruit and field overgrow with weed, their church and batter palace and best building, as for fear, hide with moss and ivy. be the very bulwark and rampire of a great part of europe, most fit by all christian to have be supply and maintain, be thus bring to ruin by they. it most concern to support it. but, alas, what be it when the power of fit by all christian to have be supply and maintain, be thus bring to ruin by they. it most concern to support it. but alas, what be it when the power of majesty pamper in all delight of pleasant vanity? neither know nor consider the labour of the ploughman, the hazard of the merchant, the oppression of statesman, nor feel the pierce torment of break limb and inveterate wound, the toilsome march, the bad lodging, the hungry diet and the extreme misery that soldier endure to secure all those estate and yet, by the spite of malicious detraction, starve for want of their reward and recompense, while the politic courtier that common aim more at his own honour and end than his country good or his prince glory. malicious detraction, starve for want of their reward and recompense, while the politic courtier that common aim more at his own honour and end than his country good or his prince, glory, honour or security, as this worthy prince too well can testify. but the emperor be, certify how weak and desperate his estate be. send busca again with a great army to try his fortune once more in transilvania. the prince, consider how his country and subject be consume the small mean he have any long to defend his estate, both against the cruelty of the turk and the power of the emperor, and the small care the polander have in supply. he, as they have promise, send to busca to have truce till messenger may be. the turk and the power of the emperor and the small care the polander have in supply. he, as they have promise, send to busca to have truce till messenger may be send to the emperor for some better agreement, wherewith busca be content. the ambassador so prevail that the emperor reassure unto they the condition he have promise the prince at their confederacy for the land in silesia, with 60000. ducat present in hand and 50000. ducat yearly as a pension. when this conclusion be know to moses, his liestenant then in the field, with the army that will do any thing rather than come in subjection to the german busca in transilvania. overthrow moses, he encourage his soldier and without any more ado, march to encounter. the army that will do any thing. rather than come in subjection to the german busca in transilvania. overthrow moses, he encourage his soldier and without any more ado, march to encounter busca, who he find much better provide than he expect, so that betwixt they, in six or seven hour, more than five or six thousand on both side, lay dead in the field. moses thus overthrow (@) to the turk at temesware and his scatter troop, some one way, some another, the prince understand of this so sudden and unexpected accident, only, accompany with a hundred of his gentry and nobility, go into the camp to busca to let he know how ignorant he be of his liestenants error that have do it without his direction. a hundred of his gentry and nobility go into the camp to busca, to let he know how ignorant he be of his liestenants. error that have do it without his direction or knowledge. free, offer to perform what be. conclude by his ambassador with the emperor sigismundus. yield his country to e^s^a and so cause all his garrison to come out of their strong hold. he deliver all to busca for the emperor, and so go to prague where he be honourable, receive and establish in his possession as his imperial majesty have promise busca. assemble all the nobility, take their oath of allegiance and fidelity and thus their prince be. go trasilvania, become again subject to the emperor. now, after the death of michael busca, assist. assemble all the nobility, take their oath of allegiance and fidelity and thus their prince be. go trasilvania, become again subject to the emperor. now, after the death of michael busca, assist rodoll in wallachia, vavoyd of wallachia, the turk send one jeremy to be their vavoyd or prince, who insult tyranny, cause the people to take arm against he so that he be force to fly into the confine of moldavia. and busca, in the behalf of the emperor, proclaim the lord rodoll in his stead. but jeremy have, assemble a army of forty thousand turk, tartar and moldavian return into wallachia. rodoll, not yet able to raise such a power, flee into transilvania, to busca, his ancient friend, who consider well of the matter and how. turk, tartar and moldavian return into wallachia. rodoll, not yet able to raise such a power, flee into transilvania to busca, his ancient friend, who consider well of the matter and how good it will be for his own security to have wallachia subject to the emperor, or at least such a employment for the remainder of the old regiment of sigismundus, of who greatness and true affection he be very suspicious. send they with rodoll to recover wallachia, conduct by the valiant captain, the earl meldritch, earl earl nederspolt, earl zarvana, the lord bechlefield, the lord budendorfe, with their regiment and diverse other of great rank and quality, the great friend and alliance, the prince have, who, with thirty thousand, march along by the river to the lord budendorfe, with their regiment and diverse other of great rank and quality, the great friend and alliance the prince have, who, with thirty thousand, march along by the river to the straits of rebrinke where they enter wallachia. encamp at raza, jeremy lie at argish, draw his army into his old camp in the plain of peteske and, with his best diligence, fortify it, intend to defend himself till more power come to he from the crym-tartar, many small party that come to his camp rodoll, cut off and in the night, will cause their head to be throw up and down before the trench. seven of their porter be take who jeremy command to be stay quick and after hang their skin upon pole and their head to be throw up and down before the trench, seven of their porter be take who, jeremy, command to be stay quick and after hang their skin upon pole and their carcase and head on stake by they. chap x, the battle of rotenton. a pretty stratagem of firework by smith rodoll, not know how to draw the enemy to battle, raise his army, burn and spoil all where he come and return again towards rebrinke in the night, as if he have flee upon the general rumour of the crym-tartar come, which so inflame the turk of a happy victory. they urge jeremy, against his will, to follow they, rodoll, see his plot fall out as he desire. so order the matter that have regain the. the turk of a happy victory. they urge jeremy, against his will, to follow they. rodoll, see his plot fall out as he desire. so order the matter. that have regain the straits he put his army in order that have be near two day. pursue, with continual skirmish in his rear, a battle betwixt, rodoll and jeremy, which now make head against the enemy that follow with their whole army, in the best manner they can be furious. charge with six thousand hyduke, wallachian and moldavian, lead by three, colonel oversall, dubras and calab, to entertain the time till the rest come up and nederspolt with their regiment. entertain they with the like courage till the zanzacke hamesbeg, with six thousand more, come with a fresh charge. entertain the time till the rest come up and nederspolt with their regiment, entertain they with the like courage till the zanzacke. hamesbeg with six thousand more, come with a fresh charge which meldritch and budendorfe rather like enrage lion than man. so brave encounter, as if in they only have consist the victory. meldritchs horse, be slay under he, the turk, press what they can to have, take he prisoner but be remount it be think with his own hand he slay the valiant zanzacke, whereupon his troop retire. the two proud pasha, aladin and zizimmus, bring up the front of the body of their battle and nederspolt have breathe and join their troop with becklefield and zarvana with such a incredible courage, charge the leave flank. zizimmus bring up the front of the body of their battle and nederspolt have breathe and join their troop with becklefield and zarvana with such a incredible courage, charge the leave flank of zizimmus as put they all in disorder. where zizimmus the bashaw be take prisoner but die present upon his wound. jeremy, see now the main battle of rodoll, advance be thus constrain, like a valiant prince in his front of the vanguard. by his example, so brave, encourage his soldier that rodoll find no great assurance of the victory. thus be join in this bloody massacre that there be scarce ground to stand upon, but upon the dead carcase which, in less than a hour, be so mingle as if each regiment have single out. this bloody massacre that there be scarce ground to stand upon, but upon the dead carcase which, in less than a hour, be so mingle as if each regiment have single out other. the admire aladin that day, do leave behind, he, a glorious name for his valour, who death. many of his enemy do lament after the victory, which, at that instant sell to rodoll- it be report jeremy be also slay, but it be not so- but flee with the remainder of his army to moldavia, leave five and twenty thousand dead in the field of both army. wallachia subject to the emperor and thus rodoll be seat again in his sovereignty and wallachia become subject to the emperor, but long he rest not to settle. field of both army, wallachia subject to the emperor, and thus rodoll be seat again in his sovereignty and wallachia become subject to the emperor. but long he rest, not to settle his new estate. but there come news that certain regiment of straggle tartar be forage those part towards moldavia. meldritch with thirteen thousand man be send against they. but when they hear it be the crym-tartar and his two son with a army of thirty thousand and jeremy that have escape with fourteen or fifteen thousand lay in ambush for they about langanaw, he retire towards rottenton, a strong garrison for rodoll. but they be so environ with these hellish number they can make no great haste for skirmish with their scout forager and small party. retire towards rottenton, a strong garrison for rodoll, but they be so environ with these hellish number. they can make no great haste for skirmish with their scout forager and small party that still encounter. they but, one night among the rest, have make a passage through a wood with a incredible expedition, cut tree, thwart each other to hinder their passage in a thick fog. early in the morning. unexpected, they meet two thousand load with pillage and two or three hundred horse and cattle, the most of they be slay and take prisoner. who tell they where jeremy lie in the passage. expect the crym-tartar that be not far from he meldritch intend to make his passage perforce. be advise of a pretty stratagem by the. tell they where jeremy lie in the passage, expect the crym-tartar that be not far from he meldritch intend to make his passage perforce. be advise of a pretty stratagem by the english smith which present he thus accomplish. for have accommodate two or three hundred trunk with wild fire upon the head of lance and charge the enemy in the night. give fire to the trunk, which blaze forth such flame and sparkle that it so amaze not only their horse but their foot also, that by the mean of this fl^ming encounter their own horse turn tail with such fury as by their violence overthrow jeremy and his army without any loss at all to speak of to meldritch. but of this victory long they triumph. horse turn tail with such fury as by their violence overthrow jeremy and his army without any loss at all to speak of to meldritch. but of this victory long they triumph not, for be within three league of rottenton, the tartar with near forty thousand, so beset they that they must either fight or be cut in piece. fly here. busca and the emperor have their desire for the sun no soon display his beam than the tartar, his colour, where at midday he stay a while to see the passage of a tyrannical and treacherous imposture, till the earth do blush with the blood of honesty that the sun, for shame, do hide himself from so monstrous sight of a cowardly calamity. it be a most. treacherous imposture. till the earth do blush with the blood of honesty that the sun for shame do hide himself from so monstrous sight of a cowardly calamity. it be a most brave sight to see the banner and ensign stream in the air, the glitter of armour, the variety of colour, the motion of plume, the forest of lance and the thickness of short weapon, till the silent expedition of the bloody blast from the murder ordnance who roar voice be not so soon hear as feel by the aim at object which make among they a most lamentable slaughter. chap 11, the name of the english that be slay in the battle of rottenton and how captain smith be take prisoner and sell for a slave. they a most lamentable slaughter. chap 11, the name of the english that be slay in the battle of rottenton, and how captain smith be take prisoner and sell for a slave. in the valley of veristhorne, betwixt, the river of and the mountain of rottenton. be this bloody encounter where the most of the dear friend of the noble prince, sigismundus perish meldritch, have order his eleven thousand in the best manner he can. at the ^oot of the mountain, upon his flank and before his front he have pitch sharp, stake their head, harden in the fire and bend against the enemy as three battalion of pike, among the which also there be, dig many small hole, the battle of rottenton, among those stake be range. in the fire and bend against the enemy as three battalion of pike, among the which also there be, dig many small hole. the battle of rottenton. among those stake be range his footman. that upon the charge be to retire as there be occasion. the tartar have order his 40000.. for his best advantage, appoint mustapha bashaw to begin the battle with a general shout. all their ensign display: drum beat, trumpet and howboye sound. nederspolt and mavazo with their regiment of horse, most valiant encounter and force they to retire. the tartar. begolgi with his squadron darken the sky with their flight of numberless arrow. who be as brave, encounter by and oberwin, which bloody slaughter continue more than a hour till the matchless multitude of. his squadron darken the sky with their flight of numberless arrow. who be as brave? encounter by and oberwin, which bloody slaughter continue more than a hour till the matchless multitude of the tartar so increase that they retire within their squadron of stake as be direct the bloody tartar as scorn he shall st^y so long for the victory with his massy troop prosecute the charge, but it be a wonder to see how horse and man come to the ground among the stake. who disorder troop be there so mangle that the christian, with a loud shout, cry victoria and with five or six field piece plant upon the rise of the mountain, do much hurt to the enemy that still continue the battle with that. a loud shout, cry victoria. and with five or six field piece plant upon the rise of the mountain, do much hurt to the enemy. that still continue the battle with that fury that meldritch see there be no possibility long to prevail, join his small troop in one body, resolve direct to make his passage or die in the conclusion and thus in gross, give a general charge and for more than half a hour make his way plain before he till the main battle of the crym-tartar with two regiment of turk and janissary. so overmatch they that they be overthrow the night, approach the earl with some thirteen or fourteen hundred horse, swim the river, some be drown, all the rest slay or take prisoner. so overmatch they that they be overthrow the night, approach the earl with some thirteen or fourteen hundred horse, swim the river, some be drown, all the rest slay or take prisoner. and thus, in this bloody field, near 30000.. lay some headless, armless and leglesse, all cut and mangle where breathe their last. they give this knowledge to the world that for the life of so few, the crym-tartar never pay dear. but now the country of transilvania and wallachia, subject to the emperor and sigismundus, that brave prince, his subject and pensioner, the most of his nobility, brave captain and soldier, become a prey to the cruel devour turk. where have the emperor be as ready to have assist he and those three army, lead by of his nobility, brave captain and soldier, become a prey to the cruel devour turk. where have the emperor be as ready to have assist he and those three army, lead by three such worthy captain as michael busca and himself, and have those three army join together against the turk? extract out of a book entitle the warn of hungaria, wall^^hia and moldavia, write by francisco f^rneza, a learned italian, the prince secretary, and translate by mr purcha. let all man judge how happy it may have be for all christendom and have either regain bulgaria or at least have beat he out of hungaria, where he have take much more from the emperor than have the emperor from transilvania in this dismal battle where nederspolt zarvana bulgaria, or at least have beat he out of hungaria, where he have take much more from the emperor than have the emperor from transilvania. in this dismal battle where nederspolt, zarvana, mavazo, bavell and many other, earl, baron, colonel, captain, brave gentleman and soldier be slay give. i leave to remember the name of our own countryman, with he in those exploit, the english man in this battle that, as resolute as the best in the defence of christ and his gospel, end their day as bask^rfield hardwicke, thomas milemer, robert mullineux, thomas bishop, francis compton, george davison, nicholas williams and one john a scot, do what man can do and when they can do no more, leave there their body in testimony of their mind only. compton, george davison, nicholas williams and one john, a scot, do what man can do and when they can do no more, leave there their body in testimony of their mind. only ensign carleton and sergeant robinson escape, but smith among the slaughter dead body and many a gasp soul with toil and wound lay groan among the rest, till be find by the pillager. he be able to live and perceive by his armour and habit his ransom may be better to they than his death. they lead he prisoner with many other. well, they use he till, his wound be cure and at axopolis they be all sell for slave like beast in a marketplace where every merchant view their limb and wound cause other slave. use he till his wound be cure, and at axopolis they be all sell for slave like beast in a marketplace where every merchant view their limb and wound, cause other slave to struggle with they to try their strength. he fall to the share of bashaw bogall who send he forthwith to adrinopolis. so for constantinople to his fair mistress, for a slave by twenty and twenty chain by the neck. they march in file to this great city where they be deliver to their several master and he to the young tragabig. chap 12: how captain smith be send prisoner through the black and dissabacca sea in tartary, the description of those sea and his usage. this noble gentlewoman take sometime occasion to show he to. how captain smith be send prisoner through the black and dissabacca sea in tartary, the description of those sea and his usage. this noble gentlewoman take sometime occasion to show he to some friend, or rather to speak with he, because she can speak italian, will feign herself sick when she shall go to the banian or weep over the grave to know how bogall take he prisoner and if he be, as the bashaw write to she, a bohemian lord conquer by his hand, as he have many other which ere long he will present she who ransom shall adorn she with the glory of his conquest, but when she hear he protest, he know no such matter, nor ever see bogall till he buy he at. she who ransom shall adorn she with the glory of his conquest. but when she hear he protest he know no such matter, nor ever see bogall till he buy he at axopolis and that he be a englishman. only by his adventure make a captain in those country. to try the truth she find mean to find out. many can speak english, french, dutch and italian to who relate most part of these former passage he think necessary, which they so honest report to she. she take, as it seem, much compassion on he but have no use for he. leave her mother shall sell he. she send he to her brother, the tymor bashaw of nalbrit in the country of cambia, a province in tartary here. have no use for he leave her mother shall sell he. she send he to her brother, the tymor bashaw of nalbrit, in the country of cambia, a province in tartary. here now, let we remember his pass in this speculative course from constantinople, by saunder, screwe, panassa, musa, lastilla, to varna, how he be send into tartary, a ancient city upon the black sea, in all which journey have little more liberty than his eye judgement since his captivity, he may see the town with their short tower and a most plain, fertile and delicate country especial, that most admire place of greece now call romania. but from varna, nothing but the black sea water (@) he come to the two cape of taur and pergilos, where country especial, that most admire place of greece now call romania, but from varna nothing but the black sea water (@). he come to the two cape of taur and pergilos, where he pass the straight of niger which, as he conjecture, be some ten league long and three broad, betwixt, two low land, the channel be deep, but at the entrance of the sea, dissabacca- the description of the dissabacca sea- their be many great osie-shou^ds and many great black ro^kes, which the turk say be tree weed and mud, throw from the inland country by the inundation and violence of the current and cast there by the eddy. they sail by many low isle and see many more of those muddy ro^kes and nothing else but. by the inundation and violence of the current and cast there by the eddy. they sail by many low isle and see many more of those muddy ro^kes and nothing else but salt water till they come betwixt susax and curuske, only two white town at the entrance of the river. bruapo, appear in six or seven day sail. he see four or five seem strong castle of stone with flat top and battlement about. they but arrive at cambia. he be according to their custom. well, use the river, be there more than half a mile broad, the castle be of a large circumference, foure^^ene or fifteen foot thick in the foundation, some six foot from the wall, be a paliizado and then a ditch of about. mile broad. the castle be of a large circumference, foure^^ene or fifteen foot thick in the foundation, some six foot from the wall. be a paliizado and then a ditch of about forty foot broad full of water on the west side of it. be a town all of low, flat house which, as be conceive, can be of no great strength. yet it keep all they barbarous country about it in admiration and subjection. after he have stay there three day, it be two day more, before his guide bring he to nalbrit, where the tymor then be resident in a great, vast stony castle with many great court about it, environ with high stone wall where be quarter their arm when they first subject those country. tymor then be resident in a great, vast stony castle with many great court about it environ, with high stone wall, where be quarter their arm when they first subject those country which only live to labour for those tyrannical turk. smith his usage in tar^^ria to her unkind brother, this kind lady write so much for his good usage that he half suspect as much as she intend for she tell he he shall there but sojourn to learn the language and what it be to be a turk till time make her master of herself. but the tymor, her brother, divert all this to the worst of cruelty, for within a hour^ after his arrival he cause his drub-man to strip he naked and shave his herself. but the tymor, her brother, divert all this to the worst of cruelty, for within a hour^ after his arrival he cause his drub-man to strip. he naked and shave his head and beard so bare as his hand. a great ring of iron with a long stalk bow like a sickle rivet about his neck and a coat make of vlgries hair guard about with a piece of a undress skin. there be many more christian slave and near a hundred forsado of turk and moor, and he be the last be slave of slave to they all. among these slavish fortune, there be no great choice for the best be so bad a dog can hardly have live to endure. and yet for all their slave to they all. among these slavish fortune, there be no great choice for the best. be so bad a dog can hardly have live to endure and yet, for all their pain and labour, no more regard than a beast. chap 13: the turk diet, the slave diet, the attire of the tartar and manner of war and religion, etc. the tymors diet of cambia. be as the turk, the tymor and his friend feed upon pillaw which be boil, rice and garnance with little bit of mutton or buckone which be roast piece of horse, bull, vlgrie or any beast. samboyse and muselbit be great dainty and yet but round pie full of all sort of flesh they can get chap with variety of herb, their horse, bull, vlgrie or any beast. samboyse and muselbit be great dainty and yet but round pie full of all sort of flesh they can get chap with variety of herb. their best drink be coffa of a grain they call coava, boil with water and sherbecke which be only honey and water, m^res milk or the milk of any beast they hold restorative, but all the commonalty drink pure water. the slave diet. their bread be make of this coava, which be a kind of black whea^ and cuskus, a small white seed like millya in biskay, but our common victual, the entrails of horse and vlgry. of this, cut in small piece they will fill a great cauldron and be boil with cuskus and put in. in biskay, but our common victual, the entrails of horse and vlgry. of this, cut in small piece, they will fill a great cauldron and be boil with cuskus and put in great bowl in the form of chaffing-dish. they sit round about it on the ground after they have rake it through so oft as they please with their soul fist. the remainder be for the christian slave. some of this broth they will temper with cuskus pound and put the fire off from the hearth, pour there a bowl full, then cover it with co^les till it be bake which stew with the remainder of the broth and some small piece of flesh be a extraordinary dainty, the better sort be attire like turk the attire. co^les till it be bake, which stew with the remainder of the broth and some small piece of flesh be a extraordinary dainty. the better sort be attire like turk, the attire o^ those tartar, but the plain tartar. have a black sheep skin over his back and two of the leg tie about his neck, the other two about his middle with another over his belly and the leg tie in the like manner behind he, then two more make like a pair of base serve he for breech with a little close cap to his skull of black feel, and they use exceed much of this, felt for carpet for bed, for coat and idol. their house be much worse than your irish, but the inland his skull of black feel and they use exceed much of this, felt for carpet, for bed, for coat and idol. their house be much worse than your irish, but the inland country have none but cart and tent, which they ever remove from country to country as they see occasion, drive with they infinite troop of black sheep, cattle and vlgry eat all up before they as they go for the tartar of nagi. they have neither town nor house, corn, the tartar of nagi and their manner, nor drink, but flesh and milk, the milk they keep in great skin, like burracho, which, though it be never so sour, it agree well with their strong stomach. they live all in hordias, as do the crim-tartar three. milk they keep in great skin, like burracho which, though it be never so sour, it agree well with their strong stomach. they live all in hordias, as do the crim-tartar, three or four hundred in a company in great cart fifteen or sixteen foot broad, which be cover with small rod wattle together in the form of a bird nest, turn upward and with the ash of bone temper, with oil, camel hair and a clay they have they, loam they so well that no weather will pierce they, and yet, very light, each hordia have a murse which they obey as their king. their god be infinite. one or two thousand of those glitter white cart draw with camel, dear bull and vlgry they bring round. have a murse which they obey as their king. their god be infinite. one or two thousand of those glitter white cart draw, with camel, dear bull and vlgry they bring round in a ring where they pitch their camp, and the murse with his chief alliance be place in the midst. they do much hurt when they can get any strogg, which be great boat use upon the river volga, which they call edle to they that dwell in the country of perolog and will do much more, be it not for the muscovite garrison that there inhabit. chap 14, the description of the crym-tartar, their house and cart, their idolatry in their lodging. now you be to understand the description of the crym-tartar court, tartary and that there inhabit. chap 14, the description of the crym-tartar, their house and cart, their idolatry in their lodging. now you be to understand the description of the crym-tartar court. tartary and scythia be all one but so large and spacious. few or none can ever perfect describe it, nor all the several kind of those most barbarous people that inhabit it. those we call the crym-tartar border upon moldavia, podolia, lituania and russia. be much more regular than the interior part of scythia. this great tartarian prince that have so trouble all his neighbour they always call chan, which signify emperor, but we the crym-tartar. he live for most part in the best champion plain of many province and his remove court be like a great city. always call chan, which signify emperor, but we the crym-tartar. he live for most part in the best champion plain of many province and his remove court be like a great city of house and tent, draw on cart, all so orderly, place east and west, on the right and left hand of the prince, his house, which be always in the midst, towards the south, before which none may pitch their house. every one know their order and quarter. his house and cart, as in a army. the prince house be very artificial, wrought both the foundation side and roof of wicker, ascend round to the top like a dove-coat. this they cover with white felt or white earth temper with the powder of bone that it. the foundation side and roof of wicker ascend round to the top like a dove-coat. this they cover with white felt or white earth temper with the powder of bone that it may shine the white, sometime with black felt, curious paint, with vine, tree, bird and beast. the breadth of the cart be eighteen or twenty foot but the house stretch four or five foot over each side and be draw with ten or twelve or for more state twenty, camel and oxen basket. they have also great basket make of small wicker like great chest with a cover or the same all cover over with black felt rub, over with tallow and sheep milk to keep out the rain, pretty bedeck with paint or feather in. chest with a cover or the same all cover over with black felt, rub over with tallow and sheep milk to keep out the rain, pretty bedeck with paint or feather. in those they put their household stuff and treasure. draw upon other cart for that purpose. when they take down their house they set the door always towards the south and their cart thirty or forty foot distant on each side, east and west, as if they be two wall. the woman also have most curious cart. every one of his wife have a great one for herself and so many other for her attendant that they seem as many court as he have wife. one great tartar or nobleman will have for his particular more than one for herself and so many other for her attendant that they seem as many court as he have. wife. one great tartar or nobleman will have for his particular more than a hundred of those house and cart for his several office and use, but set so far from each other they will seem like a great village. their idolatry in their lodging have take their house from the cart they place the master always towards the north, over who head be always a image like a puppet make of felt which they call his brother, the woman on his left hand and over the chief mistress her head, such another brother and between they a little one which be the keeper of the house at the brother, the woman on his left hand and over the chief mistress her head. such another brother, and between they a little one which be the keeper of the house. at the good wife, beds-foot be a kid, skin stuff with wool and near it a puppet. look towards the maid next the door, another with a dry cow udder for the woman that milk the kine, because only the man milk mare every morning. those image in their order. they besprinkle with that they drink, be it cossmos, cossmos, be m^^e^, m^^ke or whatsoever, but all the white mare milk be reserve for the prince. then, without the door thrice to the south, every one bow his knee in honour of the fire. then the like to. all the white mare milk be reserve for the prince. then, without the door, thrice to the south, every one bow his knee in honour of the fire, then the like to the east, in honour of the air, then to the west in honour of the water, and last to the north in behalf of the dead. after the servant have do this duty to the four quarter of the world, he return into the house where his fellow stand, wait ready with two cup and two bason to give their master and his wife that lie with he (@) night to wash and drink. who must keep he company all the day follow and all his other wife come thither to drink where he keep his that lie with he (@) night to wash and drink. who must keep he company all the day follow and all his other wife come thither to drink where he keep his house that day and all the gift present he till night be lay up in her chest and at the door a bench full of cup and drink for any of they to make merry chap 15 their feast, common diet, prince estate building, tribute, law, slave, entertainment of ambassador. for their feast they have all sort of beast, bird, fish, fruit their feast, and herb they can get, but the more variety of wild one be the best, to which they have excellent drink make of rice and honey. like wine they have also wine. and herb they can get, but the more variety of wild one be the best, to which they have excellent drink, make of rice and honey. like wine, they have also wine, but in summer they drink most cossmos that stand ready always at the entrance of the door and by it a fiddler. when the master of the house begin to drink, they all cry, ha ha, and the fiddler play than they all clap their hand and dance, the man before their master, the woman before their mistress, and ever when he drink they cry as before. then the fiddler stay till they drink all round. sometime they will drink for the victory, and to provoke one to drink they will pull he by the ear. cry as before. then the fiddler stay till they drink all round. sometime they will drink for the victory and to provoke one to drink they will pull he by the ear and lug and draw he to stretch and heat. he clap their hand, stamp with their foot and dance before the champion offer they cup, then draw they back again to increase their appetite and thus continue till they be drink or their drink do, which they hold a honour and no infirmity. though the ground be fertile, they sow little corn, their common diet yet the gentleman have bread and hony-wine grape. they have plenty and wine, private and good flesh and fish, but the common sort stamp mingle with milk and water, they call. diet. yet the gentleman have bread and hony-wine grape, they have plenty- and wine, private and good flesh and fish, but the common sort stamp mingle with milk and water. they call for meat and drink any thing also any beast unprofitable for service. they kill when they be like to die, or however they die they will eat. they gut liver and all but the most fleshy part. they cut in thin slice and hang it up in the sun and wind, wihout salt where it will dry so hard it will not putrify in a long time. a ram they esteem a great feast among forty or fifty, which they cut in piece, boil or roast, put it in a great bowl with salt and water. a long time a ram. they esteem a great feast among forty or fifty, which they cut in piece, boil or roast, put it in a great bowl with salt and water. for other sauce they have none. the master of the feast give every one a piece, which he eat by himself or carry away with he how they become populous. thus their hard fare make they so infinite in cattle and their great number of captive woman to breed upon make they so populous. but near the christian frontier, the base sort make little cottage of wood, call vlusi, daub over with dirt and beast dung, cover with sedge. yet in summer they leave. they begin their progress in april with their wife, child and slave. cottage of wood, call vlusi, daub over with dirt and beast dung, cover with sedge. yet in summer they leave. they begin their progress in april with their wife, child and slave in their cart house, scarce, convenient for four or five person, drive their flock towards perecopya and sometime into taurica or osow, a town upon the river tanais which be great and swift, where the turk have a garrison, and in october return again to their cottage. their clothes be the skin of dog, goat and sheep, line with cotton cloth, make of their fine wool for of their worst. they make their felt, which they use in abundance as well for shoe and cap, as house bed and idol, also of the coarse wool mingle. fine wool for of their worst they make their felt, which they use in abundance as well for shoe and cap, as house bed and idol also of the coarse wool mingle with horse hair, they make all their cordage their prince state. notwithstanding this wander life, their prince sit in great state upon bed or carpit and with great reverence be attend both by man and woman and rich, serve in plate and great silver cup, deliver upon the knee, attire in rich fur line with plush or taffety or robe of tissue. these tartar possess many large and goodly plain wherein feed innumerable herd of horse and cattle as well, wild as tame, which be elke, bisone, horse, dear sheep, goat, swine, bear and diverse other. possess many large and goodly plain wherein feed innumerable herd of horse and cattle as well, wild as tame, which be elke, bisone, horse, dear sheep, goat, swine, bear and diverse other ancient building in those country, be the ruin of many fair monastery, castle and city, as bacasaray, almassary, perecopya, sedacom, capha and diverse other by the sea, but all keep with strong garrison for the great turk who yearly, by trade or traffic, receive the chief commodity those fertile country afford as bezer, rice, fur, hide, commodity for tribute to the turk, butter, salt cattle and slave. yet by the spoil they get from the secure and idle christian they maintain themselves in this pomp, also their wife, of who they have as many as they. cattle and slave, yet by the spoil they get from the secure and idle christian they maintain themselves in this pomp. also their wife, of who they have as many as they will, very costly, yet in a constant custom with decency. go^d law, yet no lawyer. they be mahometan, as be the turk, from who also they have their law, but no lawyer nor attorney. only judge and justice in every village or hordia, but capital criminal or matter of moment before the chan himself or privy counsel, of who they be always hear and speedy discharge, for any may have access at any time to they, before who they appear with great reverence. adore their prince as god and their spiritual judge as saint for justice. speedy discharge, for any may have access at any time to they before who they appear with great reverence. adore their prince as god and their spiritual judge as saint for justice. be with such integrity and expedition, execute without covetousness, bribery, partiality and brawl that in six month they have sometime scarce six cause to hear about the prince court. none but his guard wear any weapon, but abroad they go very strong because there be many bandyto and thief their slave. they use the hungarian, russian, wallachian and moldavian slave- whereof they have plenty- as beast to every work, and those tartar that serve the chan or nobleman have only victual and apparel. the rest be general, nasty and idle, natural, miserable and in their war. as beast to every work, and those tartar that serve the chan or nobleman have only victual and apparel. the rest be general, nasty and idle, natural, miserable and in their war better thief than soldier. th^s chan have yearly a donative from the king of poland () the duke of lituania, moldavia and nagagon tartar, their messenger. common he use, bountiful and very noble but sometime most cruel. when any of they do bring their present by his household officer, they be entertain in a plain field with a moderate proportion of flesh, bread and wine for once. but when they come before he, the sultaine tuians vlans marhies, his chief officer and councillor, attend one man only. bring the ambassador to the court gate, but to wine for once. but when they come before he, the sultaine tuians vlans marhies, his chief officer and councillor, attend. one man only bring the ambassador to the court gate, but to the chan he be lead between two councillor where salute he, upon their bend knee, declare their message, be admit to eat with he and present with a great silver cup full of mead from his own hand, but they drink it upon their knee when they aredispatch he invite they again. the feast end. they go back a little from the palace door and reward with silk vesture wrought with gold down to their ankle, with a horse or two and sometime a slave of their own nation in they robe present they come to. and reward, with silk vesture wrought with gold down to their ankle, with a horse or two and sometime a slave of their own nation. in they robe present, they come to he again to give he thanks, take their leave and so depart. chap 16: how he levi a army, their arm and provision, how he divide the spoil and his service to the great turk when he intend any war, how he levi a army, he must first have leave of the great turk who he be bind to assist when he command, receive daily for himself and chief of his nobility pension from the turk that hold all king but slave, that pay tribute or be subject to any signify his intent to all his daily for himself and chief of his nobility, pension from the turk that hold all king but slave that pay tribute or be subject to any signify his intent to all his subject. within a month common he raise his army and every man be to furnish himself for three month victual, which be parch, millit or ground to meal, which they ordinary mingle with water, as be say hard cheese or crud dry and beat to powder a little will make much water like milk and dry flesh. this they put also up in sack. the chan and his noble have some bread and aquavitae and quick cattle to kill when they please, wherewith very spare they be content, be provide with expert guide and get into the chan and his noble have some bread and aquavitae and quick cattle to kill when they please. wherewith very spare they be content. be provide with expert guide and get into the country he intend to invade. he send forth his scout to bring in what prisoner they can, from who he will wrest the utmost of their knowledge, fit for his purpose. have advise with his council what be most fit to be. do the nobility according to their antiquity, do march. then move he with his whole army. if he find there be no enemy to oppose he, he advise how far they shall invade. command every man, upon pain of his life, to kill all the obvious, rustic, but not to hurt any woman. no enemy to oppose. he, he advise how far they shall invade, command every man upon pain of his life to kill all the obvious rustic, but not to hurt any woman or child. ten or fifteen thousand, he common, place the manner of his war where he find most convenient for his stand camp. the rest of his army he divide in several troop bear, ten or twelve mile square before they, and ever, within three or four day, return to their camp, put all to fire and sword, but that they carry with they back to their camp. and in this scatter manner he will invade a country and be go with his prey, with a incredible expedition. but if he understand of a enemy, he back to their camp and in this scatter manner he will invade a country and be go with his prey with a incredible expedition. but if he understand of a enemy, he will either fight in ambuscado or fly, for he will never fight any battle, if he can choose, but upon treble advantage. yet by his innumerable flight of arrow i have see fly from his fly troop. we can not well judge whether his fight or fly be most dangerous. so good be h^s horse and so expert his bowman. but if they be so entangle they must fight. there be none can be more hardy or resolute in their defence. regain he own border. how he divide the spoil. he take the ten of the. so entangle, they must fight there be none can be more hardy or resolute in their defence. regain he own border. how he divide the spoil. he take the ten of the principal captive, man, woman, child or beast, but his captain, that t^ke they will accept of some particular person they best like for themselves. the rest be divide among the whole army, according to every man, desert and quality that they keep they or sell they to who will give most. but they will not forget to use all the mean they can to know their estate, friend and quality. and the better they find you, the worse they will use you till you do agree to pay such a ransom as they will impose upon. know their estate, friend and quality, and the better they find you, the worse they will use you till you do agree to pay such a ransom as they will impose upon you. therefore many great person have ^ndured much misery to conceal themselves because their ransom intolerable. their best hope be of some christian agent that many time come to redeem slave, either with money or man for man. those agent know so well the extreme covetousness of the tartar do use to bribe some jew or merchant that feign they will sell they again to some other nation. be oft redeem for a very small ransom, how the chan do serve the great turk, but to this tartarian army. when the turk command he go with. to some other nation be oft redeem for a very small ransom, how the chan do serve the great turk, but to this tartarian army, when the turk command he go with some small artillery and the nagagians, perecopen, crime, osoven and cersessians be his tributary, but the petigorve, oczaconians, byalogordens and dobrucen tartar, the turk by covenant command to follow. he so that from all those tartar he have have a army of a hundred and twenty thousand excellent, swift, stomachful tartarian horse for foot. they have none. now the chan, his sultaine and nobility, use turkish, caramanian, arabian, parthian and other strange tartarian horse, the swift they esteem the best. seldom they feed any more at home than they have present use for, but upon their use turkish, caramanian, arabian, parthian and other strange tartarian horse, the swift they esteem the best. seldom they feed any more at home than they have present use for. but upon their plain be a short wood, like heath in some country, like gale full of berry, far, much better than any grass. their arm, their arm be such as they have surprise, or get from the christian or persian both brest-plate, sword, semitere and helmet, bow and arrow they make most themselves. also their bridle and saddle be indifferent. but the nobility be very handsome and well arm, like the turk in who consist their great glory. the ordinary sort have little armour, some a plain young pole, unshaven head with a piece of iron for a. and well arm, like the turk in who consist their great glory. the ordinary sort have little armour, some a plain young pole, unshaven head with a piece of iron for a lance, some a old christian pike or a turk cavatine. yet those tattertimallion will have two or three horse, some four or five as well for service as for to eat, which make their army seem thrice so many as there be soldier. the chan himself have about his person ten thousand. choose tartar and janissary, some small ordnance and a white mare tail with a piece of green taffety on a great pike be carry before he for a standard, because they hold no beast so precious as a white mare who milk be only. with a piece of green taffety on a great pike, be carry before he for a standard, because they hold no beast so precious as a white mare who milk be only for the king and nobility and to sacrifice to their idol. but the rest have ensign of dive^s colour. for all this, miserable knowledge, furniture and equipage, th^ mischief, they do, in christendom, be wonderful by reason of their hardness of life and constitution, obedience, agility and their emperor bounty, honour, grace and dignity he ever bestow upon those that have. do he any memorable service in the face of his enemy? the caspian sea. a description of the caspian sea: most man agree that have pass it to be in length about 200.. league and memorable service in the face of his enemy. the caspian sea. a description of the caspian sea most man agree that have pass it to be in length about 200. league and in breadth, a hundred and fifty environ. to the east with the great desert of the tartar, of turkamane, to the west by the circass and the mountain caucasus, to the north by the river volga and the land of nagay, and to the south by media and persia. this sea be fresh water in many place, in other as salt as the great ocean. it have many great river which fall into it, as the mighty river of volga, which be like a sea, run near two thousand mile through many great and large country. ocean. it have many great river which fall into it, as the mighty river of volga, which be like a sea, run near two thousand mile through many great and large country that send into it many other great river also, out of saberya, yaick and yem, out of the great mountain caucasus, the river sirus, arash and diverse other, yet no sea near it than the black sea, which be at least a hundred league distant, in which country live the georgian, now part armenian, part nestorian. it be neither find to increase or diminish or empty itself any way, except it be under ground. and in some place they can find no ground at two hundred fathom many other most strange and wonderful thing be in. or empty itself any way, except it be under ground and in some place they can find no ground at two hundred fathom. many other most strange and wonderful thing be in the land of cathay, towards the north-east, and china towards the southeast. where be many of the most famous kingdom in the world, where most art, plenty and curiosity be in such abundance as may seem incredible, which hereafter i will relate as i have brief gather from such author as have live there, chap 17, how captain smith escape his captivity, slay the bashaw of nalbrit in cambia, his passage to russia, transilvania and the midst of europe to africa. all the hope he have ever to be deliver from this thraldom. how smith es^^. bashaw of nalbrit in cambia, his passage to russia, transilvania and the midst of europe, to africa. all the hope he have ever to be deliver from this thraldom. how smith es^^? his captivity be only the love of tragabigzanda, who sure be ignorant of his bad usage. for although he have often debate the matter with some christian that have be there a long time slave, they can not find how to make a escape by any reason or possibility. but god, beyond man expectation or imagination, help his servant when they least think of help, as it happen to he, so long he live in this miserable estate as he become a thresher at a grange in a great field more than a league from the. help, as it happen to he. so long he live in this miserable estate as he become a thresher at a grange in a great field, more than a league from the tymor house, the bashaw, as he oft use to visit his grange, visit he and rock occasion. so to beat, spurn and revile he that forget all reason. he beat out the tymor brain with his thresh bat, for they have no flail. and see, his estate can be no worse than it be. clothe himself in his clothes, hide his body under the straw, fill his knapsack with corn, shut the door, mount his horse and run into the desert at all adventure. two or three day, thus fearful wander he know not whither and straw, fill his knapsack with corn, shut the door, mount his horse and run into the desert at all adventure, two or three day, thus fearful wander he know not whither, and well it be. he meet not any to ask the way. be even as take l^ave of this miserable world, god do direct he to the great way, or castragan as they call it, which do cross these large territory and general know among they by these mark their guide in those country, in every cross of this great way, be plant a post and in it so many bob with broad end as there be way, and every bob the figure paint on it that demonstrate to what part that way lead, as that which and in it so many bob with broad end as there be way, and every bob, the figure paint on it that demonstrate to what part that way lead. as that which point towards the crym country, be mark with a half monne. if towards the georgian and persia, a black man full of white spot. if towards china, the picture of the sun. if towards muscovia, the sign of a cross. if towards the habitation of any other prince, the figure whereby his standard be know to his die spirit. thus, god, add some comfort in this melancholy journey wherein, if he have meet any of that vild generation, they have make he their slave or know the figure engrave in the iron about his neck as in this melancholy journey wherein, if he have meet any of that vild generation, they have make he their slave or know the figure engrave in the iron about his neck, as all slave have, he have be send back again to his master. sixteen day he travel in this fear and torment, after the cross, till he arrive at aecopolis, upon the river don, a garrison of the muscovite. the governor, after due examination of those, his hard event, take off his iron and so kind use he, he think himself, new rise from death and the good lady callamata, large supply, all his want. the description of ca^bia, this be as much as he can learn of those wild country and his passage to r^ssia. that. and the good lady callamata, large supply all his want the description of ca^bia. this be as much as he can learn of those wild country and his passage to r^ssia that the country of cambia be two day journey from the head of the great river bruapo, which spring from many place of the mountain of innagachi that join themselves together in the pool kerkas, which they account for the head and fall into the sea, dissabacca, call by some, the lake meotis, which receive also the river tanais and all the river that fall from the great country of the circassi, the cartache and many from the tauricae, precope, cummani, cossunka and the crime, through which sea he sail, and up the river bruapo to nalbrit. from the great country of the circassi, the cartache, and many from the tauricae, precope, cummani, cossunka and the crime, through which sea he sail, and up the river bruapo to nalbrit and thence through the desert of circassi to, as be relate, where he stay with the governor till the convoy. go to coraguaw, then, with his certificate, how he find he and have examine with his friendly letter, send he by zumalacke to caragnaw, who governor in like manner. so kind, use he that by this mean he go with a safe conduct to letch and donka in cologoske and thence to berniske and newgrod in seberia by rezechica, upon the river niper, in the confine of littuania, from whence, with as much kindness he be, letch and donka in cologoske and thence to berniske and newgrod in seberia, by rezechica, upon the river niper, in the confine of littuania, from whence with as much kindness he be convoy in like manner by coroski, duberesko, duzihell and ostroge in volonis, saslaw and lasco, in podolia and collonia in polonia, and so to in transilvania. in all his life he seldom meet with more respect, mirth, content and entertainment, and not any governor where he come, but give he somewhat as a present beside his charge, see themselves as subject to the like calamity. his observation in his journey to transilvania through the midst of europ^ through those poor, continual forage country, there be no passage but with the caravan or convoy for they be. calamity, his observation in his journey to transilvania. through the midst of europ^, through those poor, continual forage country, there be no passage but with the caravan or convoy, for they be country rather to be pity than envy, and it be a wonder any shall make war. for they, the village, be only here and there a few house of straight fir tree lay head and point above one another, make fast by notch at the end more than a man height and with broad split board pin together with wooden pin as thatch for coverture. in ten village you shall scarce find ten iron nail, except it be in some extraordinary man house for their town, aecopolis, letch and d^nko have rampier make of that wooden. coverture in ten village you shall scarce find ten iron nail, except it be in some extraordinary man house for their town, aecopolis. letch and d^nko have rampier make of that wooden wall fashion double and betwixt. they earth and stone but so latch with cross timber they be very strong against any thing but fire, and about they a deep ditch and a palizado of young fir tree, but most of the rest have only a great ditch cast about they, and the ditch earth be all their rampire but round well environ with palisade. some have some few small piece of small ordnance and sling, caliever and musket, but their general weapon be the ruff, bow and arrow. you shall find pavement over bog only of. some have some few small piece of small ordnance and sling, caliever and musket, but their general weapon be the ruff bow and arrow. you shall find pavement over bog only of young fir tree lay across one over another for two or three hour journey or as the passage require. and yet in two day travel you shall scarce see six, habitation notwithstanding. to see how their lord, governor and captain be civilise well, attire and acoutre with jewel, sable and horse, and after their manner with curious furniture, it be wonderful. but they be all lord or slave which make they so subject to every invasion. in transilvania he find so many good friend that, but to see and rejoice himself after all those encounter in. all lord or slave which make they so subject to every invasion. in transilvania he find so many good friend that but to see and rejoice himself after all those encounter in his native country he will ever hardly have. leave they though, the mirror of virtue, their prince be absent, be thus glut with content and near drown with joy. he pass high hungaria by fileck cassovia and vnderoroway by vlmicht in moravia to prague in bohemia. at last he find the most gracious prince sigismundus with his colonel at lipswick in misenland, who give he his pass, intimate the service he have do and the honour he have receive with fifteen hundred ducat of gold to repair his loss with this he spend some time to. he his pass, intimate the service he have do and the honour he have receive with fifteen hundred ducat of gold to repair his loss. with this he spend some time to visit the fair city and country of drasdon in saxony, magdaburgh and brunswick, cassel in hessen, wittenberg and minikin in bavaria, aughsbrough and her university, frankford, mentz, the palatinate, worm, speyre and strausborough pass, nancie in lorraine and france, by paris to orleans he go down the river of loyer to angiers and embark himself at nantz in britanny for bilbao, in biskay to see burgos-valiadolid, the admire monastery of the escurial, madrill, teledo, cordua, cuedyriall, civil, cherry cales and saint lucas. in spain, chap 18, the observation of captain smith, mr henry archer and other. see burgos-valiadolid, the admire monastery of the escurial, madrill, teledo, cordua, cuedyriall, civil, cherry cales and saint lucas in spain, chap 18, the observation of captain smith, mr henry archer and other in barbary. be thus satisfy with europe and asia understand of the war in barbary. he go from gibraltar to guta and tanger, thence to saffee, where grow into acquaintance with a french man of war, the captain, and some twelve more go to morocco to see the ancient monument of that large renown city. it be once the principal city in barbary, situate in a goodly plain country, 14. mile from the great mount atlas and sixty mile from the atlantic sea, the three golden ball of affr^ca, but now little remain but the king. in a goodly plain country, 14.. mile from the great mount atlas and sixty mile from the atlantic sea, the three golden ball of affr^ca. but now little remain but the king palace, which be like a city of itself, and the christian church on who flat square steeple be a great brooch of iron whereon be place the three golden ball of africa. the first be near three el in circumference, the next above it somewhat less, the uppermost, the least over they at it be a half ball and over all a pretty guild pyramid. against those golden ball have be shoot many a shot. their weight be record 700.. weight of pure gold hollow within. yet no shot do ever hit they, nor can ever. pyramid against those golden ball have be. shoot many a shot. their weight be record 700.. weight of pure gold, hollow within. yet no shot do ever hit they, nor can ever any conspirator attain that honour as to get they down. they report the prince of morocco, betroth himself, to the king daughter of aethiopia. he die before their marriage. she cause those three golden ball to be set up for his monument, the description of morocco, and vow virginity all her life. the alfantica be also a place of note, because it be environ with a great wall wherein lie the good of all the merchant secure guard. the juderea be also, as it be, a city of itself where dwell the jew, the rest for. with a great wall wherein lie the good of all, the merchant, secure guard. the juderea be also, as it be, a city of itself where dwell the jew. the rest, for the most part, be deface, but by the many pinnacle and tower with ball on their top have much appearance of much sumptuousness and curiosity. there have be many famous university which be now but stable for fowl and beast and the house in most part lie tumble one above another. the wall of earth be with the great fresh flood wash to the ground. nor be there any village in it, but tent for stranger larbe and moor. strange tale they will tell of a great garden wherein be all sort of bi^ds, fish, beast. ground, nor be there any village in it, but tent for stranger larbe and moor. strange tale they will tell of a great garden wherein be all sort of bi^ds, fish, beast, fruit and fountain which for beauty, art and pleasure exceed any place. know in the world, though, now nothing but dunghill, pigeon-house, shrub and bush. there be yet many excellent fountain adorn with marble and many arch, pillar, tower, port and temple, but most only relic of lamentable ruin and sad desolation. a bloody ^mpresle. when mulai hamet reign in barbary, he have three son, mulai shecke, mulai sidan and mulai befferre. be a most good and noble king that govern well, with peace and plenty till his empress, more cruel than any beast in africa. son, mulai shecke, mulai sidan and mulai befferre, be a most good and noble king that govern well, with peace and plenty. till his empress, more cruel than any beast in africa, poison he her own daughter, mulai shecke, his elder son, bear of a portugal lady, and his daughter to bring mulai sidan to the crown now reign, which be the cause of all those brawl and war that follow. betwixt those brother, their child and a saint that start up. but he play the devil. king mulai ha^et ^t, the great ze^ss of barbar^e. king mulai hamet be not black, as many suppose, but molata or tawny, as be the most of his subject, every way noble, kind and friendly, very rich and pompous in sta^e. king mulai hamet be not black, as many suppose, but molata or tawny, as be the most of his subject, every way noble, kind and friendly, very rich and pompous. in sta^e and majesty, though he sit not upon a throne nor chair of estate, but cross legged upon a rich carpet, as do the turk who religion of mahomet with a incredible, miserable curiosity. they observe his ordinary guard be at least 5000, but in progress he go not with less than 20000.. horseman himself, as rich in all his equipage as any prince in christendom, and yet a contributor to the turk. his great love to english m^n in all his kingdom, be so few good artificer that he entertain from england goldsmith, plumber, carver and christendom and yet a contributor to the turk, his great love to english m^n in all his kingdom be so few good artificer that he entertain from england goldsmith, plumber, carver and polisher of stone and watch-maker, so much he delight in the reformation of workmanship. he allow each of they ten shilling a day, stand fee linen, woollen, silk and what they will for diet and apparel, and custome-free to transport or import what they will, for there be scarce any of those quality in his kingdom, but those of which there be diverse of. they live at this present in london. among the rest one, m^ henry archer, a watchmaker. walk in morocco from the alfantica to the juredea. the way be very foul, meet a. they live at this present in london. among the rest, one m^ henry archer, a watchmaker. walk in morocco from the alfantica to the juredea. the way be very foul, meet a great priest, or a sante as they call all great clergyman who will have thrust he into the dirt for the way. but archer, not know what he be, give he a box on the ear. present he be apprehend and condemn to have his tongue cut out and his hand cut off, but no soon, it be know, at the king court. but 300. of his guard come and break open the prison and deliver he, although the fact be next degree to treason. concern this archer. there be one thing more worth note: the 300. of his guard come and break open the prison and deliver he, although the fact be next degree to treason, concern this archer. there be one thing more worth note: the strange love of a lyon not far from mount atlas. a great lioness, in the heat of the day, do use to bathe herself and teach her young puppy to swim in the river cauzeff of a good breadth. yet she will carry they, one after another, over the river which some moor perceive, watch their opportunity and when the river be between she and they, steal four of her whelp, which she perceive with all the speed she can pass the river and come near they, they let fall a whelp and flee with the. and they steal four of her whelp which she perceive with all the speed she can pass the river and come near they. they let fall a whelp and flee with the rest which she take in her mouth and so return to the rest, a male and a female of those. they give mr archer who keep they in the king garden till the male kill the female than he bring it up as a puppy-dog lie upon his bed till it grow so great as a mastiff and no dog more tame or gentle to they. he know but be to return for england. at saffee he give he to a merchant of marseilles that present he to the french k^ng who send he to king. to they, he know, but be to return for england. at saffee he give he to a merchant of marseilles. that present he to the french k^ng who send he to king james where it be keep in the tower seven year after one, mr john bull, than servant to mr archer, with diverse of his friend, go to see the lion, not know any thing at all of he yet this rare beast, smell he before he see he whine, groan and tumble with such a expression of acquaintance that be inform by the keeper. how-hee, come thither, mr bull, so prevail the keeper, open the grate and bull go in. but no dog can fawn more on his master than the lion on he lick his. how-hee. come thither, mr bull, so prevail. the keeper, open the grate and bull go in. but no dog can fawn more on his master than the lion on. he lick his foot, hand and face, skip and tumble to and fro to the wonder of all. the beholder be satisfy with his acquaintance, he make shift to get out of the grate. but when the lion see his friend go, no beast by bellow, roar scratch and howl can express more rage and sorrow. nor in four day after will he either eat or drink. another kind lion in morocco. in morocco, the king lion be all together in a court environ with a great high wall. to those they put a young puppy-dogge. the great lion. another kind lion in morocco. in morocco the king lion be all together in a court environ with a great high wall. to those they put a young puppy-dogge. the great lion have a sore upon his neck which this dog so lick that he be heal the lion defend he from the fury of all the rest. nor dare they eat till the dog and he have feed this dog, grow great and live among they many year. after the description of fez, fez also be a most large and plentiful country. the chief city be call fez divide into two. part old fez contain about 80. thousand household, the other 4000 pleasant, situate upon a river in the heart of barbary, part upon hill, part upon be call fez, divide into two part. old fez contain about 80. thousand household, the other 4000. pleasant, situate upon a river in the heart of barbary, part upon hill, part upon plain, full of people and all sort of merchandise. the great temple be call carucen, in breadth, seventeen arch, in length, 120.. bear up with 2500. white marble pillar. under the chief arch, where the tribunal be keep, hang a most huge lamp, compass with 110. lesser. under the other also hang great lamp and about some be burn fifteen hundred light. they say they be all make of the bell the arabian bring from spain. it have three gate of notable height, priest and officer, so many that the circuit of the church the yard. they be all make of the bell the arabian bring from spain. it have three gate of notable height, priest and officer, so many that the circuit of the church, the yard and other house be little less than a mile and a half in compass. there be in this city 200.. school 200.. inn 400.. watermil 600.. water-conduit 700.. temple and oratory, but fifty of they, most stately and rich, furnish their alcazer or burse be wall about it. have twelve gate and fifteen walk cover with tent to keep the sun from the merchant and they that come there. the king palace, both for strength and beauty, be excellent and the citizen have many great privilege. those two, country of fez and morocco, be the best. and they that come there, the king palace, both for strength and beauty, be excellent and the citizen have many great privilege. those two country of fez and morocco be the best part of all. barbary abound with people, cattle and all good necessary for man use. for the rest, as the larbe or mountainer, the kingdom of cocow, algiers, tripoli, tunis and egypt. there be many large history of they in diverse language. a brief description of the most unknowen part of africa, especial that writ by that most excellent statesman, john de leo, who afterward turn christian. the unknowen country of ginny and be this six and twenty year have be frequent with a few english ship only to trade especial the river of senaga by afterward turn christian. the unknowen country of ginny, and be this six and twenty year have be frequent with a few english ship only to trade especial: the river of senaga by captain brimstead, captain brockit, mr crump and diverse other. also the great river of gambra by captain jobson, who be return in thither again in the year 1626. with mr william grent and thirteen or fourteen other to stay in the country to discover some way to those rich mine of gago or tumbatu, from whence be suppose the moor of barbary have their gold and the certainty of those suppose description and relation of those interior part which, daily, the more they be seek into, the more they be correct for sure, those interior part. gold and the certainty of those suppose description and relation of those interior part which, daily, the more they be seek into, the more they be correct. for sure those interior part of africa be little know to either english, french or dutch, though they use much the coast. therefore, we will make a little bold with the observation of the portugal, chap 19, the strange discovery and observation of the portugal in africa. the portugal on those have the glory how the portugal coast to the east ind^es, who first coast along this western shore of africa to find passage to the east indies within this hundred and fifty year, even from the straits of gibraltar, about the cape of bone, to the persian gulf and thence. of africa to find passage to the east indies, within this hundred and fifty year, even from the straits of gibraltar, about the cape of bone, to the persian gulf and thence all along the asian coast to the moluccas, have subject many great kingdom, erect many commonwealth, build many great and strong city, and where be it? they have not be by trade or force, no, not so much as cape and sermleone, but most bay or river where there be any trade to be, have especial gold or conveniency for refreshment, but they be scatter, live so among those black. by time and cunning they seem to be naturalize among they. as for the isle of the canary, they have fair town, many village and many. scatter, live so among those black. by time and cunning they seem to be naturalize among they. as for the isle of the canary, they have fair town, many village and many thousand of people rich in commodity. ordoardo lopez, a noble portugal dom 1578.. or edward, embark himself for congo to trade, where he find such entertainment, find the king much oppress with enemy. he find mean to bring in the portugal to assist he, whereby he plant their christian religion and spend m^st of his life to bring those country to the crown of portugal, which he describe in this manner. the kingdom of congo be about 600. mile diameter any way, the kingdom of congo, the chief city, call st savadore, seat upon a exceed. portugal, which he describe in this manner, the kingdom of congo be about 600. mile diameter any way. the kingdom of congo, the chief city, call st savadore, seat upon a exceed high mountain, 150. mile from the sea, very fertile and inhabit with more than 100000. person. where be a excellent prospect over all the plain country about it. well, water lie as it be in the centre of this kingdom, over all which the portugal now command, though but a handful in comparison of negro, they have flesh and fruit very plentiful of diverse sort wild elephant. this kingdom be divide into five province, viz, bamba, batta and pembo, but bamba be the principal and can afford 400000. man of war elephant be breed over all. sort wild elephant. this kingdom be divide into five province, viz bamba, batta and pembo, but bamba be the principal and can afford 400000.. man of war elephant be breed over all those province and of wonderful greatness though some report. they can kneel nor lie down. they can do both and have their joint as other creature for use. with their fore-seet they will leap upon tree to pull down the bough and be of that strength. they will shake a great cocar tree for the nut and pull down a good tree with their ruske to get the leaf to eat, as well as sedge and long grass, cocar nut and berry etc. which with their trunk they put in their mouth and chew it with. ruske to get the leaf to eat, as well as sedge and long grass, cocar, nut and berry etc. which with their trunk they put in their mouth and chew it with their small tooth. in most of those province be many rich mine. but the negars oppose the portugal for work in they, the kingdom of angola. the kingdom of angola be wonderful, populous and rich in mine of silver, copper and most other metal, fruitful in all manner of food and sundry sort of cattle, but dog fl^sh they love better than any other meat. they use few clothes and no armour. bow, arrow and club be their weapon. but the portugal be well arm against those engine and do buy yearly of those black more. meat. they use few clothes and no armour. bow, arrow and club be their weapon. but the portugal be well arm against those engine and do buy yearly of those black. more than five thousand slave and many be people exceed well proportion. the kingdom of the be a most valiant nation but most strange to all about they. their arm be bow short and small, wrap about with serpent skin of diverse colour but so smooth you will think they all one with the wood and it make they very strong. their string little twig but exceed tough and flexible. their arrow short, which they shoot with a incredible quickness. they have short axe of brass and copper for sword. wonderful, loyal and faithful and exceed simple. but exceed, tough and flexible, their arrow short, which they shoot with a incredible quickness. they have short axe of brass and copper for sword. wonderful, loyal and faithful and exceed, simple yet so active. they skip among the rock like goat. they trade with they of nubea, a strange money, and congo for lamache, which be a small kind of shell fish of a excellent azure colour, male and female, but the female they hold most pure. they value they at diverse price because they be of diverse sort, and those they use for coin to buy and sell as we do gold and silver. nor will they have any other money in all those country for which they give elephant tooth and slave for salt silk. to buy and sell, as we do gold and silver. nor will they have any other money. in all those country for which they give elephant tooth and slave, for salt, silk, linen, cloth, glasse-bead and such like portugal commodity a snamble of man flesh, they circumcise themselves and mark their face with sundry flash from their infancy. they keep a shambles of man flesh as if it be beef or other victual, for when they can have a good market for their slave or their enemy, they take, they kill and sell they in this manner. some be so resolute in show how much they scorn death. they will offer themselves and slave to this butchery, to their prince and friend. and though there be many nation. manner some be so resolute in show how much they scorn death, they will offer themselves and slave to this butchery, to their prince and friend. and though there be many nation will eat their enemy in america and asia, yet none but those be know to be so mad as to cat their slave and friend. also their religion and idol. religion and idol they have as many as nation and humour, but the devil have the great part of their devotion. who all those black do say be white, for there be no saint but black divers, nation yet unknown and the wonder of africa. but beside those great kingdom of congo, angola and azichi, in those unfrequented part, be the kingdom of lango matania buttua. but black divers, nation yet unknown, and the wonder of africa. but beside those great kingdom of congo, angola and azichi, in those unfrequented part, be the kingdom of lango, matania, buttua, mozambeche, quivola, the isle of saint laurence, mombaza, meli^da, the empire of and presbyter john, with who they have a kind of trade and their rite, custom, climate, temperature and commodity by relation. also of great lake that deserve the name of sea and huge mountain of diverse sort, as some scorch with heat, some cover with snow, the mountain of the sun, also of the moon, some of crystal, some of iron, some of silver, and mountain of gold with the original of nilus. likewise sundry fort of cattle, fish fowl, strange beast and monstrous. of the moon, some of crystal, some of iron, some of silver and mountain of gold, with the original of nilus. likewise, sundry fort of cattle, fish fowl, strange beast and monstrous serpent- for africa be always note to be a fruitful mother of such terrible creature, who meet at their water place, which be but pond in desert place, in regard of the heat of the country and their extremity of nature, make strange copulation and so engender those extraordinary monster. of all these, you may read in the history of this edward lopez, translate into english by abraham hartwell and dedicate to john lord, archbishop of canterbury, 1597.. but because the particular be most concern the conversion of those pagan by a good, poor priest, that into english by abraham hartwell and dedicate to john lord, archbishop of canterbury 1597.. but because the particular be most concern the conversion of those pagan by a good, poor priest that first convert a noble man to convert the king and the rest of the nobility, send, for so many priest and ornament, into portugal to solemnize their baptism with such magnificence, which be perform with such strange curiosity that those poor negro adore they as god. till the priest grow to that wealth, a bishop be send to rule over they, which they will not endure, which endanger to spoil all before they can be reconcile. but not to trouble you too long with those rarity of uncertainty, let we return again to barbary, where the not endure, which endanger to spoil all before they can be reconcile. but not to trouble you too long with those rarity of uncertainty, let we return again to barbary, where the war be end and befferre possess of morocco and his father treasure. a new bruit arise among they that mulai sidan be raise a army against he who, after take his brother befferre prisoner. but by reason of the uncertainty and the perfidious, treacherous, bloody murder rather than war among those perfidious, barbarous, moor smith return with merham and the rest to saffe and so aboard his ship to try some other conclusion at sea. chap 20: a brave sea fight betwixt two spanish man of war and captain merham, with smith merham, a captain of. so aboard his ship to try some other conclusion at sea. chap 20: a brave sea fight betwixt two spanish man of war and captain merham, with smith merham, a captain of a man of war then in the road, invite captain smith and two or three more of they aboard with he, where he spare not any thing. he have to express his kindness to bid they welcome. till it be too late to go on shore so that necessity constrain they to stay aboard. a fair evening can not be yet ere midnight such a storm do arise, they be force to let slip cable and anchor and put to sea spoon before the wind. till they be drive to the canary in the calm they. a storm do arise they be force to let slip cable and anchor and put to sea spoon before the wind till they be drive to the canary in the calm. they accommodate themselves, hope this strange accident may yet produce some good event. not long it be before they take a small bark, come from teneryf, load with wine, three or four more they chase, two they take, but find little in. they save a few passenger that tell they of five dutch man of war about the isle, so that they stand for boyadora upon the african shore. betwixt which and cape noa, they descry to sail merham, intend to know what they be, hail they very civil, they danse their topsaile and desire the man. upon the african shore, betwixt which and cape noa. they descry to sail. merham intend to know what they be. hail they, very civil, they danse their topsaile and desire the man of war to come aboard they and take what he will. for they be buttwo poor distress bi^kiners. but merham, the old fox, see himself in the lion paw, spring his loufe, the other tack after he and come close up to his neither quarter, give his broad side, and so louf up to windward, the vice-admiral do the like, and at the next bout the admiral, with a noise of trumpet and all his ordnance, murderer and musket, board he on his broad side, the other in like manner, on his ley quarter. that it. bout the admiral with a noise of trumpet and all his ordnance, murderer and musket, board he on his broad side, the other in like manner on his ley quarter that it be so dark there be little light but fire and smoke. long he stay not before he fall off, leave 4. or 5. of his man sprawl over the grate. after they have batter merham about a hour they board he again as before and throw four kedger or grapnall in iron chain, then shear off. they think so to have tear down the grate but the admiral yard be so entangle in their shroud merham have time to discharge two cross bar shoot among they and diverse bolt of iron make for that purpose against. grate. but the admiral yard be so entangle in their shroud merham have time to discharge two cross bar shoot among they and diverse bolt of iron make for that purpose against his bow. that make such a breach. he fear they both shall have sink for company so that the spaniard be as yare in, slip his chain, grapnall as merham be in, cut the tackle, keep fast their yard in his shroud. the vide-admiral present clear himself but spare neither his ordnance nor musket to keep merham from get away till the admiral have repair his leak from twelve at noon till six at night. they thus interchange one volley for another. then the vide-admiral fall on starne. stay for the admiral that come up again. repair his leak from twelve at noon till six at night. they thus interchange one volley for another. then the vide-admiral fall on starne, stay for the admiral that come up again to he, and all that night stand after merham that shape his course for mamora. but such small way they make. the next morning they be not three league off from cape noa, the two spanish man of war, for so they be and well appoint, take it in scorn, as it seem, with their chase broad side and starne, the one after the other within musket, shoot, ply their ordnance and after a hour work, command merham a main for the king of spain. upon fair quarter merham, drink to they and so discharge his. other within musket, shoot, ply their ordnance and after a hour work, command merham, a main for the king of spain. upon fair quarter merham, drink to they and so discharge his quarter piece which pride the spaniard to revenge, board he again, and many of they be, get to the top to unsling the main sail which the master and some other from the round house cause to their cost to come. tumble down about the round house, the spaniard so pester that they be force to the great cablen and blow it up. the smoke and fire be so vehement as they think the ship on fire, they in the before castle be no less assault that. blow up a piece of the grate with a. smoke and fire be so vehement as they think the ship on fire, they in the before castle be no less. assault that, blow up a piece of the grate with a great many of spaniard more then they clear themselves with all speed and merham, with as much expedition to quench the fire with w^t clothes and water, which begin to grow too fast, the spaniard still play upon he with all the shot they can. the open place present they cover with old sail and prepare themselves to fight to the last man. the angry spaniard see the fire quench, hang out a flag of truce to have but a parley. but that desperate merham know there be but one way with he and will have. angry spaniard see the fire quench hang out a flag of truce, to have but a parley. but that desperate merham know there be but one way with he and will have none but the report of his ordnance, which he do know well how to use for his best advantage. thus they spend the next afternoon and half that night when the spaniard either lose they or leave they. seven and twenty man, merham, have slay and sixteen wound and can find they have receive 140.. great shot a wound spaniard they keep alive, confess they have lose 100 man in the admiral which they do fear will sink ere she can recover a port, thus reaccommodate their sail. they sail for cruse, cape goa and magadore. they have lose 100 man in the admiral, which they do fear will sink ere she can recover a port, thus reaccommodate their sail. they sail for cruse, cape goa and magadore ti^l. they come again to saffee and then he return into england. chap 21, the continuation of the general history of virginia, the summer isle and new england with their present estate from 1624.. to this present 1629.. concern these country. i will be sorry to trouble you with repeat one thing twice, as with their map: commodity, people, government and religion. yet know the beginning of those plantation, their number and name with the name of the adventurer, the yearly proceed of every governor, both here and there. as for they misprision, neglect, grievance and the beginning of those plantation, their number and name with the name of the adventurer, the yearly proceed of every governor, both here and there, as for they, misprision, neglect, grievance and the cause of all those rumour, loss and cross that have happen. i refer you to the general history where you shall find all this at large, especial, to those page where you may read my letter of advice to the council and company: what of necessity must be do or lose all and leave the country, pag 70.. what commodity i send home, pag 163.. my opinion and offer to the company to feed and defend the colony, pag 150.. my account to they here of my action there, pag 163. my seven answer to: pag 163.. my opinion and offer to the company to feed and defend the colony, pag 150.. my account to they here of my action there, pag 163.. my seven answer to his majesty, commissioner. seven question: what have hinder virginia and the remedy, pag 165.. how those noble gentleman spend near two year in peruse all letter come from thence. and the difference betwixt many faction both here and there, with their complaint especial about the sallerie which shall have be a new office in london for the well order, the sale of tobacco, that 2500.. pound shall yearly have be raise out of it to pay four or five hundred pound yearly to the governor of that company, two or three hundred to his deputy, the. 2500.. pound shall yearly have be raise out of it to pay four or five hundred pound yearly to the governor of that company, two or three hundred to his deputy, the rest into stipend of thirty or fifty pound yearly for their clerk and under officer which be never there, pag 153.. but not one hundred pound for all they in virginia, nor any thing for the most part of the adventurer in england except the undertaker for the lottery setter out of ship, adventurer of commodity also their factor and many other officer there employ only by friendship to raise their fortune out of the labour of the true industrious planter by the title of their office who under the colour of sincerity do pillage and employ only by friendship, to raise their fortune out of the labour of the true industrious planter by the title of their office who, under the colour of sincerity, do pillage and deceive all the rest most cunning. for more than 150000. pound have be spend out of the common stock beside many thousand have be there consume and near 7000. people that there die only for want of good order and government. otherwise, long ere this there will have be more than 20000. people wh^re after twenty year spend only in compliment and try new conclusion: be remain scarce, 1500.. with some few cattle then the company dissolve but no account of any thing. so that his majesty appoint commissioner to oversee and give order for their. conclusion be remain scarce: 1500.. with some few cattle, then the company dissolve, but no account of any thing. so that his majesty appoint commissioner to oversee and give order for their proceed. be thus in a manner, leave to themselves. since then, within these four year, you shall see how wonderful they have, increase beyond expectation. but so exact as i desire, i can relate unto you, for although i have tire myself in seek and discourse with those return thence more than will a voyage to virginia, few can tell i any thing. but of that place or place they have inhabit- and he be a great traveller- that have go up and down the river of james town, be at pamaunke, smith isle or accomack. of that place or place they have inhabit- and he be a great traveller that have go up and down the river of james town, be at pamaunke smith isle or accomack, wherein for the most part they keep one tune of their now particular abundance and their former want have be there some sixteen year, some twelve, some six, some near twenty, etc. but of their general estate or any thing of worth the most of they do know very little to any purpose. now the most i can understand in general their estate: 1^27 be from the relation of mr nathaniel causeway that live there with i and return dom 1627.. and some other affirm sir george yerley be governor, captain francis west, doctor john poot. be from the relation of mr nathaniel causeway, that live there with i and return dom 1627.. and some other affirm sir george yerley be governor, captain francis west, doctor john poot, captain roger smith, captain matthewes, captain tucker, mr clabourne and mr farrer of the council, their habitation. many, the governor, with two or three of the council, be for most part at james town. the rest repair thither as there be occasion, but every three month they have a general meeting to consider of their public affair. their number then be about 1500.. their number, some say rather 2000, divide into seventeen or eighteen, several plantation, the great part thereof towards the fall be so enclose with pallizadoe. they regard not the savage, and among those number, some say rather 2000, divide into seventeen or eighteen, several plantation, the great part thereof towards the fall be so enclose with pallizadoe. they regard not the savage, and among those plantation above james town they have now find mean to take plenty of fish as well, with line as net and where the water be the large, have mean they need not want their condition with the savage. upon this river they seldom see any savage, but in the wood many time their fire. yet some few there be that upon their opportunity have slay some few straggler which have be revenge with the death of so many of themselves. but no other attempt have be make upon they this two or three year. their cattle, slay some few straggler which have be revenge with the death of so many of themselves. but no other attempt have be make upon they this two or three year, their cattle, their increase of cattle and poultry, namely ox, cow, bull, they imagine to be about 2000, goat great store and great increase the wild hog which be infinite, be destroy and eat by the savage. but no family be so poor that have not tame swine sufficient and for poultry he be a very bad husband breed not a hundred in a year and the rich sort do daily feed on they for bread they have plenty and so good, plenty of corne that those that make it well better can be diverse, have much english. the rich sort do daily feed on. they for bread. they have plenty, and so good plenty of corne that those that make it well better can be diverse. have much english corn, especial mr abraham perce, which prepare this year to sow two hundred acre of english wheat and as much with barley, feed daily about the number of sixty person at his own charge for drink, some malt, the indian corn, other barley, their drink, of which they make good ale, both strong and small, and such plenty thereof. few of the upper planter drink any water, but the better sort be well furnish with sack aquavitae and good english beer. their servant common feed upon milk, their servant diet which be bruise indian corn pound. drink any water, but the better sort, be well furnish with sack aquavitae and good english beer. their servant common feed upon milk, their servant diet, which be bruise, indian corn pound and boil thick and milk for the sauce, but boil with milk the best of all will oft feed on it and leave their fl^sh with milk, butter and cheese, with fish, bull flesh- for they seldom kill any other, etc. and every one be so. apply to his labour about tobacco and corn which do yield they they such profit. they never regard any food from the savage, nor have they any trade or conference with they, but upon mere accident and defiance. and now the merchant have leave it. there have go so many. any food from the savage, nor have they any trade or conference with they, but upon mere accident and defiance. and now the merchant have leave it. there have go so many voluntary ship within this two year as have furnish they with apparel, sack, aquavitae and all necessary, much better than ever before. for arm there be scarce any man but he be furnish with a piece their arm and exercise a jack, a coat of mail, a sword or rapier, and every holiday, every plantation do exercise their man in arm, by which mean hunt and fowl, the most part of they be most excellent mark-man for discovery. they have make none their health and discovery, nor any other commodity than tobacco do they apply themselves. hunt and fowl, the most part of they be most excellent mark-man for discovery. they have make none their health and discovery. nor any other commodity than tobacco do they apply themselves unto, though never any be plant at first, and whereas the country be heretofore hold most intemperate and contagious by many, now they have house lodging and victual, and the sun have power to exhale up the moist vapour of the earth. where they have cut down the wood which before it can not be cover with spread top of high tree, they find it much more healthful than before. nor, for their number, few country be less trouble with death, sickness or any other disease. nor where overgrow, woman become more fruitful since this, sir. it much more healthful than before. nor for their number, few country be less trouble with death, sickness or any other disease. nor where overgrow, woman become more fruitful. since this, sir george yerley die 1628.. captain west succeed he the present estate of virginia, 1629. but about a year after return for england. now doctor poot be governor and the rest of the council, as before, james town, be yet their chief seat. most of the wood destroy, little corn there plant but all convert into pasture and garden wherein do grow all manner of herb and root we have in england in abundance and as good grass as can be here. most of their cattle do feed their owner. be most, some one way, some another. herb and root we have in england in abundance and as good grass as can be here. most of their cattle do feed their owner, be most some one way, some another about their plantation and return again when they please or any ship come in to trade. here in winter they have hay for their cattle, but in other place they browse upon wood and the great husk of their corn, with some corn in they mas^^r. hat^hins do keep they. well, mr hutchins say the^ h^ve 2000 c^^^le and about 5000.. people, but master flond, john davis, william emerson and diverse other five ^ho^s^nd p^^^le say about five thousand people and five t^ousand kine, ^ive, thou^^nd, ca^e^^, calf, ox and bull^ for goa^s hog a^d poultry. flond, john davis, william emerson and diverse other five ^ho^s^nd p^^^le say about five thousand people, and five t^ousand kine ^ive thou^^nd ca^e^^ calf, ox and bull^ for goa^s, hog, a^d poultry, corn, fish, dear and many sort of other wild beast and foul in their season. they have so much more than they spend g^a^s ho^^and poultry ^is^^ce they be able to feed thr^e or four hundred man more than they have and do oft much relieve. many ship both there and for their return, and this last year be there at least two or th^ee and twenty sail. they have oft much salt fi^h from new england, but fresh fish enough when they will take it peach in abundance at kecoughtan apple, pear, apricock, vine, fig. th^ee and twenty sail. they have oft much salt fi^h from new england, but fresh fish enough when they will take it. peach in abundance at kecoughtan: apple, pear, apricock, vine, fig and other fruit. some have plant that prosper excee, but their diligence about tobacco leave they to be spoil by the cattle. yet now they begin to revive. mistress pearce, a honest, industrious woman, have be there near twenty year and now return sait^. she have a garden at james town. good hospitality contain three ^r s^me a^^e^ where in one year she have gather near a hundred bushel of excellent fig and that of her own provision. she can keep a better house in virginia than here in london for 3. or 400.. pound a. gather near a hundred bushel of excellent fig and that of her own provision. she can keep a better house in virginia than here in london for 3. or 400.. pound a year, yet go thither with little or nothing. they have some tame goose, duck and turkey the master. now do so. train up their servant and youth in shoot dear and foul that the youth will kill they as well as their mast^^s. they have two brew-house, but they find the indian corn so much better than we they begin to leave, sow it. their city and town be only scatter house. they call plantation as be our country village, but no ordnance. mount the fort, captain smith, leave a building so ruin there be scarce. their city and town be only scatter house. they call plantation, as be our country village, but no ordnance. mount the fort, captain smith, leave a building so ruin there be scarce mention where they be, no discovery of any thing more than the cure of tobacco by which hitherto be so present, a commodity of gain it have bring they to this abundance, but that they be so disjoint and every one commander of himself to plant what he will. they be. now so well, provide that they be able to subsist and if they will join together, commodity worth make bla^ke, walnut ash for p^^es, oak for plank knee for ship, cypress for chest, etc. now to work upon soap-ash, iron, r^pe-oile, mader pitch and tar. will join together, commodity worth make bla^ke, walnut ash for p^^es, oak for plank knee for ship, cypress for chest, etc. now to work upon soap-ash, iron, r^pe-oile, mader pitch and tar, flax and hemp. as for their tobacco, there come from many place. such abundance and the charge so great it be not worth the bring home. there be go and now a go diverse ship as captain perseus, captain prine, with sir john harvy to be their governor, with two or three hundred people. there be also some bristol and other part of the west country, a prepare which i hearty pray to god to bless and send they a happy and prosperous voyage. nathaniel causey, master hutchins, master flood. john davis, william emerson, master william. west country, a prepare which i hearty pray to god to bless and send they a happy and prosperous voyage. nathaniel causey, master hutchins, master flood, john davis, william emerson, master william barnet, master cooper and other. chap 22, the proceed and present estate of the summer iles from an dom 1624.. to this present, 1629.. from the summer iles, master ireland and diverse other report their fort ordnance and proceed, be much as they be in the year 1622.. as you may read in the general history, page 199.. captain woodhouse, governor, there be few sort of any fruit in the west indies, but they grow there in abundance. yet the fertility of the soil in many place decay be plant every year for their plantaine, which sort of any fruit in the west indies, but they grow there in abundance. yet the fertility of the soil in many place decay. be plant every year for their plantaine, which be a most delicate fruit. they have late find a way, by pickle or dry they, to bring they over into england. there no such fruit in europe and wonderful for increase, for fish, flesh, fig, wine and all sort of most excellent herb, fruit and root. they have in abundance in this governors time. a kind of whale, or rather a be drive on shore in southampton tr^be from the west over a infinite number of rock so bruise that the water in the bay where she lie be all oily and the rock about. on shore in southampton tr^be from the west over a infinite number of rock, so bruise that the water in the bay where she lie be all oily and the rock about it all bedash. with parmacitty congeal like ice- a good quantity, we gather- with which we common cure any boil, hurt or bruise. some burn it in their lamp, which blow out. the very snuff will burn so long as there be any of the oil remain for two or three day together. the next governor be captain philip bell, the present estate of the summer, iler 1629.. who time be expire, captain roger wodd possess his place, a worthy gentleman of good desert and have live a long time in the country. their number be the summer iler 1629. who time be expire. captain roger wodd possess his place. a worthy gentleman of good desert and have live a long time in the country. their number be about two or three thousand, man, woman and child who increase there, exceed their great complaint be want of apparel and too much custom and too many officer. the pity be there be more man than woman, yet no great mischief because there be so much less pride. the cattle they have increase, exceed their fort, be well maintain by the merchant here and planter there. to be brief, this i will be a excellent bit to rule great horse. all the cohow bird and egbird be go seldom any wild cat see, no rat to. planter there. to be brief, this i will be a excellent bit to rule great horse. all the cohow, bird and egbird be go, seldom any wild cat see, no rat to speak of, but the worm be yet very troublesome. the people very healthful, and the raven go fish enough, but not so near the shore as it use by the much beat it. it be a i will that have such a rampire and a ditch, and for the quantity, so man victual and fortify, as few in the world do exceed it or be like it. the 22. of march, two ship come from thence, a evil mischance, the peter-bonaventure, near two hundred ton and sixteen piece of ordnance, the captain thomas sherwin, the master. be like it. the 22. of march, two ship come from thence, a evil mischance, the peter-bonaventure, near two hundred ton and sixteen piece of ordnance, the captain thomas sherwin, the master, master edward, some like he in condition, a goodly lusty, proper, valiant man, the lydia, wherein be master anthony thorn, a small ship be chase by eleven ship of dunkirk, be thus overmatch captain sherwin, be take by they in turbay, only his valiant master be slay. the ship with about seventy english man. they carry betwixt, dover and calais to dunk^rk, but the lydia, safe, recover dartmouth, these noble adventurer, for all those loss, patient do bear they. but they hope the king and state will understand it be worth keep, though it afford nothing. lydia safe, recover dartmouth, these noble adventurer. for all those loss patient do bear they. but they hope the king and state will understand it be worth keep, though it afford nothing but tobacco and that now worth little or nothing, custom and fraught pay. yet it be worth keep and not supplant, though great man feel not those loss. yet gardiner, carpenter and smith do pay for it. from the relation of robert chesteven and other, chap 23, the proceed and present estate of new england since 1614 to this present 1629.. when i go first to the north part of virginia where the westerly colony have be plant, it have dissolve itself within a year and there be not one christian in all the land. i first to the north part of virginia where the westerly colony have be plant. it have dissolve itself within a year and there be not one christian in all the land. i be set forth at the sole charge of four merchant of london. the country be then repute by your westerling a most rocky, barren, desolate desert. but the good return i bring from thence consideration ^bout the loss of ^ime with the map and relation i make of the country which i make so manifest, some of they do believe i and they be well embrace both by the londoner and westerling, for who i have promise to undertake it think to have join they all together. but that may well have become a work for. well embrace both by the londoner and westerling, for who i have promise to undertake it think to have join they all together, but that may well have become a work for hercules betwixt. they long there be much contention. the londoner indeed go brave forward, but in three or four year i and my friend consume many hundred pound among the plimothians who only say i, but with delay. promise and excuse but no performance of any thing to any purpose. in the interim. many particular ship go thither and find my relation true and that i have not take that i bring home from the french man as have be report yet further for my pain to discredit i and my call it new england. they that i have not take, that i bring home from the french man as have be report. yet further, for my pain. to discredit, i and my call it new england. they obscure it and shadow it with the title of cannada till, at my humble suit it please our most royal king charles, who god long keep, bless and preserve, than prince of wales, to confirm it with my map and book by the the title of new england, the gain thence return. do make the same thereof. so increase that thirty, forty or fifty sail go yearly only to trade and fish, but nothing will be do for a plantation till about some hundred of your brownist of england, amsterdam and leyden go to new plymouth. sail go yearly only to trade and fish, but nothing will be do for a plantation till about some hundred of your brownist of england, amsterdam and leyden go to new plymouth. who humorous ignorance cause they for more than a year to endure a wonderful deal of misery, the effect of niggardliness. with a infinite patience, say my book and map be much better cheap to teach they than myself. many other have use the like good husbandry that have pay sound in try their selfewilled conclusion, but those in time do well. divers other have, in small handful, undertake to go there to be several lord and king of themselves, but most vanish to nothing. notwithstanding, the fish ship make such good return at last it. have, in small handful, undertake to go there to be several lord and king of themselves, but most vanish to nothing. notwithstanding, the fish ship make such good return, at last, it be engross by twenty pattenty that divide my map into twenty part and cast lot for their share. but money not come in as they expect. procure a proclamation: none shall go thither without their licence to fish. but for every thirty ton of ship to pay, they five pound beside, upon great penalty. neither to trade with the native, cut down wood for their stage without give satisfaction, though all the country be nothing but wood and none to make use of it with many such other pretence for to make this country plant itself. their stage without give satisfaction, though all the country be nothing but wood and none to make use of it, with many such other pretence for to make this country plant itself by its own wealth. hereupon most man grow so discontent that few or none will go, so that the pattenty- who never one of they have be there, see, those project will not prevail- have since not hinder any to go, that will that within these few last year, more have go thither than ever now, this year, 1629.. a great company of people of good rank, a new plantation, 1629, zeal, mean and quality have make a great stock, and with six good ship in the month of april, and may they set sail from. of good rank, a new plantation, 1629, zeal, mean and quality, have make a great stock and with six good ship. in the month of april and may they set sail from thames for the bay of the massachuselt, otherwise call charles river. viz the george bonaventure of twenty piece of ordnance, the talbot, nineteen, the lions-whelpe, eight, the may-flower, fourteen, the four sister, fourteen, the pilgrim, four with three hundred and fifty man, woman and child. also a hundred and fifteen head of cattle as horse mare and neat beast, one and forty goat, some coney, with all provision for household and apparel. six piece of great ordnance for a fort with musket, pike, corselet, drum colour, with all provision necessary for a plantation for the good. coney with all provision for household and apparel, six piece of great ordnance for a fort with musket, pike, corselet, drum colour, with all provision necessary for a plantation for the good of man. other particular i understand, of no more than be write in the general history of those country. but you be to understand that the noble lord, chief justice, popham, judge, doderege, the right honourable earl of pembroke, southampton, salesbury, and the rest, as i take it, they do all think as i and they go with i do that have those two country be plant as it be, intend that no other nation shall come plant betwixt we, if ever the king of spain, and we shall fall foul those country be so capable. country be plant as it be intend that no other nation shall come plant betwixt. we, if ever the king of spain, and we shall fall foul those country be so capable of all material for ship. by this may have be owner of a good fleet of ship and to have relieve a whole navy from england upon occasion, yea, and to have furnish england with the most easterly commodity. and now, since see how convenient the summer iles fall to our share so near the west indies, we may, with much more facility than the dutchman hau^, invade the west indies that do now put in practice what so long have be advise on by many a honest english statesman. note of inconvenience: those country, ca^taine. the dutchman hau^, invade the west indies that do now put in practice what so long have be advise on by many a honest english statesman. note of inconvenience those country ca^taine smith oft time use to call his child that never have mother. and well, he may, for few father ever pay dear for so little consent. and for those that will true understand how many strange accident have befall they and he, how oft up, how oft down, sometime near desperate and ere long flourish, can but conceive god infinite mercy and favour towards they have his design be to have persuade man to a mine of gold, though few do conceive either the charge or pain in refine it, nor the power nor care to. they have. his design be to have persuade man to a mine of gold, though few do conceive either the charge or pain in refine it, nor the power nor care to defend it. or some new invention to pass to the south sea, or some strange plot to invade some strange monastery or some portable country, or some chargeable fleet to take some rich carock in the east indies, or letter of mart to rob some poor merchant. what multitude of both people and money will contend to be first employ? but in those noble endeavour now, how few of quality, unless it be to beg some monopoly. and those seldom seek the common good. but the commons good, as you may read at large in his endeavour now, how few of quality, unless it be to beg some monopoly, and those seldom seek the common good. but the commons good, as you may read at large in his general history, page 217, 218, 219.. his general observation and reason for this plantation: for yet those country be not so forward, but they may become as miserable as ever if better course be not take than be, as this smith will plain, demonstrate to his majesty or any other noble person of ability, liable, generous to undertake it, how, within a short time, to make virginia able to resist any enemy that as yet lie open to all, and yield the king more custom, within these few year, in certain staple commodity than ever it. to make virginia able to resist any enemy that as yet lie open to all and yield the king more custom within these few year in certain staple commodity than ever it do in tobacco, which now not be worth bring home. the custom will be as uncertain to the king as dangerous to the plantation. chap 24, a brief discourse of diverse voyage, make unto the goodly country of guiana and the great river of the amazon, relate also the present plantation there. it be not unknowen how that most industrious and honourable knight, sir walter rauleigh, in the year of our lord 1595. take the i will of trinidado, fall with the coast of guiana northward of the line ten degree and coast the coast and walter rauleigh in the year of our lord, 1595.. take the i will of trinidado, fall with the coast of guiana, northward of the line ten degree, and coast the coast and search up the river oranoca where understand that twenty several voyage have be make by the spaniard in discover this coast and river to find a passage to the great city of mano, call by they the eldorado or the golden city. he do his utmost to have find some better satisfaction than relation but mean fail. he sparrow leave to seek the great city of mano. he leave his trusty servant, francis sparrow, to seek it, who wander up and down those country some fourteen or fifteen year. unexpected return, i have hear he say. city of mano, he leave his trusty servant, francis sparrow, to seek it, who wander up and down those country some fourteen or fifteen year. unexpected return, i have hear he say he be lead blind into this city by indian. but little discourse of any purpose touch the largeness of the report of it. his body seem as a man of a uncurable consumption. short^^ die here after in england there be above thirty fair river that fall into the sea between the river of amazon and oranoca, which be some nine degree asunder in the year 1605.. captain ley, brother to that noble knight, s^r oliver ley capucine (@) l^y with diverse other plant himself in the river weapoco, wherein i shall have be a party. the year 1605.. captain ley, brother to that noble knight, s^r oliver ley, capucine (@) l^y with diverse other, plant himself in the river weapoco, wherein i shall have be a party, but he die and there lie ^urie^ and the supply miscarry. the rest escape as they can. s^r thomas roe, well k^ow^n to be a most noble gentleman. sir th^m^^ r^e, before he go, lord ambassador, to the great mogoll or the great turk, spend a year or two upon this coast and about the river of the amazon, wherein he most employ captain matthew morton, captain m^^^^^, a expert seaman in the discovery of this famous river, a gentleman that be the first shot and mortal, suppose, wound to death with i in virginia. yet matthew morton, captain m^^^^^, a expert seaman in the discovery of this famous river, a gentleman that be the first shot and mortal, suppose wound, to death with i in virginia, yet si^ce h^th be twice with command in the east indies. also, captain william white, capta^ne wh^^e and diverse other worthy and industrious gentleman, both before and since, have spend much time and charge to discover it more perfect, but nothing more effect for a plantation t^^^ic be undertake by captain robert harcote, 1609.. this worthy gentleman, captain h^ne^, after he have by commission make a discovery to his mind, leave his brother michael harcote, with some fifty or sixty m^n in the river weapoco and so present return to england where he obtain by the favour, a discovery to his mind, leave his brother, michael harcote, with some fifty or sixty m^n in the river weapoco, and so present, return to england where he obtain, by the favour of prince henry, a large patent for all. that coast call guiana, together with the famous river of amazon, to he and his heir. but so many trouble here surprise he, though he do his best to supply they, he be not able. only some few he send over as passenger with certain dutchman, but to small purpose. thus this business lie dead for diverse year till sir walter rauleigh, accompany with many valiant soldier and brave gentleman, go his last voyage to guiana, among the which be captain roger north, brother to the right honourable. diverse year till sir walter rauleigh, accompany with many valiant soldier and brave gentleman, go his last voyage to guiana, among the which be captain roger north, brother to the right honourable the lord dudley north, who upon this voyage have stay and see diverse river upon this coast. take such a like to those country have have before this voyage more perfect and particular information of the excellency of the great river of the amazon above any of the rest by certain englishman return so rich from thence in good commodity- they will not go with sir walter rauleigh in search of gold- that after his return for england he endeavour by his best ability to interest his country and st^te in those f^re region which by with sir walter rauleigh in search of gold, that after his return for england, he endeavour by his best ability to interest his country and st^te in those f^re region which, by the way of letter patent unto diverse nobleman and gentleman of quality, erect into a company and perpetuity for trade and plantation. not know of the interest of captain harcote where, upon accompany with 120. gentleman and other, with a ship, captain roger north, a pinnace and two sh^llops to remain in the country, he set sail from plymouth the last of april 1620 and within seven week after he arrive, well in the amazon only, with the loss of one old man, some hundred league, they run up the river to settle his man where. and within seven week after he arrive, well in the amazon, only with the loss of one old man, some hundred league. they run up the river to settle his man where the sight of the country and people, so content, they that never man think themselves more happy. some english and irish that have live there some eight year on^y supply by the dutch he reduce to his company and to leave the dutch have make a good voyage to the value of more than the charge. he return to englangd with diverse good commodity beside tobacco, so that it may well be conceive that if this action have not be thus cross the generality of england, have by this time be win and encourage therein. but beside tobacco. so that it may well be conceive that if this action have not be thus cross, the generality of england have by this time be win and encourage therein. but the time be not yet come that god will have this great business effect by reason of the great power the lord gundamore, ambassador for the king of spain, have in england to cross and ruin those proceed. and so unfortunate captain north be in this business. he be twice commit prisoner to the tower and the good detain till they be spoil. who, beyond all other, be by much the great adventurer and loser ben^. notwithstanding all this, those that he have leave in the amazon will not abandon the country, captain thomas painton a. beyond all other, be by much the great adventurer and loser ben^. notwithstanding all this, those that he have leave in the amazon will not abandon the country. captain thomas painton, a worthy gentleman, his lieutenant dead, captain charles parker, brother to the right, honourable the lord morley, live there six year after mr john christmas, five year. so well, they will not return, although they may with diverse either gentleman of quality and other, all thus destitute of any supply from england. but all authority be dissolve, want of government, do more wrong their proceed than all other cross whatsoever. some relief they have sometime from the dutch who know their estate, give what they please and take what they list two brother gentleman, thomas and william. than all other cross whatsoever. some relief they have sometime from the dutch who know their estate, give what they please and take what they list. two brother gentleman, thomas and william hixon, who stay three year there be now go to stay in the amazon in the ship late send thither. the business thus remain in this sort. three private man leave of that company name, mr thomas warriner, john rhodes and robert bim have live there about two year. come for england and to be free from the disorder that do grow in the amazon for want of government among their countryman and to be quiet among themselves, make mean to set themselves out for st christopher. their whole number be but fifteen person that pay. amazon, for want of government among their countryman and to be quiet among themselves, make mean to set themselves out for st christopher. their whole number be but fifteen person that pay for their passage in a ship, go for virginia where they remain a year before they be supply, and then that be but four or five man. thus this i will, by this small beginning, have no interruption by their own country. have now get the start of the continent and main land of guiana, which have be lay apart and let alone until that captain north ever watch his best opportunity and advantage of time in the state have now again pursue and set on foot his former design, captain harco^e. be now willing to. that captain north ever watch his best opportunity and advantage of time in the state have now again pursue and set on foot his former design, captain harco^e. be now willing to surrender his grant and to join with captain north in pass a new patent and to erect a company for trade and plantation in the amazon and all the coast and country of guiana for ever. whereupon they have send this present year in januarie, and since 1628.. four ship with near two hundred person, the first ship with 112. man, not one miscarry that rest, go since not yet hear of and be prepare another with their best expedition and since januarie be go from holland, 100 english and irish conduct by the old planter. that rest go, since not yet hear of and be prepare another with their best expedition. and since januarie be go from holland, 100 english and irish conduct by the old planter. this great river lie under the line. the two chief head land, north and south, be about three degree asunder. the mouth of it be so full of many great and small isle it be a easy matter for a unexperienced pilot to lose his way. it be hold one of the great river in america and as most man think in the world and come down with such a fresh it make the sea fresh. more than thirty mile from the shore, captain north have seat his man about a hundred league in the main. and come down with such a fresh, it make the sea fresh. more than thirty mile from the shore, captain north have seat his man about a hundred league in the main, send captain william white with th^rtie gentleman and other in a pinuace of thirty tun to discover further, which they do, some two hundred league where they find the river to divide itself in two part, till then all full of land and a country most healthful, pleasant and fruitful, for they find food enough and all return safe and in good health. in this discovery they see many town well inhabit, some with three hundred people, some with five, six or seven hundred, and of some they understand to be of so many thousand most. this discovery. they see many town well inhabit, some with three hundred people, some with five, six or seven hundred, and of some they understand to be of so many thousand, most differ very much, especial in their language, whereof they suppose by those indian they understand be many hundred, more unfrequented till then by any christian. most of they stark, naked, both man, woman and child, but they see not any such giantlike woman as the river name import. but for those captain north have feat his company, it be not know where. indian, be ever so kind to any nation, not spare any pain, danger or labour to feed and maintain they, the english follow their building fortification and sugar-worke for which they have send most. ever so kind to any nation, not spare any pain, danger or labour to feed and maintain they, the english, follow their building fortification and sugar-worke, for which they have send most expert man, and with they all thing necessary for that purpose to effect which they want, not the help of those kind indian to produce and many other good commodity which god will, will ere long, make plain and apparent to this kingdom and all the adventurer and well-willer to this plantation, to be well worthy, the cherish and follow with all alacrity. chap 25, the beginning and proceed of the new plantation of st christopher by captain warner, master ralph merifield and other, 1623.. have furnish this worhty, industrious gentleman, he arrive at st christopher. 25, the beginning and proceed of the new plantation of st christopher by captain warner, master ralph merifield and other, 1623.. have furnish this worhty, industrious gentleman. he arrive at st christopher, as be say, with fifteen man, the 28. of januarie 1623.. viz. william test, john rhodes, robert bim, mr benifield, sergeant jones, mr ware, william roil, rowland grascocke, mr bond, mr langley, mr weaver, edward warner, their captain, son and now deputy-governour till his father return, sergeant aplon, one sailor and a cook. at their arrival they find three frenchman who seek to oppose captain warner and to set the indian upon we. but at last we all become friend and live with the indian a month than we build a fort and a house and captain warner, and to set the indian upon we. but at last we all become friend and live with the indian. a month than we build a fort and a house and plant fruit. by september we make a crop of tobacco, but upon the nineteen of september come a hurricane and blow it away. a hurricane all this while we live upon cassada, bread, potato, plantine, pine, turtle, guane and fish, plenty for drink. we h^d ^^24, the 18. of march 1624.. arrive, captain jefferson, with three man passenger in the hope-well of london with some trade for the indian, and then we have another crop of tobacco. in the mean time the french have plant themselves in the other end of the. i will with this. some trade for the indian, and then we have another crop of tobacco. in the mean time, the french have plant themselves in the other end of the. i will, with this crop, captain warner return for england in september 1625.. ^^^5, in his absence, come in a french pinnace under the command of de nombe. that, tell we, the indian have slay some frenchman in other of the charybe isle and that there be six peryagoe, which be huge, great tree form as your canowes, but so lay out on the side with board (@) ^^^^^h, ^^e (@) ind^^^^. they will seem like a little galley. six of those with about sour or five hundred strange indian come unto we. we bid they be go, but they ^^^^^h, ^^e (@), ind^^^^. they will seem like a little galley. six of those with about sour or five hundred strange indian come unto we. we bid they be go, but they will not. whereupon we and the french join together and upon the five of november, set upon they and put they to flight. upon new-year even, they come again, find three english, go about the i will who they slay. 1625 until the four of august, we stand upon our guard, live upon the spoil and do nothing. but now captain warner arrive again with near a hundred people, than we fall to work and plant as before (@). but upon the four of september come such a hurricane as blow down all our house tobacco. with near a hundred people than we fall to work and plant as before, (@). but upon the four of september come such a hurricane as blow down all our house, tobacco and two drum into the air, we know not whither, drive two ship on shore that be both split all our provision, thus lose. we be very miserable, live only on what we can get in the wild wood. (@). ^^en^h, ^^^^ne. we make a small party of french and english to go aboard for provision, but in their return home eight french man be slay in the harbour. 162^. thus we continue till near june that the tortel come in 1627.. but the french be like to starve, seek to surprise we and all the. be slay in the harbour 162^. thus we continue till near june that the tortel come in 1627.. but the french be like to starve, seek to surprise. we and all the cassado, potato and tobacco we have plant, but we do prevent they. the 26. of october come in captain william smith in the hope-well with some ordnance, shoot and powder. from the earl of carlisle with captain pelham and thirty man. about that time also come the blow. also a small ship of bristol with captain warner wife and six or seven woman more. t^^ce (). upon the 25. of november the indian set upon the french for some injury about their woman and slay six and twenty french man, five english and three indian, their t^^ce (). upon the 25. of november, the indian set upon the french for some injury about their woman and slay six and twenty french man, five english and three indian. their weapon be bow and arrow. their bow be never bend, but the string lie flat to the bow. their arrow, a small reed, four or five foot long head, some with the poison sting of the tail of a stingray, some with iron, some with wood, but all so poison. the arrival of many english ^^^p^ that if they draw but blood the hurt be incurable. the next day come in captain charles saltonstall, a young gentleman, son of sir samuel saltonstall, who bring with he good store of all commodity to relieve the plantation. but be incurable. the next day come in captain charles saltonstall, a young gentleman, son of sir samuel saltonstall, who bring with he good store of all commodity to relieve the plantation. but by reason some hollander and other have be there late before he who carry away with they all the tobacco, he be force to put away all his commodity upon trust till the next crop. in the mean time he resolve there to stay and employ himself and his company in plant tobacco, hope thereby to make a voyage. but before he cou^d be ready to return for england, a hurricane h^pu^^g. his ship be split to his great loss, be sol^, merchant and owner himself, notwithstanding, force to pay to the governor the fill it. ready to return for england, a hurricane h^pu^^g, his ship be split to his great loss, be sol^ merchant and owner himself, notwithstanding, force to pay to the governor the fill it part of his tobacco and for fraught to england three penny a pound and nine penny a pound custom, wh^ch amount together to more than thre^score pound in the hundred pound, to the great discouragement of he and many other that intend well to those plantation. nevertheless, he be go again this present year, 1629.. with a ship of about three hundred ton and very near two hundred people, with sir william tuffton, govenour for the barbados, and diverse gentleman and all manner of commodity fit for a plantation, captain prinne, captain stone and divers other. very near two hundred people, with sir william tuffton, govenour for the barbados, and diverse gentleman and all manner of commodity fit for a plantation. captain prinne, captain stone and divers other come in about christmas so that this last year there have be about thirty sail of english, french and dutch ship and all the indian force out of the. i will, for they have do much mischief among the french in, cut their throat, burn their house and spoil their tobacco. amongst the rest, tegramund, a little child, the king son, his parent, be slay or flee. be by great chance, save and careful, bring to england by master merifield who bring he from thence and bring he up as his own child. it lie seventeen. slay or flee. be by great chance, save and careful, bring to england by master merifield who bring he from thence and bring he up as his own child. it lie seventeen degree northward of the line. the description of the lie about a hundred and twenty league from the cape, the near main land in america. it be about eight league in length and four in breadth, a island among 100 isle in the west indies call the caribe, where ordinary all they that frequent the west indies refresh themselves. those most of they be rocky, little and mountainous, yet frequent with the cannibal many of they inhabit, as saint domingo, saint mattalin, saint lucia, saint vincent, granada and margarita. to the southward, northward, none but saint. rocky, little and mountainous, yet frequent with the cannibal many of they inhabit, as saint domingo, saint mattalin, saint lucia, saint vincent, granada and margarita. to the southward, northward, none but saint christopher and it but lat^ly. yet they will be range marigalanta, guardalupo, deceado, antigua mevis, bernardo, saint martin and saint bartholomew, but the worst of the four isle possess by the spaniard, as portorico or jamica be better than they all. as for hispaniola and cuba, they be worthy the title of two rich kingdom, the rest not respect by the spaniard for want of harbour and their better choice of good land and profit in the main. but captain warner have be very familiar with captain painton in the amazon, hear his information of this. of harbour and their better choice of good land and profit in the main. but captain warner have be very familiar with captain painton in the amazon, hear his information of this st christopher and have make a year trial, as it be say, return for england, join with master merifield and his friend, get letter patent from king james to plant and possess it. since then the right honourable the earl of carlisle have get letter patent also, not only of that but all the caribe isle about it who be now chief lord of they and the english his tenant, that do possess they over who. he appoint such governor and officer as their affair require and although there be a great custom, impose upon they. they and the english his tenant, that do possess they over who he appoint, such governor and officer as their affair require, and although there be a great custom impose upon they consider their other charge both to feed and maintain themselves. yet there be there, and now a go near upon the number of three thousand people where by reason of the rockiness and thickness of the wood in the i will it be difficult to pass and such a snuff of the sea go on the shore. ten m^y better defend the spring temper and season than fifty assault. in this i will be many spring, but yet water be scarce again in many place, the valley and side of the hill very fertile, but the and season than fifty assault. in this i will be many spring, but yet water be scarce again in many place. the valley and side of the hill very fertile, but the mountain harsh and of a sulphurous composition. all overgrow with palmetas, cotten tree and diverse other sort, but none like any in christendom except those carry thither the air. very pleasant and healthful but exceed ^ot yet. so temper with cool breath. it seem very temperate to they that be a little use to it. the tree be always green, the day and night always very near equal in length, always summer. only they have in their season great gust and reins and sometime a hurricane which be a overgrow and a most violent storm a. always very near equal in length, always summer. only they have in their season great gust and reins and sometime a hurricane, which be a overgrow and a most violent storm. a strange hat^hung of eg^es, ^or b^^sts in some of those isle be cattle, goat and hog, but here none but what they must carry gwane they have, which be a little harmless beast like a crokadell or aligator, very fat and good meat. she lay egg in the sand, as do the land crab which live here in abundance, like coney in borough, unless about may when they come down to the sea side to lay in the sand, as the other and all their egg be hatch by the heat of the sun, fish from. about may when they come down to the sea side to lay in the sand as the other, and all their egg be hatch by the heat of the sun fish from may to september. they have good store of tortass that come out of the sea to lay their egg in the sand and be hatch as the other. they will lay half a peck at a time and near a bushel ere they have do and be round like tenisball. this fish be like veal in taste, the fat of a brownish colour, very good and wholesome. we seek they in the night. where we find they on shore, we turn they upon their back till the next day. we fetch they home for they can. good and wholesome. we seek they in the night. where we find they on shore, we turn they upon their back till the next day. we fetch they home, for they can never return themselves. be so hard a cart may go over they and so big one will suffice forty or fifty man to dinner. divers sort of other fish they have in abundance, and prawn, most great and excellent, but none will keep sweet, scarce twelve hour ^^^ds. the best and great be a passer flaminga which walk at her length, be as tall as a man, pigeon and turtle, dove in abundance, some parrot, wild hawk, but diverse other sort of good sea foul who name we know, not root cassado be a root plant. as a man, pigeon and turtle, dove in abundance, some parrot, wild hawk but diverse other sort of good sea foul who name we know not. root cassado be a root plant in the ground of a wonderful increase and will make very good white bread, but the juice rank poison yet boil better than wine. potato, cabbage and radish plenty. fruit may like the virginia wheat- we have pineapple near so big as a hartichocke but the most dainty taste of any fruit plantnais a excellent and a most increase fruit, apple, prickell, pear and pease, but differ all from we. there be pepper that grow in a little red husk as big as a walnut, about four inch in length, but the long cod be small. pease but differ all from we. there be pepper that grow in a little red husk as big as a walnut, about four inch in length, but the long cod be small and much strong and better for use than that. from the east indies there be two sort of cotten: the silk cotten, as in the east indies, grow upon a small stalk as good for bed as down the other upon a shrub and bear a cod big than a walnut full of cotten. wool anotto also grow upon a shrub, with a cod like the other and nine or ten on a bunch full of anotto very good for dyer though. wild sugar cane, not tame 4. or 5. foot high. also mastic and locus. like the other and nine or ten on a bunch full of anotto. very good for dyer though. wild sugar cane, not tame 4. or 5. foot high. also mastic and locus tree, great and hard. timber, gourd, musk, melon, water melon, lettuce, p^rsly all place. natural bear purslane of itself. sope-berry like a musket bullet that wash as white as soap in the middle of the root. be a thing like a sedge, a very good f^uit. we call pengrome a pappaw. be as great as a apple, colour like a orange and good to eat. a small hard nut like a hazel nut. grow close to the ground and, like this, grow on the palmetas which we call a mucca nut. mustardseed will grow to a. eat a small hard nut like a hazel nut, grow close to the ground and like this, grow on the palmetas which we call a mucca nut. mustardseed will grow to a great tree but bear no seed yet the leaf will make good mustard. the mancinell three. the fruit be poison good fig in abundance. but the palmeta serve to build fort and house the leaf to cover. they and many other use the juice we draw from they till we suck they to death. be hold restorative and the top for meat. do serve we as cabbage, but oft we want powder beef and bacon and many other needful necessary. by thomas simons, rowland grascocke, nicholas burgh and other. chap 26, the first plant of the. we as cabbage, but oft we want powder, beef and bacon and many other needful necessary by thomas simons, rowland grascocke, nicholas burgh and other. chap 26, the first plant of the barbados. the barbados lie south-west and by south, a hundred league from saint christopher, threescore league west and south from trinidado and some fourscore league from cape de salinos. the next part of the main, the first planter, bring thither by captain henry powel, be forty english with seven or eight negro. then he go to disacuba in the main, where he get thirty indian man, woman and child of the arawaco enemy, both to the caribe, a ^eseripu^n^^, the l^^ and the spaniard, the i will be most like a triangle, each side forty or indian man, woman and child of the arawaco enemy, both to the caribe, a ^eseripu^n^^, the l^^ and the spaniard, the i will be most like a triangle, each side forty or fifty mile square. some exceed great rock, but the most part exceed good ground, abound with a infinite number of swine, some turtle and many sort of excellent fish, many great pond wherein be duck and mallard, excellent clay for pot, wood and stone for building, and a spring near the midst of the. i will of bitume, which be a liquid mixture like tar that by the great reins fall from the top of the mountain. it float upon the water in such abundance that dry up it remain like great rock of pitch and tar that by the great reins, fall from the top of the mountain. it float upon the water in such abundance that, dry up it remain like great rock of pitch and as good as pitch for any use. the mancinell apple be of a most pleasant sweet smell, fruit and tree of the bigness of a crab but rank poison, yet the swine and bird have wit to shun it. great store of exceed, great locus tree, two or three fathom about, of a great height that bear, a cod full of meal, will m^ke bread in time, of necessity. a tree like a pine bear, a fruit so great as a musk, melon, which have always ripe fruit, flower or green fruit which will refresh two. bread in time, of necessity. a tree like a pine, bear a fruit so great as a musk melon, which have always ripe fruit, flower or green fruit which will refresh two or three man and very comfortable plumb tree many. the fruit, great and yellow which but strain into water in four and twenty hour will be very good drink. wild fig tree, there be many. all those fruit do fat the hog, yet at some time of the year they be so lean as carrion. gwane tree bear a fruit so big as a pear, good and wholesome palmetaes of three, several f^rrs, papawe, prickle pear, good to eat or make drink. cedar tree very tall and great, fusticke tree be very great and the wood. pear, good and wholesome. palmetaes of three, several f^rrs, papawe, prickle pear, good to eat or make drink. cedar tree, very tall and great, fusticke tree be very great and the wood yellow, good for die. soap berry, the kernel so big as a slow and good to eat. pumpeon in abundance, goad, so great as will make good great bottle and cut in two piece good dish and platter. many small brook of very good water, ginni wheat, cassado, pines and plantaine. all thing we there plant do grow exceed so well as tobacco. the corn, pease and bean cut, but away the stalk. young sprig will grow and so bear fruit for many year together, without any more plant. the i will be overgrow with wood. corn, pease and bean cut but away the stalk, young sprig will grow and so bear fruit for many year together, without any more plant, the i will be overgrow with wood or great reed. those wood w^ich be soft be exceed light and full of pitch, and those that be hard be so hard and great they be as hard to cut as stone. their number, master john powel, come thither the four of august 1627.. with forty five man, where we stay three week and then return, leave behind we about a hundred people and his son, john powel, for his deputy as governor. but there have be so many faction among they i can, from so many variable relation, give you any certainty for their and his son john powel for his deputy as governor. but there have be so many faction among they i can, from so many variable relation, give you any certainty for their orderly government, for all those plenty much misery they have endure in regard of their weakness at their land and long st^y without supply. therefore, those that go thither, it be good. they carry good provision with they. but the i will be most healthful and all thing plant do increase abundant, and by this time there be, and now a go about the number of fifteen or sixteen hundred people. sir william curtain and captain john powel be the first and chief adventurer to the plant. this fortunate i will, which have be oft frequent. number of fifteen or sixteen hundred people, sir william curtain and captain john powel be the first and chief adventurer to the plant. this fortunate i will, which have be oft frequent by man of war to refresh themselves and set up their shallop, be so far remote from the rest of the isle, they never be trouble with any of the indies harbour, they have none but exceed good rhodes which with a small charge may be very well fortify it. do ebb and flow four or five foot and they can perceive there have ever be any hurricane. in that i will from the relation of captain john white and captain wolverstone, chap 27, the first plantation of the i will of mevis, because i have ever be any hurricane. in that i will from the relation of captain john white and captain wolverstone, chap 27, the first plantation of the i will of mevis, because i have range and live among those land. what my author can tell i the description of the i will, i think it no great error in help they to tell it myself in this little i will of mevis more than twenty year ago. i have remain a good time together to will and water and refresh my man. it be all woddy but by the sea side southward there be sand like down where a thousand man may quarter themselves convenient. but in most place the wood grow close to the water side at a high. the sea side. southward there be sand like down where a thousand man may quarter themselves convenient. but in most place the wood grow close to the water side, at a high water mark and in some place so thick of a soft, spongy wood like a wild fig tree you can get through it, but by m^king your w^y with hatchet or falchion. whether it be the dew of those tree or of some other, i be not certain. but many of our man become so torment, with a burn sw^lling all over their body. they seem like se^ld^d man and near mad with pain. here we find a great pool, t^e ma^, wherein bathe themselves, they find much ease and find it feed with a pleasant they seem like se^ld^d man and near mad with pain. here we find a great pool, t^e ma^, wherein bathe themselves. they find much ease and find it feed, with a pleasant small stream that come out of the wood we find the head, half a m^le within the land, distil from a many of rock, by which they be well cure in two or three day. such faction here we have as common attend such voyage that a pair of gallows be m^de, but captain smith, for who they be intend, can not be persuade to use. they, but not any one of the inventor, but their life by justice, fall into his power to determine of at his pleasure who, with much mercy, he favour that. to use. they, but not any one of the inventor, but their life by justice, fall into his power to determine of at his pleasure who, with much mercy, he favour that most base and unjust will have betray he the last year, 1628.. master littleton, a gr^^t mispr^^^^^ with some other, get a patent of the earl of carlisle to plant the i will call the barbados thirty league, northward of saint christopher, which by report of their informer and undertaker, for the excellency and pleasantness thereof, they call dulcina. but when they come there they find it such a barren rock they leave it. although they be tell as much before they will not believe it. persuade themselves, those contradicter will get it for themselves be. they find it such a barren rock, they leave it. although they be tell as much before they will not believe it, persuade themselves. those contradicter will get it for themselves. be thus, by their cunning opinion, the deceiver of themselves, for see it lie convenient for their purpose in a map. they have not patience to know the goodness or badness, the inconvenience nor probability of the quality nor quantity. which error do predominate in most of our homebred adventurer that will have all thing as they conceit and will have it. and the more they be contradict, the more hot they be. but you may see by many example in the general history how difficult a matter it be to gather the truth from among so they be contradict, the more hot they be. but you may see by many example in the general history how difficult a matter it be to gather the truth from among so many foreign and several relation, except you have exceed good experience, both of the country people and their condition and those ignorant undertake have be the great hindrance of all those plantation, their number at last, because they will be absolute- they come to mevis a little, i will- by saint christopher, where they seat themselu^s, well furnish with all necessary, be about the number of a hundred and since increase to a hundred and fifty person, whereof many be old planter of saint christopher, especial master anthony hinton and master edward tompson. but because all number of a hundred and since increase to a hundred and fifty person, whereof many be old planter of saint christopher, especial master anthony hinton and master edward tompson. but because all those isle, for most part, be so capable to produce and in nature like each other, let this discourse serve for the description of they all. thus much concern those plantation which now, after all this time, loss and charge shall they be, abandon, suppress and dissolve, be most lamentable and sure see they all strive so much about this tobacco and that the fraught thereof and other charge be so great and so open to any enemy. by that commodity they can long subsist and it be a wonder to i to see such miracle. fraught thereof and other charge be so great and so open to any enemy, by that commodity they can long subsist. and it be a wonder to i to see such miracle of mischief in man. how greedy they pursue to dispossess the planter of the name of christ jesus, yet say they be christian, when so much of the world be unpossessed, yea and better land than they so much strive for murder, so many christian burn and spoil so many city, village and country and subvert so many kingdom, when so much lie vast or only possess by a few poor savage that more serve the devil for fear than god for love. who ignorance we pretend to reform, but covetousness, humour, ambition, faction and pride. or only possess by a few poor savage that more serve the devil for fear than god for love. who ignorance we pretend to reform. but covetousness, humour, ambition, faction and pride have so many instrument we perform very little to any purpose. nor be there either honour or profit to be get by any that be so vile to undertake the subversion or hindrance of any honest, intend christian plantation. now to conclude, the travel and adventure of captain smith () how first he plant virginia and be set ashore with about a hundred man in the wild wood. how he be take prisoner by the savage, by the king of pamaunke, tie to a tree to be shoot to death, lead up and down their country. in the wild wood. how he be take prisoner by the savage, by the king of pamaunke, tie to a tree to be shoot to death, lead up and down their country to be show for a wonder, fat as he think, for a sacrifice for their idol. before who they conjure he three day with strange dance and invocation. than bring he before their emperor powhatan that command he to be slay. how his daughter pocahontas save his life. return he to james town, relieve he and his famish company, which be but eight and thirty, to possess those large dominion. how he discover all the several nation upon the river, fall into the bay of chisapeacke, sting near to death with a most poison tail of. thirty to possess those large dominion. how he discover all the several nation upon the river, fall into the bay of chisapeacke, sting near to death with a most poison tail of a fish call stingray. how powhatan out of his country, take the king of pamaunke and paspahegh prisoner, force thirty nine of those king to pay he contribution. subject: all the savage. how smith be blow up with gunpowder and return for england to be cure. also, how he bring our new england to the subjection of the kingdom of great britain. his fight with the pirate, leave alone among a many french man of war and his ship run from he. his sea-fight for the french against the spaniard, their bad usage of he. how with the pirate, leave alone among a many french man of war and his ship. run from he his sea-fight for the french against the spaniard, their bad usage of he. how, in france, in a little boat, he escape. they be adrift all such a stormy night at sea by himself, when thirteen french ship be split or drive on shore by the i will of ree, the general and most of his man drown. when god, to who be all honour and praise, bring he safe on shore to all their admiration that escape. you may read at large in his general history of virginia, the summer, iles and new england, chap 28, the bad life, quality and condition of pirate and how they teach the you may read at large in his general history of virginia, the summer iles and new england, chap 28, the bad life quality and condition of pirate and how they teach the turk and moor to become man of war. as in all land where there be many people there be some thief, so in all sea, much frequent, there be some pirate. the most ancient within the memory of threescore year be one. calais, who most refresh himself upon the coast of wales, clinton, and pursser, his companion, who grow famous till queen elizabeth of bless memory. hang they at wapping fleming, be as expert and as much seek for as they. yet such a friend to his country that discover the spanish armado, he voluntary come. bless memory, hang they at wapping fleming, be as expert and as much seek for as they. yet such a friend to his country that discover the spanish armado, he voluntary, come to plymouth, yield himself free to my lord admiral and give he notice of the spaniard. come, which good warning, come so happy and unexpected that he have his pardon and a good reward. some few pirate there then remain. notwithstanding, it be incredible how many great and rich prize the little bark of the west country daily bring home, in regard of their small charge, the d^s^cul^es of a great navy. for there be so many difficulty in a great n^vy by wind and weather, victual sickness lose and find one another they seldom defray. small charge, the d^s^cul^es of a great navy. for there be so many difficulty in a great n^vy: by wind and weather, victual sickness, lose and find one another. they seldom defray half the charge. but for the grace state and defence of the coast and narrow sea a great navy be most necessary, but not to attempt any far voyage except there be such a competent stock. they want not wherewith to furnish and supply all thing with expedition, but to the purpose. after the death of our most gracious queen, elizabeth, what ocasion, pirate of bless memory, our royal king james, who from his infancy have reign in peace with all nation, have no employment for those man of war, so that those that be rich. of bless memory, our royal king james, who from his infancy have reign in peace with all nation. have no employment for those man of war, so that those that be rich rest with that they have. those that be poor and have nothing but from hand to mouth turn pirate. some because they become slight of those for who they have get much wealth. some for that they can nor get their due. some that have live brave will not abase themselves to poverty. some vain only to get a name other for revenge: covetousness or as ill. and as they find themselves more and more oppress, their passion increase with discontent, make they turn pirate. now because they grow hateful to all christian prince, their chief. or as ill, and as they find themselves more and more oppress, their passion increase with discontent, make they turn pirate. now, because they grow hateful to all christian prince, their chief rendezvous they retire to barbary where, although there be not many good harbour but tunis, argier, sally, mamora and tituane, there be many convenient rhodes or the open sea which be their chief lordship. for their best harbour, massalqueber, the town of oran, mellila, tanger and cuta, within the straits, be possess by the spaniard. without the straits they have also arzella and mazagan mamora. likewise, they have late take and fortify ward. a poor english sailer and dansker, a dutchman, make first here their mart when the moor know scarce how to sail a ship. mamora. likewise they have late. take and fortify ward, a poor english sailer, and dansker a dutchman, make first here their mart, when the moor know scarce how to sail a ship. bishop be ancient and do little hurt, but easton get so much as make himself a marquis in savoy and ward live like a bashaw in barbary. those be the first that teach the moor to be man of war. genning, harris, tompson and diverse other be. take in ireland, a coast they much frequent and die at, wapping hewes, bough smith, walsingam, ellis collins, sawkwell, wollistone, barrow, wilson, sayres and diverse other. all these be captain among the pirate who, king james, merciful pardon, and be it not strange a few of these shall command. collins, sawkwell, wollistone, barrow, wilson, sayres and diverse other. all these be captain among the pirate who, king james, merciful pardon, and be it not strange a few of these- shall command the sea, notwithstanding the maltese, the pope, florentine, genoeses, french, dutch and english galley and man of war, they will rob before their face and even at their own port. yet seldom more than three, four, five or six in a fleet. many time they have very good ship and well man their condition, but common in such faction among themselves, and so riotous, quarrelous, treacherous, blasphemous and villainous, it be more than a wonder they can so long continue to do so much mischief. and all they get they base, consume it among jew turk. quarrelous, treacherous, blasphemous and villainous. it be more than a wonder they can so long continue to do so much mischief. and all they get they base, consume it among jew, turk, moor and whore, the best be. they will seldom go to sea so long as they can possible live on shore be compile of english, french, dutch and moor, but very few spaniard or italian common, run one from another till they become so disjoint, disorder, debawch and miserable that the turk and moor begin to command they as slave and force they to instruct they in their best skill, which many a accurse runnagado or christian turn turk do till they have make those sally man or moor of barbary so powerful as they be. instruct they in their best skill, which many a accurse runnagado or christian turn turk do till they have, make those sally man or moor of barbary, so powerful as they be, to the terror of all the straits. and many time they take purchase in the main ocean, yea, sometime even in the narrow sea in england, and those be the most cruel villain in turkey. or barbary who native be very noble and of good nature in comparison of they advertisement for wild head. to conclude, the misery of a pirate, although many be as sufficient seaman as any, yet in regard of his superfluity you shall find it such that any wise man will rather live among wild beast than they. therefore let all unadvised. as sufficient seaman as any, yet in regard of his superfluity you shall find it such that any wise man will rather live among wild beast than they. therefore, let all unadvised person take heed how they entertain that quality, and i can wish merchant gentleman and all setter forth of ship not to be spare of a competent pay nor true payment, for neither sould^ers nor seaman can live without mean, but necessity will force they to steal, and when they be once enter into that trade, they be hardly reclaim those title of seaman and soldier have be most worthy honour and esteem, but now regard for most part, but as the scum of the world. regain therefore your wont reputation and endeavour rather to adventure. and soldier have be most worthy honour and esteem, but now regard for most part. but as the scum of the world, regain therefore your wont reputation and endeavour rather to adventure to those fair plantation of our english nation which, however, in the beginning be scorn and contemn. yet now you see how many rich and gallant people come from thence who go thither as poor as any soldier or sailer and get more in one year than you, by piracy, in seven. i entreat you, therefore, to consider how many thousand yearly go thither, also how many ship and sailor be employ to transport they and what custom they yearly pay to our most royal king, charles, who prosperity and his kingdom good i humble beseech. also how many ship and sailor be employ to transport they and what custom they yearly pay to our most royal king, charles. who prosperity and his kingdom good. i humble beseech the immortal god ever to preserve and increase.