advertisement or the pathway to experience, to erect a plantation, chap 1.. what people they be that begin this plantation? the have of virginia, strange misprision of wiseman. the war in europe, asia and africa, teach i how to subdue the wild savage in virginia and new-england. in america which now, after many a stormy blast of ignorant contradictor, projector and undertaker, both they and i have be so toss and torture into so many extremity as despair be the next. we both expect till it. please, god, now at last to stir up some good mind that i hope will produce glory to god, honour to his majesty and profit to his kingdom, although all our plantation have be so foil and abuse their best good willer. have be, for the most part, discourage and their good intent disgrace as the general history of they will at large, true, relate you, pardon i if i offend in love that i have cherish. true, no browaist nor separatist admit by the loss of my prime fortune, mean and youth if it, over-glad i to see industry herself adventure now to make use of my age. endeavour, not by such, i hope, as rumour do report a many of discontent, brownist, anabaptist, papist, puritan, separatist and such faction humorist, for no such they will suffer among they if know, as many of the chief of they have, assure i and the much conference i have have with many of they do confident, persuade i to writethus much. in their behalf. i mean not the brownist of leyden and amsterdam, at new-plimoth, who, although by accident, ignorance and wilfulness, have endure with a wonderful patience many loss and extremity. yet they subsist and prosper so well. not any of they will abandon the country but to the utmost of their power, increase their number. but of those which be go within this eighteen month for cape anne and the bay of the massachusets, those which be their chief, what they be, that biginne, this plantation undertaker, be gentleman of good estate, some of 500, some a thousand pound land a year, all which they say they will sell for the advance, this harmless and pious work, man of good credit and well-beloved in their country, not. such as fly for debt or any scandal at home and be good catholic protestant according to the reform church of england. if not, it be well they be. go the rest of they man of good mean or art, occupation and quality much more fit for such a business and better furnish of all necessary, if they arrive well than be ever any plantation. go out of england, i will not say, but some of they may be more precise than needs, nor that they all be so good as they shall be, for christ have but twelve apostle and one be a traitor, and if there be no dissembler among they it be more than a wonder. therefore, do not condemn all for some, but however. they have as good authority from his majesty as they can desire. if they do ill, the loss be but their own. if well, a great glory and exceed good to this kingdom to make good at last what all our former conclusion have. disgrace now they take not that course. the virginia company do the be of virginia for the planter there. their purse and life be subject to some few here in london who be never there, that consume all in argument, project and their own conceit every year, try new conclusion, alter every thing yearly as they alter opinion, till they have consume more than two hundred thousand pound and near eight thousand man life. it be true in the year of our lord 1622. they be about seven or eight thousand english indifferent, well furnish with most necessary, and many of they grow to that height of bravery, live in that plenty and excess that go thither, not worth any thing, make the company here think all the world be oatmeal there. and all this proceed by survive those that die. nor be they ignorant to use as curious trick, there as here and out, of the juice of tobacco which at first they sell at such good rate, they regard nothing but tobacco, a commodity then so vendable it provide. they all thing and the love savage, their kind friend. they train so well up to shoot in a piece, to hunt and kill. they foul, they become more expert than our own countryman who labour be more profitable to their master in plant tobacco and other business. this superfluity cause my poor beginning scorn, or the difference betwixt my beginning in virginia and the proceed of my successor to be speak of, but with much derision that never send ship from thence fraught, but only some small quantity of wainscot, clap-board, pitch tar, rosin, soap-ash, glass, cedar, cypress, black walnut, knee for ship, ash for pike, iron over none better some silver over, but so poor it be not regard. better there may be, for i be no mineralist, some sturgeon, but it be too tart. of the vinegar which be of my own store, for little come from they, which be good, and wine of the country, wild grape, but it be too sour. yet better than they send we any in two or three year. but one hogshead of claret only spead my time to revenge my imprisonment upon the harmless, innocent savage who by my cruelty i force to feed i with their contribution and to send any offend my idle humour to james town to punish at my own discretion, or keep their king and subject in chain and make they work thing clean, contrary to my commission. while i and my company take our needless pleasure in discover the country about, we build of fort and such unnecessary foolery. where a eggshell, as they write, have be sufficient against such enemy neglect to answer the merchant expectation with profit. feed the company only with letter and taste of such commodity, as we write, the country will afford in time by industry as silk, wine, oil of olive rape and linse, rason, prune, flax, hemp and iron. as for tobacco, we never then dream of it now, because i send not their ship full fraught home with those commodity they kind write to i. if we fail the next return, they will leave we there as banish man, as if house and all those commodity do grow natural, only for we to take at our pleasure, with such tedious letter, direction and instruction, and most contrary to that. be fit. we do admire how it be possible such wise man can, a strange mistake, be wise man so torment themselves and we, with such strange absurdity and impossibility, make religion their colour, when all their aim be nothing but present profit, as most plain appear by. send we so many refiner, goldsmith, jeweller, lapidarics, stonecutter, tabacco-pipe-maker, imbroderer, perfumer, silkeman, with all their appurtenance but material, and all those have great sum out of the common stock. and so many spy and superintendent over we, as if they suppose we will turn rebel. all strive to suppress and advance. they know not what. at last get a commission in their own name. promise the king custom within seven year where we be free for one and twenty. appoint the lord de-la-ware for governor with as many great and stately officer and office under he as do belong to a great kingdom, with good sum for their extraordinary expense. also, privilege for city, charter for corporation, university, free-schoole and glebe-land. put all those in practice. before there be either people, student or scholar to build or use they, or provision and victual to feed. they be then there and to amend this, most of the tradesman in london that will adventure, but twelve pound ten shilling have the furnish, the company of all such thing as belong to his trade. such juggle there be betwixt they, and such intrude committee, their associate, that all the trash they can get in london be send we to uirginia. they be well, pay for that be good much. they blame we for not convert the savage, when those they send we be little better, if nor worse. nor do they all convert any of those. we send they to england for that purpose. so, dote of mine of gold and the south sea that all the world can not have, devise better course to bring we to ruin than they do themselves with many more such like strange concoit. by this you may avoid the like inconvenience and take heed by those example. you have not too many iron in the fire at once, neither such change of governor nor such a multitude of officer, neither more master, gentleman, gentlewoman and child than you have man to. work which idle charge you will find very troublesome and the effect dangerous. and one hundred good labourer better than a thousand, such gallant as be send i that can do nothing but complain, curse and despair when they see our misery and all thing so clean, contrary to the report in england. yet must i provide as well for they as for myself. chap 2. needless custom. effect of flatterr. cause of misery, faction, careless government, the dissolve the company and patent this. the mariner and sailor do ever all they can thou. effect of slaurry, the (@) of misery to conceal, who have always both good fare and good pay for the most part and part out of our own purse, never care how long they. stay upon their voyage, daily feast before our face, when we live upon a little corn and water, and not half enough of that, the most of which we have from among the savage now, although there be dear in the wood, fish in the river and fowl in abundance in their season, yet the wood be so wide, the river so broad and the beast so wild and we so unskilful to catch they we little trouble, they nor they we. for all this, our letter that still signify unto they the plain truth, will not be believe, because they require such thing as be most necessary, but their opinion be otherways, for they desire but to pack over so many as they can say necessity will. make they get victual for themselves. as for good labourer, they be more useful here in england, but they find it otherways. the charge be all one to send a workman as a roarer who clamour to appease we have much ado to get fish and corn to maintain they from one supply till another come with more loiterer without victual, still to make we worse and worse. for the most of they will rather starve than work. yet have it not be for some few that be gentleman, both by birth, industry and discretion. we can not possible have subsist. many do urge i may have force they to it have authority that extend so far as death. but i say: have neither, take heed of faction. breed in england meat, drink, lodging, pay nor hope of any thing or preferment, and see the merchant only do what they list with all they wrought for. i know not what punishment can be great than that they endure. which misery cause we always to be in faction? the most part strive by any mean to abandon the country, and i with my party to prevent they and cause they stay. but indeed the cause of our faction be breed here in england and grow to that maturity among themselves that spoil all, as all the kingdom and other nation can too well testify. yet in the year 1622. there be about seven or eight thousand english, as have be say so well, train, secure and well. furnish as they report and conceit, these simple savage, their bosom friend i so much oppress, have lay their plot: how to cut all their throat in a morning, and upon the 22. of march, so innocent attempt it, they slay three hundred forty seven, set their house on fire, slay their cattle and bring they to that distraction and confusion. within less the massacre in virginia than a year there be not many more than two thousand remain, the which loss to repair the company, do what they can till they have, consume all their stock, as be say. then they break, not make any account nor give satisfaction to the lord planter adventurer, nor any who noble intent have refer the manage of this intricate business. to a few that lose, not by it, so that his majesty recall how the company dissolve their commission. and by more just cause, then they persuade king james to call in we, which be the first beginner, without our knowledge or consent, dispose of we and all our endeavour at their pleasure. chap 3. a great comfort to new england, it be no island, a strange plague notwithstanding, since they have be leave in a manner as it be to themselves. they have, increase the abundance of victual- now in virginia their number to four or five thousand, and near as many cattle, with plenty of goat, abundance of swine poultry, and come that, as they report, they have sufficient and to spare to entertain three or four hundred people, which be much better than to have many people more than provision now have, glut the world with their too much over-abounding tobacco. reason or necessity or both will cause they, i hope, learn in time better to fortify themselves and make better use of the trial of their gross commodity that i have propound and at the first send over, and be it not a lamentable dishonour, so goodly a country after so much cost, loss and trouble. shall now in this estate not be regard and supply. and to those of new-england, may it not be a great comfort to have so near a great comfort for new england by virginia, a neighbour of their own nation. that may furnish they with their spare cattle, swine, poultry and other root and fruit much better than from england. but i fear the seed of envy and the rust of covetousness do grow too fast, for some will have all man advance virginia to the ruin of new-england and other the loss of virginia to sustain new-england, which god of his mercy forbid. for at first it be intend by that most memorable judge, sir john popham, than lord chief justice of england and the lord of his majesty privy council with diverse other, that two colony shall be plant, as now they be for the better. strengthen each other against all occurrence, the which to perform shall ever be in my hearty prayer to almighty god to increase and continue that mutual love. betwixt they for ever. by this you may perceive somewhat what unexpected inconvenience be incident to a plantation especial in such the difference. betwixt the beginning of virginia and they of salem, a multitude of voluntary contributer, superfluity of officer and unexperienced commissioner. but it be not so as yet with those for new-england, for they will. neither believe nor use such officer in that they be overseer of their own estate and so well breed in labour and good husbandry as any in england, where as few as i say be send i to virginia. but these be naught here and worse, there. now, when these shall have lay the foundation and provide mean beforehand, they may entertain all the poor- a necessary consideration, artificer and laborer in england and their family, which be burdensome to their parish and country, where they live upon alm and benevolence for want of work, which, if they will but pay for their transportation, they shall never be trouble with they more, for there be vast land enough for all the people in england, scotland and ireland and it seem god have provide this country, new-england, be no island but the main continent for our nation. destroy the native by the plague. it not touch one englishman, though many trade and be conversant among they, for they have three plague in three year successive near. two hundred mile along the sea coast, that in some place there scarce remain five of a hundred. and as they report thus it begin, a fish ship be cast away upon the coast. two of the man escape on shore, one of they die, the other live among the native till he have learn their language. then he persuade they to become christian, show they a testament, some part thereof expound so well as he can, but they so much deride he that he tell they he fear his god will destroy they. whereat the king assemble a strange plague among the savage, all his people about a hill, himself with the christian stand on the top. demand if his god have so many people and able. to kill all those? he answer yes and sure will, and bring in stranger to possess their land. but so long they mock, he and his god, that not long after such a sickness come that of five or six hundred. about the massachusets, there remain but thirty on who their neighbour fall and slay twenty eight. the two remain- flee the country till the english come, than they return and surrender their country and title to the english. if this be not true in every particular excuse, i, i pray you, for i be not the author, but it be most certain there be a exceed great plague among they, for where i have see two or three hundred within three year after remain scarce thirty. but what disease it be. the savage know not till the english tell they never have see nor hear of the like before chap 4.. our right to those country, true reason for plantation, rare example: many good, religious, devout man have make it a. by what right we may possess those country? law full, great question, as a matter in conscience, by what warrant they may go to possess those country which be none of they but the poor savage? which poor curiosity will answer itself. for god do make the world to be inhabit with mankind and to have his name know to all nation and from generation to generation. as the people increase, they disperse themselves into such country as they find most convenient. and here in florida, virginia, new-england and cannada be more land than all the people in christendom can manure and yet more to spare than all the native of those country can use and culturate. and shall we here keep such a coil for land and as such great rent and rate, when there be so much of the world uninhabited and as much more in other place and as good, or rather better than any we possess, be it manure and use according. if this be not a reason sufficient to such tender conscience for a copper kettle and a few toy as bead and hatchet, they will fell you a whole. country and, for a small matter, their house and the ground they dwell upon. but those of the massachusets have resign. they free now the reason for plantation. be many adam and true reason for those plantation eve. do first begin this innocent work to plant the earth to remain to posterity, but not without labour, trouble and industry. noah and his family begin again the second plantation and their seed, as it still increase, have still plant new country, and one country another, and so the world to that estate it be, but not without much hazard, travel, mortality, discontent and many disaster. have those worthy father and their memorable offspring not be more diligent, for we now, in those age, than we be to plant that? yet unplanted for after-liver, have the seed of abraham, our saviour christ. jesus and his apostle expose themselves to no more danger to plant the gospel we so much profess than we even we ourselves have at this present, be as savage and as miserable as the most barbarous savage yet uncivilized: the hebrew, lacedaemonian, the goth, grecian, roman and the rest, what be it. they will not undertake to enlarge their territory, enrich their subject and resist their enemy. those that be the founder of those great monarchy and their virtue be no silver idle, golden pharisee, but industrious, honest heart publican. they regard more provision and necessary for their people than jewel ease and delight for themselves. riches be their servant, not their master. they rule. as father, not as tyrant their people, as child, not as slave. there be no disaster can discourage they and let none think they encounter, not with all manner of encumbrance and what have ever be the work of the best great prince of the world, but plant of country and civilise barbarous and inhuman nation to civility and humanity. who eternal action fill our history with more honour than those that have waste and consume they by war. last the portugal and spaniard that first begin plantation. rare example of the spaniard, portugal and the ancient in this unknown world of america till within this 140. year. who everlasting action before our eye will testify our idleness and ingratitude to all posterity and neglect of our duty. and religion. we owe our god, our king and country and want of charity to those poor savage who country we challenge, use and possess, except we be but make to mar what our forefather make, or but only tell what they do, or esteem ourselves too good to take the like pain. where there be so much reason, liberty and action offer itself, have as much power and mean as other, why shall english man despair and not do so much as any, be it virtue in those heros to provide that do maintain we and baseness in we to do the like for other to come sure. no, then see, we be not bear for ourselves, but each to help other and our ability be much. alike, at the hour of our birth and minute of our death. see our good deed or bad, by faith in christ, merit be all we have to carry our soul to heaven or hell. see honour be our life ambition and our ambition after death to have a honourable memory of our life. and see by no mean we will be abate of the dignity and glory of our predecessor. let we imitate their virtue to be worthy their successor, or at least not hinder, if not further, they that will and do their utmost and best endeavour. chap 5. my first voyage to new england, my return and profit to begin with the original of the voyage to those, my first voyage to notumbega, now call. new-england, 1614 coast. i refer you to my general history for new-england by the most of they be esteem, a most barren rocky desert notwithstanding, at the sole charge of some merchant of london and myself, 1614. within eight week sail, i arrive at mo^ahigan an. i will in america, in 43. degree 39 minute of northerly latitude, have the fish for whale prove as we expect. i have stay in the country but we find the plot we have so false and the season for fish and trade by the unskilfulness of our pilot. so much mistake. i be content have take by hook and line, with fifteen or eighteen man at most, more than 60000.. cod in less than a month, while myself with eight other. of they may best be spare by a hour glass of three month. range the coast in a small boat, get for trifle eleven hundred beaver skin beside otter and martin. all amount to the value of fifteen hundred. we get 1500.. pound in six month. pound and arrive in england with all my man in health in six or seven month. but northward, the french return this year to france, five and twenty thousand bever and good fur while we be contend about patent and commission with such fearful incredulity that more dazzle our eye than open they in this voyage. i take the description of the coast as well by map as writing and call 25000.. bever send to france. it new-england, but malicious mind among. sailor and other drown that name with the echo of nusconcus, canaday and penaquid. till at my humble suit, our most gracious king charles than prince of wales, be please to confirm it by that title and do change the barbarous name of their principal harbour and habitation for such english that posterity may say king charles be their godfather, and in my opinion it shall seem a unmannerly presumption in any that do alter they. without his leave, my second voyage be to begin a plantation, and to my second and three voyage, 1615.. 1616.. do what else i can, but by extreme tempest that bear near all my mast, by the board be more than two hundred league at sea, be force to return to plymouth. with a jury-mast, the three be intercept by english and french pirate, by my treacherous company. that betray i to they who run away with my ship and all that i have. such enemy, the sailor be to a plantation and the great loss be i do easy excuse themselves to the merchant in england that still provide to follow the fish. much difference there be betwixt the londoner and the westerling to engross it. who now will adventure thousand that when i go first will not adventure a groat. yet there go four or five. good ship, but what? by their dissension and the turk man of war that take the best of they in the strait, they scarce, save themselves. this year at my return from france, i do my best to have unite they, but that have be more than a work for hercules, so violent be the folly of greedy covetousness. chap 6. a description of the coast, harbour, habitation, landmark, latitude, longitude. with the map this country we now speak of lie betwixt, 41. a description of the country and 44@ the very mean for heat and cold, betwixt, the equinoctial and (@) north pole, in which i have found about five and twenty very good harbour, in many, whereof be ancorage for five hundred good ship of any burden, in some of they for a thousand and more than three hundred isle overgrow with good timber or diverse sort of other wood in most. of they in their season: plenty of wild fruit, fish and fowl and pure spring of most excellent water, pleasant distil from their rocky foundation. the principal habitation i be at northward be pennobscot, who be in war with the terentines, their next northerly neighbour. southerly up the river and along the coast we find mecadacut, segocket, pemmaquid, nusconcus, sagadahock, satquin, aumughcawgen and kenabeca. to those belong, the country and people of segot, igo, pocopassum, taughtanakagnet, wabigganus, masherosqueck, wawrtgwick, moshoquen, waccogo, pasharanack, etc. to those be ally in confederacy, the country of aucocisco, passataquak, augawoam and naemkeck. all these, for any thing i can perceive, differ little in language or any thing, though most of they be sagamo and lord of themselves, yet they hold the bashabe of. pennobscot, the chief and great among they, the next be mattahunt, totant, massachuset, paconekick than cape cod, by which be pawmet the isle, nawset and capawuck, near which be the shovel of rock and sand that stretch themselves into the main sea, twenty league and very dangerous. betwixt the degree of 40. and 41.. now, beyond cape cod, the land extend itself southward to virginia, florida, the west-indies, the amazon and brasele, to the strait of magelanus, two and fifty degree southward beyond the line. all those great country differ as they be in distance, north or south, from the equinoctial in temper, heat, cold, wood, fruit, fish, beast, bird, the increase and decrease of the night and day to six under the equinoctial twelve hour day and twelve night, month day and six month night. some say many of those nation be so brute they have no religion, wherein sure they may be deceive. for myself, i never see nor hear of any nation in the world which have not religion. dear bow and arrow, those in new-england, i take it. believe, much alike as those in virginia, of many divine power, yet of one above all the rest, as the southerly virginian call their chief god kewassa, and that we now inhabit okae, but their religion all, their king werowance, the m^ssichusots call their great god kichtan and their king sacheme, and that we suppose their devil. they call habamouk, the pennobscots their god tantum, their king sagamo. about those country be abundance of several nation and language, but much alike in their simple curiosity, live and workmanship, except the wild estate of their chief king, etc. of who particular? miserable magnificence, yet most happy in this that they never trouble themselves with such variety of apparel, drink, viand, sauce, perfume, preservative and nicety as we yet live. as long and much more healthful and hardy. also the deity of their chief, god, priest, conjurer, religion, temple, triumph, physic and chirurgeric. their birth education, duty of their woman, exercise for their man, how they make all their instrument and engine to cut down tree, make their clothes boat line, net, fishhook wear and trap, mat, house, pot, platter, mortar, bow, arrow, target, sword, club, jewel and hatchet, their several sort of wood, serpent, beast, fish, fowle, root, berry, fruit, stone and clay. their best trade, what be most fit to trade with they, with the particular of the charge of a fish voyage and all the necessary belong to it, their best country to vent it for their best return. also the particular for every private. man or family that go to plant and the best season to go or return thence, with the particular description of the savage habitation, harbour and land mark, their latitude, longitude or several distance, with their old name and the new by the map, augment last the power of their king, obedience of their subject law, execution, plant their field, hunt, fishing, the manner of their war and treachery, yet know and in general, their life and conversation and how to bridle their brute, barbarous and savage disposition. of all these particular, you may read at large in the general history of virginia, new-england and the summer iles, with many more such strange action and accident that to a ordinary capacity may rather seem miracle than wonder possible. to be effect. which though they be, but wound up as bottom of fine silk which with a good needle may be flourish, into a far large work. yet the image of great thing be best discern. contract into small glass, chap 7.. new england yearly trial the plant. new plymouth, supprisal, prevent their wonderful industry and fish. for all those difference. there go eight tall ship before i arrive in england from france, so that i spend 1617.. eight ship to fish that year in the west country to persuade the city, town and gentry for a plantation which the merchant very little like, because they will have the coast free only for themselves and the gentleman be doubtful of their true account oft and much it. be so dispute that at last they promise i the next year twenty sail well furnish, make i admiral of the country for my life under their hand and the colonel seal for new-england, and in renew their letter patent to be a patentee, for my pain, yet nothing but a voluntary fish be effect for all this air, new england, the most remarqueable part, thus name by the high and mighty prince charles, prince of great britain, at last, upon those inducement, some well dispose, brownist as they be term with some gentleman and merchant of layden and amsterdam, to save charge, will try their own conclusion, though with great loss and much misery. till time have teach they to see their own error, for such humorist. will never believe. well, till they be beat with their own rod, they be supply with a small ship with seven and thirty- 1621.. passenger who find all they be leave after they be seat. well, all but six that die for all their poverty. in this ship. they return the value of five hundred pound which be take by a frenchman upon the coast of england. there be go from the west to fish, five and thirty sail, 1622.. seven and thirty sail to fish, two from london, with sixty passenger, for they at new-plimoth, and all make good voyage. now you be to understand. the seven and thirty passenger miscarry twice upon the coast of england come so ill provide they only rely upon that poor. company they find that have live two year by their naked industry and what the country natural afford, it be true at first, there have be. take a thousand bayse at a draught and more than twelve hogshead of herring in a night of other fish. when and what they will, when they have mean but want most necessary for fish and fowl, it be a wonder how they can subsist, fortify themselves, resist their enemy and plant their plant. in july, a many of straggle, forlorn englishman who want they relieve, though want themselves the which to requite, destroy their corn and fruit and will have do the like to they and have, surprise what they have. the savage also intend the like, but wise they slay. the savage captain and revenge those injury upon the fugitive english that will have do the like to they. chap 8.. extremity, next despair. god, great mercy their estate. they make good salt, a unknown rich. i at new-plimoth have plant there field and 1623. garden. such a extraordinary drought ensue, all thing wither that they expect no harvest and have long expect a supply. they hear no news but a wrack split upon their coast. they suppose their ship. thus, in the very labyrinth of despair, they solemn assemble themselves together nine house in prayer. at their departure the parch fair sky all overcast with black cloud, and the next morning such a pleasant, moderate rain continue fourteen day that it be hard to say whether their wither fruit or droop affection be most revive. not long after come two ship to supply. they with all their passenger well except one, and he present, recover for themselves for all their want there be not one sick person among they. the great ship they return fraught with commodity. this year go from england only to fish five and forty sail and have all make a better voyage. five and forty sail to fish than ever. in this plantation there be about a hundred and fourscore 1624.. person, some cattle, but many swine and poultry. their town contain two and thirty house, whereof seven be burn with the value of five or six hundred pound. in other good impail, about half a mile within which, within a high mount, a fort with a watchtower, well build of stone, loam and wood. their ordnance well mount and so healthful that of the first planter not one have die this three year. yet at the first land, at cape cod, be a hundred passenger beside twenty they have leave behind. at plymouth, for want of good, take heed, think to find all thing better than i advise. they spend six or seven week in wander up and down in frost and snow, wind and rain, among the wood, crick and swamp. forty of they die. and threescore be leave in most miserable estate at new-plimoth, where their ship leave they and but nine league by sea from where they land who? misery? and variable opinion for want of experience, occasion, much faction till necessity agree they. these disaster, loss and uncertainty make such disagreement among the adventurer in england who begin to repent and rather lose all than long continue the charge be out of purse. six or seven thousand pound account my book and their relation as old almanac. but the planter, rather than leave the country, conclude absolute. to supply themselves and to all their adventurer pay they for nine year, two hundred pound yearly, without any other account, where more than six hundred adventurer for virginia, for more than two. hundred thousand pound, have not six penny, since they have make a. they make store of good salt, salt work, wherewith they preserve all the fish they take and have fraught this year a ship of a hundred and fourscore tun. live so well. they desire nothing but more company and what ever they take return commodity to the value. thus you may plain see, although many envy, i shall bring so much from thence where many other have be and some, the same year, return with nothing. report the fish and bevers i bring home. i have take from the french man of canada to discourage any from believe i and excuse their own misprision, some only to have conceal this good country, as be say to. their private use, other tax. i as much of indiscretion to make my discovery and design so public for nothing which may have be so well manage by some concealer to have be all rich ere any have know of it. those and many such, like wise reward, have be my recompense, for which i be content. so the country prosper and god name be there. praise by my countryman. i have my desire, and the benefit of this salt and fish for breed, mariner and build ship will make so many fit man to raise a commonwealth, if but manage, as my general history will show you it, a incredible rich. i may well by this have be as profitable as the best mine, the king of. spain have in his west indies. chap 9, note worth observation: miserableness, no good husbandry. now, if you but true, consider how many strange, note worthy observation accident have befall those plantation and myself, how oft up, how oft down, sometime near despair and ere long flourish. how many scandal and spanolized english have seek to disgrace they, bring they to ruin or at least hinder they all they can. how many have shave and cozen? both they and i and their most honourable supporter and well-willer can but conceive. god. infinite mercy both to they and i. have be a slave to the turk, prisoner among the most barbarous savage. after my deliverance, common discover and range those large river and unknown nation with such a handful. of ignorant companion that the wise sort often give, i for lose, always in mutiny, want and misery blow up with gunpowder. a long time prisoner among the french pirate from who escape in a little boat by myself and adrift all such a stormy winter night when their ship be split. more than a hundred thousand pound lose we have take at sea and most of they drown upon the i will of ree, not far from whence i be, drive on shore in my little boat etc. and many a score of the worst of winter month live in the field. yet to have live near 37. year in the midst of war, pestilence and famine by which many a hundred thousand have die about i. and scarce five live of. they go first with i to virginia and see the fruit of my labour thus well begin to prosper though i have, but my labour for my pain. have i not much reason, both private and public, to acknowledge it and give god thanks who omnipotent power only deliver i to do the utmost of my best to make his name know in those remote part of the world and his love mercy to such a miserable sinner. have my design be to have persuade man to a mine good ill get ill spend of gold, as i know many have. do that know no such matter, though few do conceive either the charge or pain in refine it, nor the power nor care to defend it. or some new invention to pass to the south sea, or some strange plot to invade some strange monastery, or some chargeable fleet to take some rich charaques, or letter of mart, to rob some poor merchant or honest fisher man. what multitude of both people and money will contend to be first employ. but in those noble endeavour, now, how few, unless it be to beg they as monopoly and those seldom seek the common good, but the commons good, as the 217. the 218. and the 219. page in the general history will show. but only those noble gentleman and their associate. for who better encouragement? i have recollect those experience memorandum as a apology against all calumniate detractor, as well for myself as they now, since they call brownist, go some few before they also have my book and map. presume they know miserableness, no good husbandry as much as they desire many other director they have, as wise as themselves, but that be best, that like their own conceit, for indeed they will not be know to have. any knowledge of any but themselves, pretend only religion their governor and frugality their counsel, when indeed it be only their pride and singularity and contempt of authority. because they can not be equal. they will have no superior in this fool paradise they so long use that good husbandry they have pay sound in try their own folly, who undertake in small handful to make many plantation and to be several lord and king of themselves, most vanish to nothing, to the great disparagement of the general business. therefore, let they take heed that do follow their example. chap 10.. the mistake of patent, strange effect. encouragement for servant who will not think that all those certainty- 1625. 1626. 1627. 1628. shall not have make both i. and this country have prosper well by this, but it fall out otherways. for by the instigation of some who policy have long watch their opportunity, by the assurance of those profitable return, procure new letter patent from king james, draw in many nobleman and other to the number of twenty. for patentee divide my map and that tract of land from the north sea to the south sea, east and west, the effect of the last great patent, which be suppose by most cosmographer at least more than two thousand mile, and from 41. degree to 48. of northerly latitude, about 560. mile, the bound virginia to the south, the south sea to the west, canada to the north and the main ocean to the east. all this they divide in twenty, part for which they cast lot, but no lot for i. but smith isle, which be a many of barren rock, the most overgrow with such shrub and sharp whin. you can hardly pass they without either grass or wood, but three or four short, shrubby old cedar. those patentee procure a proclamation that no ship shall go thither to fish, but pay they for the public as it be, pretend five pound upon a proclamation for new-england every thirty tun of ship, neither trade with the native, cut down wood, throw their ballast over board, nor plant without commission, leave and content to the lord of that division or manor, some of which, for some of they, i believe, will be. tenantlesse this thousand year. thus, whereas this country, as the contriver of those project, shall have plant itself of itself, especial all the chief part along the coast, the first year, as they have oft tell i and chief by the fish ship and some small help of their own, think, man will be glad, upon any term, to be admit under their protection. but it prove so contrary, none will go at all. so, for fear to make a contempt against the proclamation it have ever since be little frequent to any purpose, nor will they do any thing, but leave it to itself. thus it lay again, in a manner vast, till those noble gentleman. memorandum for master, thus voluntary, undertake it whem, i entreat to. take this as a memorandum of my love to make your plantation so near and great as you can for many hand make light work, whereas yet your small party can do nothing available. nor stand too much upon the let set or sell those wild country, nor impose too much upon the commonalty either by your maggazine which common eat out all poor man labour, nor any other too hard imposition for present gain. but let every man so it be by order. allot he plant free, without limitation, so much as he can, be it by the half or otherways, and at the end of five or six year, or when you make a division for every acre he have plant, let he have twenty thirty. forty or a hundred or as you find he have, extraordinary deserve by itself to he and his heir for ever. all his charge be defray to his lord or master and public good in so do. a servant that will labour within four or five year encouragement for servant- may live as well there as his master do here, for where there be so much land lie waste, it be a madness in a man at the first to buy or hire or pay anything more than a acknowledgement to who it shall be due, and he be double mad. that will leave his friend mean and freedom in england to be worse there than here. therefore, let all man have as much freedom in reason as may be, and true deal for it be the great comfort you can give they where the very name of servitude will breed much ill blood and become odious to god and man. but mild temper, correction with mercy, for i know well you will have occasion enough to use both, and in thus do, doubtless god will bless you, and quick, triple and multiply your number, the which, to my utmost, i will do my best endeavour. chap 11. the plant bastable, or salem and charlton, a description of the massachusets. in all those plantation yea, of those that have do least yet the most, will say we be the first. and so every 1629. the. plant salem, next supply, still the next beginner. but see history be the memory of time, the life of the dead and the happiness of the live. because i have more plain discover and describe and discourse of those country than any as yet, i know i be the bold to continue the story and do all man right, so near as i can, in those new beginning which hereafter perhaps may be in better request than a forest of nine day pamphlet in the year 1629.. about march six, good ship be go with 350.. man, woman and child people profess themselves their provision for salem of good rank, zeal, mean and quality, also 150.. head of cattle as horse mare and neat beast, 41.. goat some. coney with all provision for household and apparel, six piece of great ordnance for a fort with musket, pike, corslet, drum and colour, with all provision necessary for the good of man. they be seat about 42. degree and 38. minute at a place call by the native naemkecke, by our royal king charles bastable, but now by the planter salem, where they arrive for most part exceed well their cattle and all thing else prosper, exceed far beyond their expectation. at this place they find some reasonable, good provision, the plant salem and charlton and house build by some few of dorchester with who they be join in society, with two hundred man, a hundred and fifty more they have send to the massachusets which they call. charlton or charles town, i take the fair reach in this bay for a river, whereupon i call it charles river after the name of our royal king charles. but they find that fair channel to divide itself into so many fair branch as make forty or fifty pleasant land within that excellent bay, where the land be of diverse and sundry sort, in some place very black and fat, in other good clay, sand and gravel. the a description of the massachusets bay superficies, neither too flat in plain nor too high in hill. in the isle you may keep your hog, horse, cattle, coney or poultry and secure for little or nothing and to command, when you lift, only have a care of provision for some. extraordinary cold winter. in those isle, as in the main, you may make your nursery for fruit and plant where you put no cattle. in the main, you may shape your orchard, vineyard, pasture, garden, walk park and corn field out of the whole piece as you please, into such plot, one adjoin to another. leave every of they environ with two, three, four or six or so many row of well grow tree as you will, ready grow to your hand to defend they from ill weather, which in a champion you can not in many age. and this at first you may do with as much facility as careless or ignorant, cut down all before you and then, after better consideration, make ditch, pale, plant young. tree with a excessive charge and labour. see, you may have so many great and small grow tree for your main post to fix hedge, palisado house, rale or what you will, which order in virginia have not be so well, observe as it may, where all the wood for many a hundred mile, for the most part, grow straight like unto the high grove or tuft of tree upon the high hill by the house of that worthy knight, sir humphrey mildmay, so remarkable in essex, in the parish of danbery where i write this discourse. but much tall and great, neither grow they so thick together by the half, and much good ground between they without shrub, and the best be ever know by the greatness. of the tree and the vesture it bear. now, in new-england the tree be common, low, but much thick and firm wood and more proper for ship, of which i will speak a little. be the chief engine we be to use in this work and the rather for that within a square of twenty league you may have all or most of the chief material belong to they, be they wrought to their perfection, as in other place. of all fabric, a ship be the most excellent, require more art in building, rig, sail, trim, defend the masterpiece of workmanship and moar with such a number of several term and name in continual motion. not understand of any landman, as none will think of but some few. that know they. for who better instruction? i write my sea-grammar, a book most necessary for those plantation because there be scarce. any thing belong to a ship, but the sea-terme charge and duty of every officer be plain, express, and also any indifferent capacity may conceive how to direct a unskilful carpenter or sailer to build boat and bark sufficient to sail those coast and river and put a good workman in mind of many thing in this business. he may easy mistake or forget, but to be excellent in this faculty be the masterpiece of all the most necessary workman in the world. the first rule or model thereof be direct by god himself to noah for his ark, which he never do to any other. build but his temple which be toss and turn up and down the world with the like danger, misery and extremity. as a ship sometime taste the fury of the four element as well as she, by unlimited tyrant in their cruelty for torture that it be hard to conceive whether those inhumanes exceed the beast of the forest, the bird of the air, the fish of the sea, either in number, greatness, swiftness, fierceness or cruelty. who action and variety with such memorable observation as i have collect, you shall find with admiration in my history of the sea. if god be please, i live to finish it, chap 12. extraordinary mean for building many caveat: increase of corn. how to spoil the wood for any thing. their health for the build house, town and fortress. where shall a man find the like conveniency as stone of most extraordinary mean for building sort as well? lime stone, if i be not much deceive as iron stone, smooth stone, blue slate for cover house and great rock, we suppose marble, so that one place be call the marble harbour. there be grass plenty, though very long and thick stalk, which be neither mow nor eat, be very rank, yet all their cattle like and prosper well therewith. but indeed it be weed. herb and grass grow together which, although they be good and sweet in the summer, they will deceive your cattle in winter. therefore be careful. caveat for cattle in the spring to mow the. swamp and the low land of auguan, where you may have harsh sheare-grasse enough to make hay of till, you can clear ground to make pasture which will bear as good grass as can grow any where, as now it do in virginia. and unless you make this provision, if there come a extraordinary winter you will lose many of they and hazard the rest. especial if you bring they in the latter end of summer or before the grass be grow in the spring come weak from sea. all thing they plant prosper, exceed but one man of 13.. gallon of indian corn reap that year 364.. bushel, london measure, as they confident report, at which i much wonder, have plant many bushel but no such increase. the best way we find in virginia to spoil the wood. how to spoil the wood for pasture and corn be first to cut a notch in the bark, a hand broad, round about the tree, which peel off and the tree will sprout no more and all the small bough in a year or two will decay the great branch in the root they spoil with fire, but you with more ease may cut they from the body and they will quick rot betwixt those tree they plant their corn. who, great body, do much defend it from extreme gust and heat of the sun, where that, in the plain, where the tree, by time they have consume, be subject to both, and this be the most. easy way to have pasture and corn field which be much more fertile than the other. in virginia they never manure their overworn field, which be very few, the ground for most part be so fertile. but in new-england they do stick at every plant of corn a herring or two which come in that season. in such abundance they may take more than they know what to do with. some infirmed body or tender educat complain of a silly complaint of cold, the reason and remedy the pierce cold, especial in january and february. yet the french in canada, the russian, swethlander, polander, german and our neighbour hollander be much cold and far more northward for all that rich country and live well. now they have wood. enough if they will, but cut it at their door to make fire and train oil with the splinter of the root of fir tree for candle, where in holland they have little or none to build ship, house or any thing but what they fetch from foreign country. yet they dwell. but in the latitude of yorkshire and new-england, be in the height of the north cape of spain, which be 10. degree, 200. league or 600. mile near the sun than we, where upon the mountain of bisky i have feel as much cold, frost and snow as in england, and of this i be sure, a good part of the best country and kingdom of the world, both northward and southward of the line, lie. in the same parallel of uirginia and new-england as at large you may find in the 201. page of the general history. thus you may see how prosperous thus far they have. proceed in which course by god grace they may contitinue. proviso for passenger and sailor at sea. but great care will be, have they pester not their ship too much with cattle nor passenger, and to make good condition for your people diet for therein be use. much legerdemain, therefore, in that you can be too careful to keep your man well and in health at sea. in this case some master be very provident, but the most part so they can get fraught enough care, not much whether the passenger live or die for a. common sailer regard, not a landman especial, a poor passenger as i have see too oft, approve by lamentable experience, although we have victual, they all at our own charge, chap 13.. their great supply, present estate and accident advantage, who will not think but that all those trial have 1630.. their presnnt estate be sufficient to lay a foundation for a plantation. but we see many man, many mind and still new lord, new law for those 350.. man with all their cattle that so well arrive and promise so much, not be of one body, but several man servant. few can command and few obey live merry of that. they have neither plant or build any thing to any purpose, but one fair house for the. governor, till all be spend and the winter approach, then they grow into many disease and as many inconvenience depend only of a supply from england which expect house garden and corn field ready plant by they for their entertainment. it be true that master john wynthrop, their now governor, a worthy gentleman both in estate and esteem, go so well provide for six or seven hundred people, go with he as can be devise, but at sea such a extraordinary storm encounter his fleet continue ten day, that of two hundred cattle which be so toss and bruise threescore and ten die. many of their people fall sick and in this perplex estate after ten week they arrive in new-england at several time where they find threescore. of their people dead, the rest sick. nothing do, but all complain, and all thing so contrary to their expectation that now every monstrous humour begin to show itself. and to second this near as many more come after they. but so ill provide with such multitude of woman and child as redouble their necessity. this small trial of their patience cause among they, no, the fruit of counterfeit, small confusion, and put the governor and his council to their utmost wit. some can not endure the name of a bishop, other not the sight of a cross, nor surplice, other by no mean the book of common prayer. this absolute crew only of the elect hold all but such as themselves. reprobate and castawaies now make more. haste to return to babel, as they term england, than stay to enjoy the land they call canaan. somewhat, they must say, to excuse themselves those he find brownist. he let go for new-plimoth who be now betwixt four or five hundred and live well without want some two hundred. of the rest he be content to return for england who clamour be as variable as their humour and auditor. some say they can see no timber of two foot diameter, some the country be all wood, other they drink all the spring and pond dry, yet like to famish for want of fresh water, some of the danger of the rattle snake, and that other sell their provision at what rate they please to they that want. and so return to england great gainer out of other misery. yet all that return be not of those humour. notwithstanding all this, the noble governor be no way disanimate, neither repent he of his enterprise for all those mistake, but do order all thing with that temperance and discretion, and so relieve those that want, with his own provision that there be six or seven hundred remain with he and more than 1600.. english in all the country, with three or four hundred head of cattle. as for corn, they be very ignorant if, upon the coast of america, they do not, before the end of this october for toy, furnish themselves with two or three thousand bushel of indian corn, which be better than we, and in a short time, cause the savage to do they as good service as their own man, as i do in virginia, and yet neither use cruelty nor tyranny among they. a consequence well worth put in practice, and till it be effect, they will hardly do. well, i know ignorance will say it be impossible, but this impossible task, ever since the massacre in virginia, i have be a suitor to have undertake, but with 150. man, to have get corn, fortify the country and discover. they more land than they all yet know or have demonstrate. but the merchant common answer be necessity in time will force the planter do it themselves, and rather thus husbandly to lose ten sheep than be at the charge of a half penny worth of tar. who be it that know not what a small handful of spaniard in the west indies subdue million of the inhabitant note? well, so depopulate those country they conquer that they be glad to buy negro in africa at a great rate, in country far remote from they, which, although they be as idle and as devilish people as any in the world, yet they cause they quick to be their best servant, notwithstanding, there be for every four or five. natural spaniard, two or three hundred indian and negro, and in virginia and new-england more english than savage that can assemble themselves to assault or hurt they. and it be much better to help to plant a country than unplant it and then replant it. but there indian be in such multitude, the spaniard have no other remedy, and we such a few, and so disperse. it be nothing in a short time to bring they to labour and obedience. it be strange to i that english man shall not do as much as any, but upon every sleight affront in stead to amend it, we make it worse. notwithstanding the worst of all those rumour, the better sort there be, constant in their resolution, and so be. the most of their best friend here and make provision to supply they. many conceit they make a death here, which be nothing so, for they will spend more here than they transport thither. one ship this summer with twenty cattle and forty or fifty passenger arrive all well and the ship at home again in nine week. another, for all this exclamation of want, be return with 10000 corfish and fourscore keg of sturgeon, which they do take and save when the season be near pass and in the very heat of summer. yet as good as can be, since another ship be go from bristol and many more, a provide to follow they with all speed. thus you may plain see, for all these rumour, they be in no such distress as be, suppose. as for their mischance, misprison or what accident may befall they, i hope none be so malicious as attribute the fault to the country, nor i. yet if some blame we not both, it be more than a wonder, for i be not ignorant- that ignorance and too curious spectator make it a great part of their profession to censure, however, any man. action who have lose the path to virtue will make most excellent shift to mount up. any way, such incomparable connivenoy be in the devil most punctual cheater, they will hazard a joint. but where god have his church they will have a chapel. a mischief so. hard to be, prevent that i have thus plain adventure to show my affection, through the weakness of my ability, you may easy know. they, by their absoluteness in opinion, hold experience. but the mother of fool, which indeed be the very ground of reason, and he that contemn, she in those action, may find occasion enough to use all the wit and wisdom he have to correct his own solly that think to find among those savage such church, palace, monument and building as be in england chap 14.. ecclesiastical government in virginia. authority from the arch bishop. their beginning at bastable now call salem. now, because i have speak so much for the body, give ecclesiastical government in virginia, i leave to say somewhat of the soul and the rather, because i have be demand by so many how we begin to preach the gospel in virginia and by what authority, what church we have, our order of service and maintenance for our minister. therefore, i think it not amiss to satisfy their demand. it be the mother of all our plantation entreat pride to spare laughter, to understand her simple beginning and proceed. when i go first to virginia, i well remember we do hang a which be a old sail to three or four, tree to shadow we from the sun. our wall be rale of wood, our seat unhewed. tree till we cut, plank our pulpit, a bar of wood, nail to two neighbour tree in foul weather we shift into a old rot tent, for we have few better, and this come by the way of adventure for new. this be our church till we build a homely thing like a barn, set upon crotchet cover with raft sedge and earth. so be also the wall. the best of our house of the like curiosity, but the most part far, much worse workmanship that can neither well defend wind nor rain. yet we have daily common prayer, morning and evening, every sunday two sermon and every three month the holy communion till our minister die, but our prayer daily, with a homily. on sunday we continue. two or three year after. till more preacher come and sure god do most merciful. till the continual inundation of mistake direction, faction and number of unprovided libertine near, consume we all, as the israelite in the wilderness notwithstanding, out of the relic of our misery, time and their estate. at this day, experience have bring that country to a great happiness, have they not so much dote on their tobacco, on who fumish foundation? there be small stability. there be so many good commodity beside. yet by it they have build many pretty village, fair house and chapel which be grow good benefice of 120. pound a year beside their own mundall industry. but james town be 500 pound a year, as they say, appoint by the. council here, allow by the council there and confirm by the archbishop of canterbury, his grace primate and metrapolitan of all england, an 1605.. to master richard haeclutt, prebend of westminister, who by his authority send master robert hunt, a honest, religious and courageous divine during who life our faction be, oft qualify our want and great extremity so comfort that they seem easy in comparison of what we endure after his memorable death now in new-england they have all our example to teach, their order of teach in salem they how to beware and choice man we most ignorant in all thing or little better. therefore, presage not the event of all such action by our defailement. for they write, they doubt not ere long to be. able to defend themselves against any indifferent enemy. in the interim they have preacher erect among themselves and god, true religion, they say, teach among they. the sabbath day, observe the common prayer, as i understand, and sermon, perform and diligent catechise with strict and careful exercise and commendable good order to bring those people with who they have to deal withal into a christian conversation. to live well, to fear god, serve the king and love the country, which do in time. from both, those plantation may grow a good addition to the church of england, but rome be not build in one day. who beginning be once as unhopefull as they and to make they as eminent shall be my humble and hearty prayer. but as yet it be not well understand of any authority they have seek for the government and tranquillity of the church, which do cause those suspicion of faction in religion wherein, although i be no divine yet, i hope without offence the miserable effect of faction in religion. i may speak my opinion as well in this as i have do in the rest. he that will but true, consider the greatness of the turk empire and power here in christendom, shall find the natural turk be general of one religion and the christian in so many division and opinion that they be among themselves worse enemy than the turk who disjoyntednesse have. give he that opportunity to command so many hundred thousand of christian as he do. where have they be constant to one god, one christ and one church? christian may have be more able to have command as many turk as now the turk do. poor, miserable christian. let this example remember you to beware of faction in that nature. for my own part, i have see many of you here in london go to church as orderly as any. therefore, i doubt, not, not, but you will seek to the prime authority of the church of england for such a orderly authority, the necessity of order and authority, as in most man opinion be fit for you both to entreat for and to have, which i think. will not be deny, and you have good reason. see, you have such liberty to transport so many of his majesty subject with all sort of cattle, arm and provision, as you please and can provide, mean to accomplish. nor can you have any certain relief, nor long subsist without more supply from england. beside this may prevent many inconvenience may ensue and will clear, take away all those idle and malicious rumour and occasion you many good and great friend and assistance you yet dream not of. for you know better than i can tell that the maintainer of good order and law be the best preservation, next god of a kingdom. but when they be stuff with hypocrisy and corruption, that state be not doubtful. but lamentable in a well settle commonwealth, much more in such as you, which be but a beginning. for as the law corrupt, the state consume, chap 15.. the true model of a plantation: tenure, increase of trade, true example, necessity of expert soldier, the name of all the first discoverer for plantation and their action. what be requisite to be in the governor of a plantation? the expedition of queen elizabeth, sea captain. in regard of all that be past, it be better of those slow proceed the effect of a citadel or (@) true model of a plantation than lose all, and better to amendlate than never. i know how hateful it be to envy pride, flattery and greatness to be advise, but i hope my true meaning, wise man will excuse for make my opinion plain. i have be so often, and by so many honest man entreat. for the rest, the more they mislike it the better. i like it myself. concern this point of a citadel, it be not the least, though the last. remember therefore, see you have such good mean and power of your own i never have. with the best convenient speed may be erect a fort, a castle or citadel which, in a manner, be all one towards the building, provision and maintenance thereof. every man for every acre he do culturate to pay four penny yearly and some small matter out of every hundred of fish take or use within five or ten mile, or as you please about it. it be the centre as a fortress for ever belong to the state. and when the charge shall be defray to the chief undertaker in reason, let he be governor for his life. the overplus to go forward to the erect another in like manner, in a most convenient place, and so, one after another, as your ability can accomplish by benevoleuce, forfeiture, fine and imposition, as reason and the necessity of the common good require, all man hold their land on those manner as they do of church, university and hospital, but all depend upon one principal, and this will avoid all faction among the superior extremity from the commonalty, and none will repine at such payment when they shall see it, just employ for their own defence and security. as for corruption, in so small a government, you may quick perceive and punish it according. now, as his majesty have, make you custome-free for seven year. have a care. that all your country, man, shall come to the condition of trade and freedom. trade with you. be not trouble with pilotage, boyage, ancorage, wharfage, custom or any such trick, as have be late use in most of new plantation where they will be king before their folly, to the discouragement of many and a scorn to they of understanding, for dutch, french, biskin or any, will as yet use free the coast without control, and why not english as well, as they therefore use all comer, with that respect, courtesy and liberty be fit, which in a short time will much increase your trade and ship to fetch it from you. for as yet it be not good to adventure any more abroad with factor till you. be better provide now there be nothing more inrich a commonwealth than much trade, nor no mean better to increase than small custom, as holland, genua, leghorn and diverse other place can well tell you, and do most beggar, those place where they take most custom, as turkey, the archipelagan isle, cicilia, the spanish port, but that their officer will connive to enrich themselves though undo the state. in this, your infancy, imagine, you have many eye attend your action, some for one end and some only to find fault, neglect. therefore, no opportunity to inform his majesty. true, your orderly proceed which, if it be to his like and contrary to the common rumour here in england, doubtless his majesty will continue. you custom free till you. have recover yourselves and be able to subsist. for till such time to take any custom from a plantation be not the way to make they prosper, nor be it likely those patentee shall accomplish anything that will neither maintain they nor defend they, but with countenance, counsel and advice which any reasonable man there may better advise himself than one thousand of they here who be never there. nor will any man that have any wit throw himself into such a kind of subjection, especial at his own cost and charge. but it be too oft see that sometime one be enough to deceive one hundred, but two hundred not sufficient to keep one from be deceive. i speak not this to discourage any with vain fear. but can the spaniard glory wish every english man to carry always this motto in his heart? why shall the brave spanish soldier brag? the sun never set in the spanish dominion, but ever shine on one part or other. we have conquer for our king who, within these few hundred of year, be one of the least of most of his neighbour, but to animate we to do the like, for we who be no way his inferior. and true, there be no pleasure comparable to a generous spirit, as good employment in noble action, especial among turk heathen and infidel, to see daily new country people, fashion, government stratagem, relieve the oppress, comfort his friend, pass misery, subdue, enemy, adventure upon any feasible danger for god. and his country. it be true it be a happy thing to be bear to strength, wealth and honour, but that which be get by prowess and magnanunity be the true lustre, and those can the best distinguish content that have escape most honourable danger, as if out of every extremity he find himself now bear to a new life to learn how to amend and maintain his age. those harsh conclusion have so oft plunder i in those perplex prouiso for exercise of arm action that if i can not free express myself to they do second they. i shall think myself guilty of a most damnable crime, worse than ingratitude. however, some overwein capricious conceit may attribute it to vainglory ambition or what other idle epithet. such please to bestow on i, but such trash i so much scorn that i presume further to advise those less advise than myself that as your fish and trade increase, so let your fort and exercise of arm. drill your man at your most convenient time to rank, file, march, skirmish and retire in file manaples, battalion or ambuskado, which service there be most proper. also, how to assault and defend your fort and be not spare of a little extraordinary shot and powder to make they mark-man especial, your gentleman and those you find most capable for shot must be your best weapon. yet all this will not do unless you have atleast 100, or as many as you can, of expert blood. approve good soldier. who dare bold, lead they not to shoot a duck, a goose or a dead mark, but at man, from who you must expect, such as you send the want of this and the presumptuous assurance of literal captain, be the loss of the french and spaniard in florida each surprise other and late near the ruin of mevis and saint christopher in the indies. also the french at port rial and those at canada, now your next english neighbour, last cape britton, not far from you, call new-scotland. questionless there be some good soldier among they, yet somewhat be the cause they be undo by those that watch the advantage of opportunity for as rich prey make true man thief. so you must not expect if you. be once worth take and unprovided but by some to be attempt, in the like manner to the prevention whereof i have not be more willing, at the request of my friend, to print this discourse than i be ready to live and die among you upon condition. sate, my calling and profession to make good and virginia and new-england, my heir, executor, administrator and assign, now, because i can express half that which be necessary for your full satisfaction and instruction, belong to this business. in a reference to the action of all our prime discoverer and plonter, this small pamphlet, i refer you to the general history of virginia, the summer iles and new-england, wherein you may plain see all the discovery, plantation, accident, the misprision. and cause of defailment. of all those noble and worthy captain, captain philip amadas and barlow, that most renown knight, sir richard greenvile, worthy sir ralph layne and learned master horiot, captain john white, captain bartholomew gosnold, captain martin bring and george waymouth, with my own observation by sea, river and land, and all the governor that yearly succeed i in virginia. also those most industrious captain, sir george summer and sir thomas gate, with all the governor that succeed they in the summer iles. likewise the plantation of sagadahock by those noble captain, george popham, rawley, gilbert, edward harlow, robert davis, james davis, john davis and diverse other, with the map of those country with it. also you may find the plantation of saint christopher mevis, the. berbade and the great river of the amazon, who great defect and the best mean to amend. they be there yearly record to be warning and example to they that be not too wise to learn to understand this great work, though small in conceit, be not a work for what be requisite to be in a governor of a plantation, everyone, to manage such a affair as make a discovery and plant a colony, it require all the best part of art, judgement, courage, honesty, constancy, diligence and industry to do but near well, some be more proper for one thing than another and therein best to be employ, and nothing breed more confusion than misplace and misemploy man in their undertake. columbus, curtez pitzara, zotto and the rest serve more than a apprenticeship: to learn how to begin their most memorable attempt in the west indies, which, to the wonder of all age, successful they effect when many hundred, far above they, in the world opinion be instruct but by relation scorn to follow their blunt example. but in great state, with new invention, come to shame and confusion in action of small moment who doubtless in other matter be both wise, discreet, generous and courageous. i say not this to detract any thing from their nobleness, state nor greatness, but to answer those questionless question that keep we from imitate the other brave spirit that advance themselves from poor soldier to great captain, their posterity to great lord. and their king to be one of the great potentate on earth and the fruit of their labour. his great glory, power and renown till his greatness and security make his so rich, remote and disperse. the expedition of queen elizabeth sea-captaine plantation. such great booty and honour to the incomparable sir fr drake, the renown captain candish, sir richard luson, sir john hawkins, captain carlisle and sir martin furbisher, etc. and the most memorable and right honourable earl cumberland, essex, southampton and nottingham, that good l admiral, with many hundred of brave english soldier, captain and gentleman that have teach the hollander to do the like, those will never stand upon a demur who shall give the first blow when they see peace be only but a. empty name and no sure league but impuissance to do hurt. find it better to buy peace by war than take it up at interest of those can better guide penknife than use sword. and there be no misery worse than be conduct by a fool or command by a coward. for who can endure to be assault by any, see his man and self imbrue in their own blood for fear of a check, when it be so contrary to nature and necessity, and yet as obedient to government and their sovereign as duty require? now your best plea be to stand upon your guard and provide to defend, as they do offend especial at land. if you be force to retire, you have the advantage five. for one in your retreat wherein there be more discipline than in a brave charge and though it seem less in fortune, it be as much in valour to defend as to get. but it be more easy to defend than assault, especial in wood, where a enemy be ignorant. last, remember as faction pride and security produce nothing but confusion, misery and dissolution. so the contrary: well practise will in short time make you happy and the most admire people of all our plantation for your time in the world. john smith write this with his own hand.