a sea. grammar, chap i of docke and their definition. a dock be a great pit or pond. a dry dock or creek by a harbour side, make convenient to work in with two great floodgate. build so strong and close that the dock may be dry till the ship be build or repair and then be open, let in the water to float and launch she and this be call a dry dock, a wet dock. a wet dock be any place where you may hale in a ship into the oze, out of the tide way where she may dock herself a cradle. a cradle be a frame of timber make along a ship or the side of a galley by her billidge for the more. ease and safety in launch. much use in turkey, spain and italy. the stock and the stock be certain, frame post much of the same nature upon the shore to build a pinnace, a catch, a frigate or boat etc. to those docke for building belong their woodyard with saw-pit and all sort of timber, but the mast and yard be chain together in some great water to keep they from rot. a crab, and in season also a crab be necessary which be a engine of wood of three claw, place on the ground in the nature of a capsterne for the launch of ship or heave they into the dock. chap 2: how to build a ship with the definition of all, the principal name of every part of her principal timber, also how they be fix one to another and the reason of their use. the first and low timber in a ship be the keel. the keel to which be fasten all the rest. this be a great tree, or more hew to the proportion of her burden, lay by a right line in the bottom of the dock or stock at the one end. be skarf into it the stem. the stem, which be a great timber, wrought compass and all the butt-end of the plank forward be fix to it. the stern, the stern post, be another great timber which be let into the keel. at the other end somewhat slope the fashion piece and from it do rise the two fashion piece like a pair of great horn. to those be fasten all the plank that reach to the after end of the ship. but before you use any plank, the rung they lay the rung call floor timber or ground timber, thwart the keel. through those you cut your limberhole to bring the water to the well for the pump. the limberhole, the use of they be when the ship be build to draw in they a long hair rope by pull it from stern to stem to scour they and keep they clean from choke. the floor. those ground timber do give the floor of the ship be straight, save at the end. they begin to compass and there they be call the runghead, runghead and do direct the sweep or mould of the foot-hooke and navel timber. sweep, mould, skarf, for there do begin the compass and bear of the ship. those be skarf into the ground timber, which be one piece of wood let into another, or so much wood cut away from the one as from the other, for when any of those timber be not long enough of themselves, they be skarf in this manner to make two or three as one. those next the keel, be call the ground foot-hooke, foot-hooke, keeleson, the other the upper foot-hooke. but first lay your keeleson over your floor. timber, which be another long tree like the keel, and this lie within as the other without, must be fast bind together with strong iron, bolt through the timber and all and on those be all the upper work. raise when the foot-hooke be skarf, as be say, and well bolt when they be plank up to the orlop. they make the ship howl, and those timber in general be call the ship rib howle, rib sleeper, because they represent the carcase of any thing. have rib the sleeper run before and after on each side the keeleson on the floor. well, bolt to the foot-hooke which be thus bind, do strengthen each other, spurkits, the spurkit be the space. betwixt the timber alongst the ship side in all part, but they in howle below the sleeper be broad board which they take up to clear the spurkit. if any thing get betwixt the timber, the garbord be the first plank, next the keel. on the outside the garbord, garbord strike. rise timber. the garbord strike be the first seam, next the keel. your rise timber be the hook or ground timber and foot-hooke place on the keel. and as they rise by little and little, so do the run of the ship from the floor, the run which be that part of the ship under water which come narrow by degree from the floor timber along to the stern post, call the ship way aftward. for according to she run she will steer well or ill by reason of the quickness or slowness of the water. come to the rudder now. all those plank under water plank as they rise and be join one end to another. the fore end be call the butt-end in all ship, butt-end b^t in great ship. they be common most careful bolt, for if one of those end shall spring or give way it will be a great troublesome danger to stop such a leak. the other part of those plank be make fast, which good treenaile and trunnion of well season timber treenailes, tiunnion through the timber or rib. but those plank that be fasten into the ship stem be call whooding, whooding the gather of. those work upon the ship. quarter under water be call the tuck the tuck. if it lie too low it make she have a fat quarter and hinder the quick passage of the water to the rudder. if too high she must be lay out in that part, else she will want bear for she after work. the transome be a timber, lie thwart the stern transome betwixt the two fashion piece and do lay out the breadth of the ship at the buttock. buttock which be her breadth from the tuck upward and according there to her breadth or narrowness, we say she have a narrow or broad buttock. the fashion piece before speak of be the two outmost timber on either side the stern, except the. counter: rake the hull. the ship rake be so much of her hull as hang over both end of the keel so much as be forward. be say she rake so much forward, and so in like manner aftward by the hull be mean the full bulk or body of a ship without mast or any rig, from the stem to the stern. the rake forward be near half the length of the keel and for the rake aftward about the forepart of her rake forward. but the fore rake be that which give the ship good way and make she keep a good wind, but if she have not a full bow it will make she pitch her head much into the sea if but a small. rake forward, the sea will meet she. so fast upon the bow she will make small way and if her stern be upright, as it be, she be call bluffe, bluffe, bluffeheaded, billage, or bluffeheaded a ship, billage be the breadth of the floor when she do lie aground and billage water be that which can come to the pump. we say also she be bilge when she strike on a rock, a anchor flooke or any thing that break her plank or timber to spring a leak when you have berth or bring she up to the plank, plank which be those thick timber which go fore and aft on each side whereon do lie the beam of the first orlop, beam, orlop which be the first. floor to support the plank. do cover the howl. those be great cross timber that keep the ship side asunder. the main beam be ever next the main mast where be the ship? great breadth. the rest from this be call the first, second, three, four, etc. forward or aftward beam. great ship. have a tier of beam under the orlop whereon lie no deck and great post and binder call rider from they to the keel in howl only to strengthen all rider. but the beam of the orlop be to be bind at each end with sufficient knee, knee which be a crooked piece of wood bow like a knee that bind the beam and foot-hooke be bolt together. some stand right up and down, some. a long the ship and be use about all the deck. some saw or hew to that proportion but they which grow natural to that fashion be the best lay. the orlop with good plank according to her proportion, so level as may be, be the best in a man of war port because all the port may be of such equal height so that every piece may serve any port bed without make any bed or platform to raise they. but first bring up your work as before to the second deck or orlop and by the way you may cut your number of port hole according to the greatness of your ship ringbolt by they fasten your ringbolt for the tackle of your ordnance you use. ringbolt also for bring the plank and wail to the ship side. set bolt and set bolt for force the work and plank together. clinch bolt. clinch bolt be clinch with a rivet hammer for draw out, but rag bolt be so iagger that they can be draw out. rag bolt, fore lock bolt- have a eye at the end. fore lock bolt whereinto a fore lock of iron be drive to keep it from start back fend bolt. fend bolt be beat into the outside of a ship with the long head to save her side from gall against other ship. drive bolt. drive bolt be a long piece of iron to drive out a treenaile or any such thing beside diverse other so useful that without they and long iron spike and nail she be build of cedar. nothing can be well do. yet i have know a ship build, have sail to and again over the main ocean which have not so much as a nail of iron in she but only one bolt in her keel clamps. now your rise be above the first orlop as the clamp be under it, which be long, thick, plank, like they fore and aft on both side, under the end of the beam and timber of the second deck or orlop, or the three deck or orlop or the three deck. which be never call, by the name of orlop deck, a half deck, a quarter deck, a flush deck, and yet they be all but deck. also, the half deck and quarter deck whereon the beam and timber bear be call rise. a flush deck be when, from stem to stern, it lie upon a right line, before and aft, which be the best for a man of war, both for the man to help and succour one another as for the use of their arm or remount any dismount piece, because all the port on that deck be on equal height, which can be without bed and much trouble. a camber deck to sink, a deck to raise, a deck where the deck do camber or lie. compass. to sink a deck, be to lay it low. to raise a deck, to put it high, but have a care. you so cut your port hole. one piece lie not right over another for the better. bring they to your mark. the half deck be from the main mast to the and the quarter deck from that to the master cabin, call the round house, which be the utmost of all. but you must understand, all those work be bring up together as near equal as may be, from bend to bend, bend or wail, or wail to wail, which be the outmost timber on the ship side and be the chief strength of her side, to which the foot-hooke, beam, chain, wail and knee be. bolt and be call the first, second and three bend. but the chain wail be a broad timber set out among they a little above, where the chain and shroud be fasten together to spread the shroud, the wide the better, to succour the mast. thus the side and deck be wrought till you come at the gunwaile. gun wail, which be the upmost wail, go about the upmost strike or or seam of the upmost deck about the ship waste and the ship quarter be from the main mast aftward. the ship quarter culuertailed, carling culuertailed be. let one timber into another in such sort that they can slip out as the carling end be fix in the beam and carling be certain. timber lie along the ship from beam to beam. on those the ledge do whereunto the plank of the deck be fasten. carling knee, the carling knee be also timber come. thwart the ship from the side of the hatch way, betwixt the two mast and bear up the deck on both side and on their end lie the come of the hatch, come which be those timber and plank which bear they up high than the deck to keep the water from run down at the hatch also they fit loophole in they for. the close fight loophole and they be likewise a great ease for man to stand upright. if the deck below hatch way, the hatch way be when they be open, where the good be lower that way right down into the howl, and the hatch be like trap door in the midst of the deck before the main mast, by certain ring to take up or lay down at your pleasure a scuttle-hatch. be a little hatch do cover a little square hole we call the scuttle. a scuttle where but one man alone can go down into the ship. there be in diverse place of the ship whereby man pass from deck to deck and there be also small scuttle grate to give light to they betwixt. deck and for the smoke of ordnance to pass away by the ramshead be a great block wherein be three shiver into which be pass the halyard ramshead and at the end of it, in a hole, be reved the tie, and this be only belong to the fore and and main halyard, to this belong the fore knight, the fore knight and the main knight. the main knight upon the second deck fast bolt to the beam. they be two short, thick piece of wood common carve with the head of a man upon they. in those be four shiver apiece, three for the halyard and one for the top rope to run in and knevel be small piece of wood nail to the inside of the. ship knevel to belay the sheat and rack unto capstaine the capstaine be a great piece of wood. stand upright upon the deck, abaft the main mast, the foot. stand in a step upon the low deck and be in the nature of a windis to wind or weigh up the anchor, sail, top mast ordnance or any thing it be. frame in diverse square with hole through they capstaine bar through which you put your capstaine bar for as many man as can stand at they to thrust it about and be call man the capstaine, the main body of it. be call the spindle the spindle whelp. the whelp be short piece of wood. make fast to it to keep the cable from come too high. in the turn about paul. the paul be a short piece of iron, make fast to the deck, rest upon the whelp to keep the capstaine from recoil, which be dangerous. but in great ship they have two. the other stand in the same manner betwixt the fore mast and the main to heave upon the jeer rope, jeer capstaine, and be call the jeer capstaine to strain any rope or hold off by when we way anchor to heave a head, or upon the viol, which be when a anchor be in stiff ground. we can weigh it, or the sea go so high the main capstaine can purchase in the cable than we take a hawser, open one end and so put into it nipper some. seven or eight sadome distant from each other, wherewith we bind the hawser to the cable and so bring it to the jeer capstaine to heave upon it, and this will purchase more than the main capstaine. can the viol, the viol, be fasten together at both end with a eye or two with a wall knot and seize together a? a be a square piece of timber like a role before the before castle in small ship, and force about with handspike for the same use as be the capstaine, the pump. what be the part of a pump you may see in every place: the brake, the handle, we call the brake. the pump can be a great. can we power water into pump to make it pump the can the daile. the daile be a trough wherein the water do run over the deck, chain pump, but in great ship they use chain pump which will go with more ease and deliver more water. a bur pump: the dutch man use a burr pump by the ship side wherein be only a long staff with a burr at the end, like a gunner sponge to pump up the billage water that by reason of the breadth of the ship floor can come to the well in pump. they use to take spell that be fresh man to relieve they and count how many stroke they pump each watch whereby they know if the ship be. staunch or thite or how her leak increase. the pump suck. the pump suck be. when the water be out, it draw up nothing but froth and wind. they have also a little pump make of a cane, a little piece of hollow wood or latin, like a elder gun, a bear pump to pump the beer or water out of the cask, for at sea we use no tap and then stave the cask to make more room and pack the pipe-stave or board up as close as may be. in other cask till they use, they the skupper be little hole close to all the deck through the ship side, the skupper, whereat the water do run out when you pump or wash the deck: skupper-leather. the skupper-leather. be nail over those hole upon the low deck to keep out the sea from come in, yet give they way for it to run out. skupper-naile. skupper nail. be little short one with broad head. make purposely to nail the skupper-leather, the waist and the coat of mast and pump the waist. be that part of the ship. betwixt the main mast and the forecastle and the waist board be set up in the ship. waist, waist board. betwixt the gunwaile and the waist tree, waist tree. but they be most use in boat set up alongst their side to keep the sea from break in. there be usual three ladder in a ship: the enter ladder. the enter ladder be in the waist. make formal of wood and another out of the gallery make of rope to go into the boat by in foul weather gallery ladder and the three at the beak-head make fast over the boulspret to get upon it. boultspret ladder only use in great ship. it be not amiss now to remember the forecastle. the forecastle be as useful a place as the rest. this be the forepart of the ship, above the deck, over the bow bow, there be a broad bow and a narrow bow. so call according to the broadnes or the thinness, the bow be the broad part of the ship before compass the stem to the loufe. loufe which reach so far as the bulk-head of the forecastle extend against the bow. be the first breach of the sea. if the bow be too broad, she will seldom carry a bone in her mouth or cut a feather. cut a feather, that be to make a foam. before she where a well bow ship so swift, press the water as that it foam and in the dark night sparkle like fire. if the bow be too narrow, as before be say, she pitch her head into the sea so that the mean be the best if her after way be answerable. the hause be those great round hole before hause under the beak-head, where common be. use the cable when you come to a anchor. the bold or high hause be the best for when they lie low in any. great sea. they will take in very much water, the which to keep out they build a circle of plank, either abaft or before the main mast. call the manger manger and a hause-plug at sea. now the forecastle do cover all those. be build up like a half deck to which be fix the beakhead prow and the prow be the deck. abaft the forecastle whereon lie the prow. piece the beak-head. the beak-head be without the ship before the fore castle. support by the main knee. fasten into the stem all paint and carve as the stern and of great use as well for the grace and countenance of the ship as a place for man to ease themselves in to it. be fasten the collar. of the main stay and the fore tack there. bring aboard also the stand for rig and trim the spretesaile gear. combe under the midst of it. be the comb which be a little piece of wood with two hole in it to bring the fore tack aboard. bit the bit, be two great piece of timber and the crospeece go through. they crospeece, they be ordinary place. abaft the manger in the ship loose to belay the cable thereto when you ride at anchor. their low part be fasten to the rider but the middle part in great ship be bolt to two great beam cross to the bow. and yet in extraordinary storm we be glad to make fast the cable to the main m^st for. strengthen of the bit and safety of the bow which have, in great storm, be tear from the ship david. the david be a short piece of timber at the end whereof, in a notch, they hang a block in a strap, call the fish-block, fish-block, by which they hale up the flock of the anchor to the ship bow cat. it be put out betwixt the cat and the loufe and to be remove when you please. the cat be also a short piece of timber aloft right over the hawse. in the end it have two shiver in a block wherein be reeve a rope to which be fasten a great hook of iron to trice up the anchor from the hawse to the top of. the forecastle, a bulk head, be like a ceiling or a wall of board, thwart the ship as the gunroome, the great cabin, the bread room a bulk head, the quarter deck or any other such division. but they which do make close the forecastle and the half deck, the mariner call the cubbridge head cubbridge head, wherein be place murderer and abaft, falcon, falconet or rabinit to clear the deck fore and aft so well as upon the ship side to defend the ship and offend a enemy. socket. socket be the hole wherein the pintel of the murderer or fowler go into the hollow arch. betwixt, the low part of the gallery and the transome be call the low counter, low counter, upper, counter the upper. counter be from the gallery to the arch of the round house bracket and the bracket be little carve knee to support the gallery. the stearage room be before the great cabin. the stearage, great cabin, where he that steer the ship do always stand before he be a square box nail together with wooden pin. call a bittacle, because iron nail will attract the compass bittacle. this be build so close, the compass, that the lamp or candle only show light to the stearage and in it always stand the compass, which every one know be a round box and in the midst of the bottom a sharp pin. call a centre whereon the fly do play, which be a round piece of pace-boord with a small wire under it, touch with the loadstone. in the midst of it be a little brass cap that do keep it level upon the centre. on the upper part be paint 32.. point of the compass: cover with glass to keep it from dust break or the wind. this box do hang in two or three brass circle, so fix, they give such way to the move of the ship that still the box will stand steady. there be also a dark compass. a dark compass, a compass for variation and a compass for the variation. yet they be, but as the other, only the dark compass have the point. black and white and the other only touch for the true north and south upon the bittacle. be also the travas. the travas, which be a little round board full of hole upon line, like the compass upon which, by the remove of a little stick, they keep a account how many glass which be but half hour. they steer upon every point. the whipstaffe, be that piece of wood like a strong staff. the steersman or helmesman have always in his hand. the whipstaffe go through the roll, the roll and then make fast to the tiler with a ring, the tiler. the tiler be a strong piece of wood. make fast to the rudder, rudder which be a great timber, somewhat like a plank. make according. to the burden of the ship and hang at the stern upon hook and hinge. pintel, gudgeon or rudder-iron. the gun-roome they call pintel and gudgeon or rudder-iron. the tiler play in the gun-roome over the ordnance by the whipstaffe whereby the rudder be so turn to and fro as the helmesman please and the cat hole be over the port cathole right with the capstaine as they can to heave the ship. a stern by a cable or a hauser, call a sternefast. on each side the stearage room be diverse cabin, as also in the great cabin, the quarter deck and the round house with many convenient seat or locker to put any thing in locker, as in little cupbert, the bread-roome. the bread-roome be common. under the gun-roome, well dry, or plate. the cookroom where they dress their victual may be place in diverse place of the ship, cooke-roome, as sometime in the hold, but that oft spoil the victual by reason of the heat. but common in merchantman it be in the forecastle especial, be contrive, in fornace, beside in a chase. their stern be that part of the ship they most use in fight but in a man of war they fight most with their prow and it be very troublesome to the use of his ordnance and very dangerous. lie over the powder-roome. some do place it over the hatch way but that as the steward room be ever to be contrive, according to the ship, employment etc. calk, calk. be beat okum into every seam or betwixt plank and plank. okum and okum be old rope, tear in piece like touse match or hurd of flax which be close. beat into every seam with a calk iron and a maller calking-iron, which be a hammer of wood and a iron chisel. pay be well, pay over with hot pitch. do make she more sight than it be possible by join plank to plank. grave be only under water. grave a white mix ure of tallow soap and brimstone or train-oile rosin and brimstone boil together be the best to preserve her calk and make her glib or slippery to pass the water and when it be decay by weed or barnacle, barnacle or worm which be a. kind of fish, like a long red worm, will eat through all the plank, if she be not sheathe, which be as case the hull under water with tar and hair. close cover over with thin board. fast nail to the hull which, though the worm pierce broom or bream, she can endure the tar bream she be, but wash or burn of all the filth with reed or broom, either in a dry dock or upon her careene, which be careene to make she so light as you may, bring she to lie on the one side, so much as may be in the calm water you can, but take head you overset she not, and this be the best way to breame. ship of great burden. or have but 4. sharp flores, for fear of bruise or overset. parsling, parsling be most use upon the deck and half deck, which be to take a list of canvas. so long as the seam be, you will parsell be first, well calk, then pour hot pitch upon it and it will keep out the water from pass the seam. there remain nothing now, as i can remember, to the build the hull of a ship, nor the definition of her most proper term, but only s^eling the cabin and such other part as you please, and to bind a end with all thing fit for the sea, as you may read in the covenant: betwixt the carpenter and the owner, which be thus note for a. covenant between the carpenter and the owner. if you will have a ship build of 400.. tun, she require a plank of 4. inch, if 300.. tun, 3. inch, small ship 2. inch but none less for clamp, middle band and sleeper they be all of six inch. plank for bind within the rest for the spar up of the work of square. three inch plank lay the beam of the orlope, if she be 400. tun at ten foot deep in howl and all the beam to be bind with two knee at each end and a stardard knee at every beam end upon the orlope. all the orlope to be lay with square three inch plank and all the plank to be treenailed to the beam. six foot will be between the beam of the deck and orlope and ten port on each side upon the low orlope. all the bind between they shall be with three inch or two inch plank and the upper deck shall be lay with so many beam as be fit with knee to bind. they lay that deck with spruce deal of thirty foot long, the sap cut off, and two inch thick for it be better than any other then for the captain cabin or great cabin, the stearage, the half deck, the round house, the forecastle, and to bind a end with the capsterne and all thing fit for the sea, the smith work, the carve join and paint, except be the principal thing i remember. to be observe for a charter-party betwixt the merchant, the master and the owner. you have precedent of all sort in most scrivener shop, chap 3, how to proportion the mast and yard for a ship by her beam and keel. when a ship be build, she shall be mast, a ship overma, wherein be a great deal of experience to be use so well as art. for if you overmast she either in length or bigness, she will lie too much down by a wind and labour too much a hull, and that be call a taunt-mast. but if either too small or too short taunt-masted, she be under mast or low mast, vndermasted, and can bear so great a sail as shall give she her true. way for a man of war, a well order taunt-mast be best, but for a long voyage a short mast will bear more canvas and be less subject to bear by the board. their rule be diverse, because no artist can build a ship so true to proportion, neither set her mast, but by the trial of her condition they may be impair or amend. suppose a ship of 300.. a example: ton be 29. foot at the beam. if her main mast be 24. inch diameter, the length of it must be 24. yard for every inch in thickness, be allow a yard in length, and the fore mast, 22. inch in thickness, must be 22. yard in length. your bowl spret both in length and thickness. must be equal to the ^ore mast, the mizzen, 17. yard in length and 17. inch diameter. but the rule most use be to take the @ part of the breadth of the ship and multiply that by three. the rule most use will give you so many foot as your main mast shall be in length. the bigness or thickness will bear. it also allow a inch for a yard. but if it be a make mast, a make mast or a arm mast that be great than one tree, it must be more. for example, suppose the ship breadth 30. foot, four fifth of 30. foot be 24. foot. so you find the main mast must be 24. yard long. for every yard be 3. foot. and 24. inch through, allow a inch to every yard. the fore mast be to be in length @ of the main mast, which will be 20. yard want one @ part of a yard, and 20. inch through. the boulspret must ever be equal with the fore mast, the mizzen mast, half the length of the main mast, which will be 12. yard long and 12. inch diameter. now, as you take the proportion of the mast from the beam or breadth of the ship, so do you the length of the yard from the keel, the step. these mast have each their step in the ship and their partner at every deck where thorough they pass to the keel partner. be strong timber bolt to the beam in circle the mast to keep they steady in their step, fast wedge for roll. yet some ship will not sail so well as when it do play a little, but that be very dangerous in foul weather. their coat be p^eces of torrid canvas, cotes, tarpawling or a tarpawling put about they and the rudder to keep the water out. at the top of the fore mast and main mast be splice cheek, cheek or thick clamp of wood through which be in each two hole, call the hound the hound, wherein the tie do run to hoist the yard. but the top mast have but one hole or hound the cap and one tie. every mast also have a. cap, if a top which be a piece of square timber with a round hole in it to receive the top mast or flag-staff to keep they steady and strong, leave they be bear by the board in a stiff gale. the crosse-tree be also at the head of the mast. cross-tree one let into another cross tressel-tree and strong bolt with the tressell tree to keep up the top mast which be fasten in. they and those be at the top of each mast. all the mast stand upright but the boulspret which lie along over the beak-head and that timber it rest on. be call the pillow pillow. a example of the yard by the keel. now for the yard. suppose the ship be 76. foot. at the keel, her main yard must be 21. yard in length and in thickness, but 17. inch the fore yard, 19 yard long and 15. inch diameter or thick the spret-saile yard 16. yard long and but nine inch thick. and your misen-yard so long as the mast, the top yard bear half proportion to the main and before yard and the top gallant the half to they. but this rule be not absolute, for if your mast be taunt your yard must be the short, if a low mast the long. but this be suppose the best: to have the main yard ^ part of her keel in length, the top yard @ of the main yard and the main yard for bigness @ part of a inch for a yard in length, the length of the fore yard ^ of the main yard, the crosse^acke yard and spretsaile yard to be of a length. but you must allow the mizzen yard and spretsaile yard @ inch of thickness to a yard in length. but to give a true arithmetical and geometrical proportion for the build of all sort of ship, be they all build after one mould, as also of their mast yard, cables, cordage and sail, be all the stuff of like goodness, a methodical rule as. you see, may be project, but their length, bredth, depth, rake and burden be so variable and different that nothing but experience can possible teach it. chap 4: the name of all. the mast, top and yard belong to a ship: the boulspret, the spretsaile yard, the spretsaile topmast, the spretsaile top sail yard, the fore mast, the fore yard, the fore topmast, the fore topsail yard, the fore top gallant mast, the fore top gallant sail yard, woulding gromit and staple for all yard, the main mast, the main yard, the main top, the main top mast, the main topsail yard, the top gallant mast, the main top gallant sail yard. the trucke be a square piece of wood at the top wherein you put the flag-staff. the mizzen, the mizzen yard, the mizzen top mast, the mizzen top sail yard, the cross jack. in great ship they have two misens. the latter be call the bonaventure mizzen, a jury mast, that be when a mast be bear by the board with yard roof tree or what they can splice or fish together they make a jury-mast would or bind they with rope fast trice together with handspike as they use to will or bind any mast or yard. chap v, how all the tackle and rig of a ship be make fast one to another with their name and the reason of their use: riggage or cordage. the rig a ship be, all the rope or cordage belong to the mast and yard a. mast well rig, a yard well rig, and it be proper to say the mast be well rig or the yard be well rig, that be when all the rope be well sise to a true proportion of her burden. we say also, when they be too many or too great over rig, she be over-rigged and do much wrong. a ship in she sail for a small weight aloft be much more in that nature than a much great below. and the more upright any ship go, the better she sail. all mast have stay except one, a choler, a lannier. all the mast top-mast and flagstaff have stay, except the spret saile-top mast. the main mast stay be make fast by a lannier to a choler. which be a great rope that come about the head and boulspret, the other end, to the head of the main mast. the main top-mast stay be fasten to the head of the fore mast by a strop and a dead man eye, dead man eye. the main top-gallant mast stay in like manner to the head of the fore topmast, the fore mast and stay belong to they. in like manner be fasten to the boulspret and spretsaile topmast and those stay do help to stay the boulspret, the mizzen stay do come to the main mast and the mizzen topmast stay to the shroud with crowes-feet. crowes-feet, the use of those stay be to keep the mast from fall aftward or too much forward. those lannier be many small rope recue into the dead man eye of all shroud, either to slaken they or set they teach also all the stay have their block and dead man eye have lannier dead man eye be block. some small, some great with many hole but no shiver. the crowes-feet re^ued thorough. they be a many of small line, sometime 6.8 or 10.. but of small use more than for fashion to make the ship show full of small rope. block or pulley be thick piece of wood have shiver in they block or pulley shiver which be a little wheel fix in the midst with a cock or pin. a cock some be brass, but the most of wood whereon all the run rope. do run, some be little, some great run rope with 3.4 or 5. shiver in they and be call by the name of the rope whereto they serve. there be also double block. double block that where there be use of much strength will purchase with much ease but not so fast as the other. and when we hale any tackle or haleyard to which two block do belong, when they meet we call that block and block. bock and block. the shroud be great rope which go up either side of all mast. all mast have shroud etc. the mizzen main mast before mast shroud have as their low end dead man eye seize into they and be set up, teach by lannier to the chain at the other end over the head of those mast. be pendant for tackle and swifter under they. the top-mast shroud in like manner. be fasten with lannier and dead man eye to the puttock or plait of iron. belong to they, aloft over the head of the mast as the other chain and the chain be strong plate of iron fast bolt into the ship side by the chaine-waile. when the shroud be too stiff, we say ease they to ease, teach. when too slack, we say set, teach the shroud. but the boulspret have no shroud and all. those small rope do cross the shroud like step, be call ratling, ratling, puttock. the puttock go from the shroud of the fore mast, main mast or mizzen, to go off from the shroud into the top cap or bowl which be a round thing at the head of either mast for man to stand in. for when the shroud come near the top of the mast they fall in so much that without the puttock you can not get into the top, and in a manner they be a kind of a shroud pendant. a pendant be a short rope, make fast at one end to the head of the mast or the yard arm. have at the other end a block with a shiver to reeve. some run rope in as the pendant of the back stay and tackle hang a little down on the inside of the shroud. all yards-arme have they, but the mizzen into which the brace be reeve, and also there be pendant or streamer hang from the yard. arm make of taffety or colour flannel cloth to beautify the ship. only barrel be little round ball call truck, and little piece of wood call rib, rib and rope which do encircle the mast and so make fast to the yard that the yard may slip up and down easy upon the mast and with the help of the brest-rope do keep the yard close to the mast. brest-rope stand rope. the stand rope be the shroud and stay because they be not remove except it be to be ease or set taughter. the tackle or rope run in three part. the tackle be of diverse sort, etc. have a pendant with a block at the one end and a block with a hook at the other to heave any thing in or out of the ship. they be of diverse sort as the botes tackle make fast, the one to the fore shroud, the other to the main to hoist the boat in or out. also the tackle that keep firm the mast from stray, the gunner tackle for hale in or out the ordnance, but the wind tackle be the great which be a. great double block with three shiver to the end of a small cable about the head of the mast and serve as a pendant to which be make fast a guy. a guy which be a rope, bring to it from the before mast to keep the weight upon it steady, or from swing to and again into the block. be reeve a hawser which be also reeve through another double block. have a strop at the end of it which put through the eye of the sling. be lock into it with a fid and so hoist the good in or out by the help of the snap-blocke. cat harp be small rope run in little block from one side of the ship to the other. cat near the upper deck to keep the shroud tight for the more safety of the mast from roll. the halyard belong to all mast halyard, for by they we hoist the yard to their height. the tie, and the tie be the rope by which the yard do hang and do carry up the yard. when we strain the halyard, the main yard and before yard tie be first reeve through the ram head, then through the hound, with a turn in the eye of the sling which be make fast to the yard. the missen yard and top yard have but single tie, that be one do but run in one part, but the spretsaile yard have none, for it be make fast with a pair. of sling to the boltspret a horse. a horse be a rope. make fast to the before mast shroud and the spretsaile sheat to keep those sheat clear of the anchor flooke to sling. be to make fast any cask yard ordnance to sling, sling or the like in a pair of sling and sling be make of a rope, splice at either end into itself with one eye at either end, so long as to be sufficient to receive the cask, the middle part of the rope also. they seize together and so make another eye to hitch the hook of the tackle. another sort be make much long for the hoise of ordnance. another be a chain of iron to sling or bind the yard fast. aloft to the crossetre^s in a ^ight leave, the tie shall be cut and so the mast must fall. canhooke- the canhooke be two hook fasten to the end of a rope with a noose, like this the brewer use to ^^^^g or carry their barrel on, and those serve also to take in or out hog head or any other commodity. a parbunkell: a parbunkel be two rope that have at each end a noose, or lump that be cross. you may set any vessel that have but one head upon. they bring but the loop over the upper end of the cask fix but the tackle to they, and then the vessel will stand straight in the midst to heave out or take in without spill. pudding, pudding be rope nail round to the yard arm close to the end, a pretty distance one from another to save the robbins from gall upon the yard. or to serve the anchor ring to save the clinch of the cable from gall robbins and the robbins be little line. reeve into the eylet hole of the sail under the head rope to make fast the sail to the yard. for in stead of tie, sea man always say: headlines make fast, head line be the rope that make all the sail fast to the yard. furl line, furl line be small line make fast to the top sail, top gallant sail, a smite line and the missen yard arm the missen have but one. call the. smite line, the other, on each side one, and by these we farthel or bind up the sail. brales, the brale be small rope reeve through block, seize on each side the tie and come down before the sail and at the very skirt be fasten to the creengle. with they we furl or farthel our sail across and they belong only to the two course and the missen. to hale up the brale or brale up the sail, be all one creengle be little rope splice into the boltrope of all sail, belong to the main and fore mast to which the boling bridle be make fast and to hold by when we shake off a bonnet. bolt ropes be that rope be sow about every sail. soft and gentle twist for the better sow and handle the sail bunt line. bunt line be but a small rope. make fast to the midst of the boltrope to a creengle reeve through a small block, which be seize to the yard to trice or draw up the bunt of the sail, clew garnet when you farthel or make it up the clew garnet be a rope. make fast to the clew of the sail and from thence run in a block. seize to the middle of the yard which in furl do hale up the clew of the sail. close to the middle of the yard. clew line and the clew line be the same to the top, s^iles, top gallant and spret sail as the clew garnet. be to the main and foresaile the clew of a sail be the low corner, next the sheet and tack a clew and stretch somewhat, gore or slope from the square of the sail and according to the goaring she be say to spread a great or a little clew. goaring tack, tack. be great rope which have a wall-knot at one end, seize into the clew of the sail and so reeve first through the chestre and then come in at a hole in the ship side. this do carry forward the clew of the sail to make it stand close by a wind sheats. the sheats be bend to the clews of all sail. in the low sail they hale aft the clew of the sail, but in top sail they serve to hale they home, that be to bring the clew close to the yard arm. the brace belong to all yard but the missen every yard have two reeved at their end through two pendant brace and those be to square the yard or travasse they, as you please. the boling be make fast to the leech of the sail about the midst to make it stand the sharp or close by a wind boling. it be fasten by two, three or four rope like a crow foot to as many part of the sail which be call the boling. bridle boling bridle only the missen boling be fasten to the low end of the yard. this rope belong to all sail except the spretsaile and spret-saile topsail which not have any place to hale it forward by. they can use those sail by a wind. sharp the main boling be to hall it teach. sharp the boling ch^cke the boling loe fanng. hale up the boling be to pull it hard forward on. check or ease the boling be to let it be more slick. lee fanng be a rope reeve into the creengle of the course when we will hale in the bottom of the sail to lash on a bonnet or take in the sail, reeve and reeve be but draw a rope through a. block or eyelet to run up and down leech line. leech line be small rope, make fast to the leech of the topsail for they belong to no other and be reeve into a block at the yard close by the topsail. tie to hale in the leech of the sail when you take they in. leech of a sail. the leech of a sail be the outward side of a skirt of a sail, from the ear to the clew earring and the ear-ring be that part of the rope which at all the four corner of the sail be leave open as it be a ring. the two upmost part be put over the end of the yard arm and so make fast to the yard. and the lowermost be seize or bend to the sheat, bent and tack into the clew. lift the lifts be two rope which belong to all yard, arm to top the yard, that be to make they hang high or low at your pleasure. but the topsail lift do serve for sheat to the top gallant yard, the hale they be. call the top the lift. top the lift leg as top a starboard or top a port leg. leg be small rope put through the bolt rope of the main and fore sail near to a foot in length. splice each end into the other in the leech of the sail. have a little eye. whereunto the martnet be fasten by two hitche and the end seize. into the stand part of the martner which be also small line like crow foot, reeve through a block at the top mast head and so come down by the mast to the deck but the topsail martnet be make fast to the head of the top gallant mast and come but to the top where it be hale and call the top marnet. they serve to bring that part of the leech next the yard arm up close to the yard. latchet, latchet be small line. sow in the bonnet and drabbler like loop to lash or make fast the bonnet to the course. lash the loose hook or the course to the drabler which we call lash the bonnet to the course or the drabler to. the bonnet, the loose hook be a tackle with two hook, one to hitch into a chingle of the main or before sail in the bolt rope, in the leech of the sail by the cl^w bouse, and the other to strap splice to the chestre to bouse or pull down the sail to succour the tack in a stiff gale of wind. a bonnet, a drabler, a course, or take off, or put on a bonnet or a drabler, which be two short sail to take off or put to the before course or the main, which be the fore sail or main sail. a knave-line: the knave-line be a rope, have one end, fasten to the cross tree and so come down by the tie to. the ram head to which be seize a small piece of wood some two foot long with a hole in the end, whereunto the line be. reeve and bring to the ship side and h^led teach to the rail to keep the tie and halyard from turn about one another when they be new. knettel be two rope yarne twist together and a knot at each end. knettel whereunto to seize a block, a rope or the like. rope yarne. rope yarne be the yarne of any rope untwist. they serve to serve small rope or make sinnet mat plait or caburnes and make up the sail at the yard arm. sinnet be a string, make of rope. yarn common of two, four, six, sinnet eight or nine. string plait in three part which be beat flat. they use it to serve rope or mat. that which we call a panch be broad clout mat or panch. weave of thrum and sinnet together to save thing from gall about the main and fore yard at the tie and also from the mast and upon the boltspret louse beakhead or gunwaile to save the clewe of the sail from gall or fret caburne. caburne be a small line, make of spin yarn to make a bend of two cable or to seize the tackle. seize or the like. seize be to bind fast any rope together with some small rope yarn. marline be any line to a block or any tackell, pendant garnet or the like there. be also a rope by which the boat do ride, by the ship side seasen serve or siruis, which we call a seasen to serve any rope with plait or sinnet be, but to lay sinnet, spungius yarn, rope yarn or a piece of canvas upon the rope and then roll it fast to keep the rope from gall about the shrowd at the head of the mast, the cable in the hawse, the flooke of the anchor. spunyarne, the boat rope or any thing be nothing but rope yarn make small at the end casket and so spin one to another so long as you will, with a winch also casket be but small rope of sinnet make fast to the gromit or ring upon the yard. the long be in the midst of the yard. betwixt the tie and be call the breast casket, hang on each side the yard in small length, only to bind up the sail when it be. furl. marling be a small line of untwist hemp. marling very pliant and well tar to seize the end of rope from ravelin out or the side of the block at their arse, or if the sail r^ntout of the boltrope, they will make it fast with marlin till they have leisure to mend it. marling spike: the marl spike be but a small piece of iron to splice rope together or open the bolt rope when you sew the sail, splice, splice, be so to let one rope end into another. they shall be as fitme as if they be but one rope, a round splice, a cut splice, and this be call a round splice, but the cut splice be to let one into another with as much distance as you will, and yet be strong and undo when you will. now, to make a end of this discourse, with a knot, a knot you be to know, a wall knot. seaman, use three. the first be call the wall knot, which be a round knob. so make, with the stroud or lay of a rope, it can slip the sheet, take and stopper. use this knot a boling knot. the boling knot be also so firm, make and fasten by the bridle into the creengle of the. sail they will break or the sail split before it will slip. the last be the shepshanke, which be a knot they cast upon a runner or tackle when it be too long to take in the good sheepshanks knot, and by this knot they can shorten a rope without cut it as much as they lift and present, undo it again, and yet never the worse. chap 5: what do belong to the boat and skiffe? with the definition of all those thirteen rope, which be only proper call rope, belong to a ship and the boat and their use of boat there be diverse sort, but those belong to ship. a long boat be call either the long boat or ship boat which shall be able. to weigh her sheet anchor. those will live in any reasonable sea, especial the long boat, a shallop, a skiffe, great ship have also other small boat, call shallop and skiff, which be with more ease and less trouble row to and again upon any small occasion to a boat belong a mast and sail, a stay sheet and halyard rudder and rudder iron as to a ship also, in any discovery, they use a tarpawling, tarpawling bail which in a good piece of canvas wash over with tar to cover the bail or hoop over the stern of their boat where they lodge in a harbour which be that you call a tilt cover with wadmall in your wherry, or else a awning, awning which be but. the bo^s sail or some piece of a old sail, bring over the yard and stay and boumed out with the boat hook, so spread over their head, which be also much use as well a shore as in a ship, especial in hot country, to keep man from the extremity of heat or wet, which be very oft infectious, thought be the sea^s whereon the rower fit, thought thowle and thowle small pin put into little hole in the gunwaile or upon the boat side against which they bear the oar when they row. they have also a daved and also in long boat, a windless to weigh the anchor by which be with more ease than the ship can the two arch timber against the boat. head be call carling man the boat be to put a gang of man, which be a company, into she a gang they be common call the coxswaine gang who have the charge of she free the boat be to bail or cast out the water. free or bail. trim the boat be to keep she stright. trim boat. wind boat. hold water. forbear a spell. wind the boat be to bring her head the other way. hold water be to stay she forbear. be to hold still any oar you be command or on the broad or whole side a fresh spell be to relieve the rower with another gang. give the boat more way for a dram of the bottle. who say amends one and all? vea, vea, vea, vea that be. they pull all strong together. the enter rope be tie by the ship side. the enter rope to hold by as you go up the enter ladder cleat or wail. the bucket rope that be tie to the bucket by which you hale and draw water up by the ship side. bucket rope. the bolt rope be those wherein the sail be sow bolt ropes. the port rope hale up the port of the ordnance port rope. the jeer rope be a piece of a hawser make fast to the ^eare rope main yard, another to the before yard, close to the tie. reeve through a block which be seize close to the top and to come down by the mast and be reeve through another block at the bottom of the mast, close by the deck. great ship have on each side the tie one, but small ship, none the use be to help to hoist up the yard, to succour the tie which, though they break yet they will hold up the mast preventer rope. the preventer rope be a little one. seize cross over the ^ies that if one part of they shall break yet the other shall not run through the ram head to endanger the yard. top rope, the top rope be those wherewith we set or strike the main or fore top mast. it be reeve through a great block, seize under the cap, reeve through the heel of the top must, thwart ship and then make fast to a ring with a clinch on the other side the cap, the other part come down by the tie, reeve into the knight and so bring to the capstaine when they set the top mast, keele rope. the keel rope, you have read in the build: be of hair in. the keel to scour the limber hole. rudder rope: the rudder rope be reeve through the stem post and go through the head of the rudder and then both end splice together. serve to save the rudder if it shall be strike off. the iron cat rope: the cat rope be to hale up. the cat boy rope: the boy rope be that which be tie to the boy by the one end and the anchor flooke by the other. boat rope: the boat rope be that which the ship do tow her boat by at her stern. guest rope: shear: the guest rope be add to the boat rope when she be tow at the ship stern to keep she from shear, that be, from swing to. and again, for in a stiff gale she will make such yawe and have such gird, it will endanger she to be tear in piece swift, but that they use to swift she that be. to encircle the gunwaile with a good rope and to that make fast the guest rope. chap 7, the name of all sort of anchor, cable and sail and how they bear their proportion with their use. also how the ordnance shall be place and the good stow in a ship, the proper term belong to anchor, be many the least be call kedger, a kedger to use in calm weather in a slow stream or to kedg up and down a narrow river, which be when they fear the wind or tide. may drive they on shore. they row by she with a anchor in a boat and in the midst of the stream or where they find most fit. if the ship come too near the shore and so by a hawser wind her head about, then weigh it again till the like occasion, and this be kedge, there be also a stream anchor, not much big stream anchor, the first, second, three anchor, sheet anchor to stem in easy stream or tide. then there be the first, second and three anchor. yet all such as a ship in fair weather may ride by and be call bow anchor the great be the sheet anchor and never use. but in great necessity they be common, make according to the burden of the ship by proportion. for that the sheet anchor of a small ship will not serve for a kedger to a great ship, a anchor, shank, flock, shoulder beam or nut, eye ring stock. also, it bear a proportion in itself as the one flooke which be that do stick in the ground, be but the three part of the shank in length. at the head of the shank there be a hole, call a eye, and in it a ring, wherein be the nut to which there be fast fix, a stock of wood. cross the flooke and the length be take from the length of the shank. these differ not in shape but in weight, from two hundred to three or four thousand weight, grapell or grapple be the least of all and have four flooke but no stock for a boat to ride by or to throw into a ship in a fight to pull down the grate or hold fast a cable. the first, second and three. the cable also carry a proportion to the anchor, but if it be not three strand, it be account. but a hawser, yet a great ship. hawser may be a cable to the sheet anchor for a small ship and there be the first, second and three cable beside the sheet anchor cable. sheet anchor cable, keckell. if the cable be well make, we say it be well lay to keckell. or serve the cable as be say be but to bind some old clout to keep it from gall in the hawse or ring splice, splice a cable be to fasten two end together that it may be double in length to make the ship ride with more ease. a shot of cable quoil a fake pay. pay cheap and be. call a shot of cable quoil a cable be to lay it up in a round, ring or sake one above another. pay more cable. be when you carry a anchor out in the boat to turn over, pay cheap. be when you over set it or turn it over board fast veer more cable. end for end be when you ride at anchor and end for end be when the cable run clear out of the hawse or any rope out of his shiver. a bite, a bite be to hold by any part of a coil. a bitter, that be the upmost fake. a bitter be but the turn of a cable, about the bit and fear it out by little and little, and the bitter end be that part of the cable do stay within board. a bitter end, gert, gert be when the cable be so teach that upon the turn of a tide a ship can go over it. to bend, to bend the cable to the anchor be to make it fast to the ring. unbend. unbend the cable, be but to take it away, which we usual do when we be at sea, and to tie two rope or cable together, be call bend, bend, hitch, hitch. be to catch hold of any thing with a rope to hold it fast or with a hook as hitch the fish-hooke to the anchor flooke fender junke or the tackle into the garnets of the sling. fender be piece of old hawser call junke hang over the ship side to keep they from bruise. in boat they use pole or boathook to fend off the boat from bruise. breast fast a brest-fast be a rope which be fasten to some part of the ship forward on to hold her head to a wharf or any thing. stern fast and a sternefast be the same in the stern. the use for the hawser be to warp the ship by which be lay out a anchor and wind she. up to it by a capsterne. rouse, rouse be, but pull the slackness of any cable with man hand into the ship. shank-pant the shank painter be, a short chain fasten under the fore mast, shroud with a bolt to the ship side and at the other end a rope to make fast the anchor to the bow. stop to, stop be when you come to a anchor and veare out your cable, but by degree, till the ship ride. well than they say, stop the ship to those cable and anchor belong. short piece of wood, call boy boy or close hoop barrel like tankard as be say, but much short to show you the anchor and help to weigh it. there be another sort of can. call can boy, much great can boy moor upon shovel to give mariner warn of the danger. the main sail and the fore sail be call the fore course sailes, main sail before sail, main course before course bonit, drabbler and the main course or a pair. of course bonit and drabbler be common one, three part a piece to the sail they belong unto in depth, but their proportion be uncertain, for some will make the main sail so deep that with a shallow bonnet they will clothe all the mast without a drabler. but without bonnet we call they but course. we say lash on the bonnet to the course because it be make fast with la^chets into the eylot hole of the sail main top. saile, before top saile, top gallant sail, studding sailes as the drabler, be to it and use, as the wind permit, there be also your main topsail and before topsail, with their top-gallant sail and in a fair gale, your stud sail, which be bolt of canvas or any cloth that will hold wind. we ex^end alongst the side of the main sail and boomes i^ out with a boome or long pole which we use also sometime to the clew of the main sail, fore sail and spret sail, mizzen mizzen, top saile, spret sail, spretsaile, top saile, drift saile, when you go before the wind or quarter else, not your miszen and miszen topsail, your spret and spret topsail, as the rest take all their name. of their yard. a drift sail be only use under water vear out right a head by sheat to keep the ship head right upon the sea in a storm or when a ship drive too fast in a current net sail. a net sail be only a sail lay over the net nettings, which be small rope from the top of the fore castle to the poop, stretch upon the ledge from the waist-tree to the rouse-tree, waist-tree, rouse-tree, which be only small timber to bear up the grating from the half deck to the forecastle stantion, grate, support by stantion, that rest upon the half deck and this net or grate, which be but the like make of wood you may set up or take down. when you please and be call the close fight. fore and aft head sailes. now the use of those sail be thus all head sailes, which be those belong to the before mast and boltsprer do keep the ship from the wind or to fall off. after sailes, all after sail, that be all the sail belong to the main mast and miszen keep she to wind ward. therefore, few ship will steer upon quarter wind with one sail but must have one after sail and one head sail. the sail be cut in proportion as the mast and yard be in breadth and length, but the spret-saile be ^ part the depth of the fore sail and the miszen by the leech twice so deep as the. mast be long from the deck to the hound leech. the leech of a sail be the outward side or skirt of the sail, from the ear to the clew, the middle betwixt, which we account the leech, the clew. the clew be the low corner of a sail to which you make fast your sheats and tack, or that which come gore out from the square of the sail. goring for a square sail have no clew but the mainesaile must be cut gore because the tack will come close aboard and so cause the sail to hold more wind. now, when the sail be large and have a good clew, we say she spread a large clew or spread much canvas in make those sail they. use two sort of seam down the sail which do sow the breadth of the canvas together: a monk seam, a round seam, the one we call a monk seam, which be flat, the other a round seam, which be so call because it be round the ship be thus, provide there want yet her ordnance, which shall be in greatness according to her build in strength and burden. but the great common lie low, which we call the low tier, if she be furnish fore and aft. likewise, the second tier, a tier three, second, half a tier, and the three which be the small, the forecastle and the half deck be also furnish, we account half a tier sowage, or to stow stowage, to stow ballast. be to put the good in howle in order. the most ponderous next the ballast, which be next the keelson to keep she stiff in the sea ballast be either gravel, stone or lead, but that which be dry, heavy and lie close, be best to find a leak trench the ballast shout they trench the ballast, that be to divide it. the ballast will sometime shoot. that be run from one side to another, and so will corn and salt if you make not pouch or bulk-head which when the ship do heel be very dangerous to over^et or turn the keel upward for cask that be. so stow tier above tier with ballast and cant coin. cant coin which be little short piece of wood or billet, cut with a sharp ridge or edge to lie betwixt the cask, stand coin to bear and stand coin be billet or pipe-stave to make they. they can give way nor stir. the ship will bear much that be carry much ordnance or good or bear much sail and when you let any thing down into the howle lower it by degree. they say amaine and be down strike. chap 8: the charge and duty of the captain of a ship and every office and officer in a man of war, the captain charge. the captain charge be to command all and tell the master to what port he will go or to what height in a fight. he be to give direction for the manage thereof. and the master be to see the cunning of the ship and trim of the sail. the master and his mate. the master and his mate be to direct the course, command all the sailor for steer, trim and sail the ship. his mate be only his. second. allow sometime for the two mid ship man that aught to take charge of the first prize: the pilot. the pilot, when they make land do take the charge of the ship till he bring she to harbour. the chirurgeon and his mate. the chirurgeon be to be exempt from all duty but to attend the sick and cure the wound, and good care will be. have he have a certificate from barber surgeon hall of his sufficiency and also that his chest be well furnish both for physic and chirurgery, and so near as may be proper for that clime you go for, which neglect have be the loss of many a man life. the capemerchant or purser. the capemerchant or purser have the charge of all the ca^ragasoune or merchandise and do keep a account of all that be receive or deliver. but a man of war have only a purser. the gunner with his mate and quarter gunner. the master gunner have the charge of the ordnance and shot: powder, match, ladle, sponge, worm, cartrage, arm and firework and the rest of the gunner or quarter gunner to receive their charge from he according to direction and to give a account of their store. the carpenter and his mate be to have the nail clinch. the carpenter and his mate roove and clinch nail, spike plate, rudder, iron pump nail, skupper nail and leather saw, file, hatchet and such like and ever ready for calk bream, stop leak fish or splice the maft or yard as occasion require and to give a account of his store. the boatswain be to have the charge of all the cordage. the boatswain and his mate, tackle, sail, fid and marl spike, needle, twine, saile-cloth and rig the ship. his mate, the command of the long boat, for the set forth of anchor, weigh or fetch home a anchor, warp, tow or moor and to give a account of his store, the trumpeter be always to attend. the captain command the trumpeter and to sound either at his go a shore or come aboard at the entertainment of stranger. also, when you hale a ship, when you charge, board or enter and the poop be his place to stand or sit upon. if there be a noise, they be to attend he. if there be not, every one he do teach to bear a part- the captain be to. encourage he by increase his share or pay and give the master trumpeter a reward. the marshal be to punish offender the marshal and to see justice execute according to direction as duck at the yard, arm, hale under the keel, bind to the capsterne or main mast with a basket of shot about his neck, set in the bilbowe and to pay the cobtie or the morioune. but the boy, the boatswain, be to see every monday at the chest to say their compass and receive their punishment for all their week offence. which do they be to have a quarter can of beer and a basket of bread. but if the boatswain eat or drink before he catch they, they be free. the corporal be to see the set and relieve the watch the corporal and see all the soldier and sailor keep their arm clean, neat and yare and teach they their use. the steward and his mate the steward be to deliver out the victual according to the captain direction and mess they four, five or six, as there be occasion. the quarter master. the quarter master have the charge of the howl for stow, rummage and trim the ship in the hold, and of their squadron for the watch and for fish to have a sayne, a fisgig, a harpin, iron and fish hook for porgos, boneto, dolphin or dorados and rail line for mackerel. the cooper and his mate the cooper be to look to the. cask, hoop and twig to stave or repair the bucket, can steep, tub, runlet, hogshead, pipe, butt etc. for wine, bear, cider, beverage, fresh water or any liquor. the coxswaine and his mate, the coxswaine, be to have a choice gang to attend the skiff to go to and again, as occasion, command the cook and his mate. the cook be to dress and deliver out the victual. he have his store of quarter can small can, platter, spoon, lantern etc. and be to give his account of the remainder. the swabber. the swabber be to wash and keep clean the ship and map the lyar. the liar be to hold his place, but for a week, and he that be first take with a lie every monday. be so proclaim at the main mast by a general: cry: a liar, a liar, a liar. he be under the swabber and only to keep clean the beak head and chain the sailor. the sailor be the ancient man for hoise the sail, get the tack aboard, hale the bowl and steer the ship. the younker? the younker be the young man, call sore-mast man to take in the topsail or top and yard for surl the sail or sling the yard, bouse or ^rising and take their turn at helm the lieutenant. his place the lieutenant be to associate the captain and, in his absence, to execute. his place he be to see the marshal and corporal do their duty and assist they in instruct the soldier. and in a fight the forecastle be his place to make good as the captain do the half deck and the quarter master or master mate the mid ship and in a state man of war he be allow as necessary as a lieutenant on shore. chap 9, proper sea term for divide the company at sea and steer sail or moor a ship in fair weather or in a storm. it be to be suppose by this the ship be victual and man the voyage determine. steep tub the steep tub in the chain to shift their beef, pork or fish in salt water till the salt. be out, though not the saltness and all thing else, ready to set sail. but before we go any further, for the better understanding the rest, a few word for steer and cunning. the ship will not be amiss, then know, starboard be the right hand, larboard, the left starboard, larboard. cunning, steer, mid-ship, port, starboard, the helm be to put the helm a starboard, than the ship will go to the larboard. right your helm, that be to keep it in the mid ship, or right up port, that be to put the helm to larboard, and the ship will go to the starboard. for the ship will ever go contrary to the helm. now, by a quarter wind they will say aloof or keep your loof. keep she to it a loof, keep your loof. war no more. no, near ease. steady, have a care of your lee-latch. touch the wind and war no more. be no more but to bid he at the helm to keep she so near the wind. as may be no near ease the helm, or bear up, be to let she fall to lee-ward. steady that be to keep her right upon that point. you steer by yare. be yare at the helm or a fresh man to the helm, but he that keep the ship most from yawn, do common use the least motion with the helm and those steer the best the master and company be aboard. he command they to get the sail to the yard. gear and about your gear, or work on all hand. stretch forward your main halliard, hoist your sail half mast high, prithee, prithee, or make ready to set sail across your yard. bring your cable to the capsterne boatswain, fetch a anchor aboard, break ground or weigh anchor, heave a head man into the top man upon the yard. a pike come be the anchor. a pike that be to heave the hawse of the ship right over the anchor. what be the anchor away. tally, yea, yea, let fall your foresail, tally that be. hale off the sheats. who be at the helm there? coil your cable in small fake hale. the cat a bitter belay lose. fast your anchor with your shank-painter stow the boat, set the land how it bear by the compass that we may the better know, thereby to keep our account and direct our course. let fall your main sail. every man say his private prayer for a boon voyage. out with your spret sail, on with your bonit and drabbler. steer steady and keep your course so you go. well, how they divide the company at sea and set and rule the watch. when this be, do the captain or master command the boatswain to call up the company. the master be chief of the starboard watch. do call one, and his right hand mate on the larboard do call another, and so forward till they be divide in. two part than each man be to choose his mate, consort or comrade and then divide they into squadron according to your number and burden of your ship. as you see, occasion these be to take their turn at the helm, trim, sail, pump and do all duty, each half or each squadron, for eight glass or four hour, which be a watch, but care will be have that there be not two comrade upon one watch, because they may have the more room in their cabin to rest. and as the captain and master, mate, gunner, carpenter, quartermaster, trumpeter, etc. be to be abast the mast, so the boatswain and all the yonker or common sailor under his command be to be before the mast. the next. be to mess. they four to a mess and then give every mess a quarter can of beer and a basket of bread to stay their stomach till the kettle be boil. that they may first go to prayer, then to supper and at six a clock sing a psalm, say a prayer and the master with his side begin the watch. than all the rest may do what they will till midnight, and then his mate with his larboard man with a psalm and a prayer relieve they till four in the morning, and so from eight to twelve each other, except some flaw of wind come, some storm or gust or some accident that require the help of all hand which common after such good cheer. in most voyage do happen. for now, the wind veere, that be the wind veere. it do shift from point to point. get your starboard tack aboard, tally and tally, or hale off your lee-sheats. the ship will not wayer settle your main topsail. veer a fathom of your sheet. the wind come fair again and a fresh gale fly hale up the slatch of the lee-boling. by slatch be mean the middle part of any rope hang over board, veer more sheet, or a fly sheet that be. when they be not hale home to the block fly. but when we say let fly the sheat, than they let go amain, which common be in some gust, a pair of course, lest they spend their topsail or. if her quick side lie in the water, overset the ship. a fly sheet be when she go before the wind. or betwixt a pair of sheat or all sail draw but the wind shrink, that be when you must take in the spretsaile and get the tack aboard. hale close the main boling. that be when your tack be close aboard if you will sail against the wind or keep your own, that be not to fall to lee-ward or go back again by hale off. close your bolings. you set your sail so sharp as you can to lie close by a wind. thwart it a league or two or more or less. as you see cause first on the one board, then on the other. this we call board, or beat it up upon a tack in the wind eye or bolt to and again. but the long your board be, the more you work or gather into the wind. if a sudden flaw of wind shall surprise you when you will lower a yard so fast as you can. they call a main, but a cross sail can come near the wind than six point. but a carvel who sail stand like a pair of tailor shear will go much near how to handle a ship in a storm. it over-casts. we shall have wind, foul weather. settel your top sail, take in the spret-saile, in with your topsail. low the foresail. tallow under the barrel, brade up close all they sail. lash sure the ordnance. strike your top-mast to the cap. make it sure with your sheep foot a storm. try, let we lie at try with our main course, that be to hale the tack aboard, the sheet close aft, the bol set up and the helm tie close aboard. when that will not serve, then try the mizzen, if that split or the storm grow so great she can bear it. hall, then hull, which be to bear no sail, but to strike a hull be when they will lie obscure in the sea or stay for some consort. lash sure the helm a lee under the sea, and so a good ship will lie at ease under the sea, as we term it. wether coil. if she will weather coil and lay her head the other way without lose a sail, that must be do by bear up the helm, and then she will drive nothing so far to leeward. they call it hull also in a calm, swell sea, which be common before a storm, when they strike their sail leave she shall beat they in piece against the mast by roll. roll labour, we say a ship do labour much when she do roll much any way. but if she will neither try nor hull spoon, then spoon that be. put she right before the wind. this way, although she will roll more than the other, yet if she be weak it will not strain she any thing. so much in the trough of the sea, trough which be the distance betwixt two wave or billow. if none of this will do well than she be in danger to founder, founder, if not sink, founder be when she will neither veer nor steer. the sea will so, over, rake she, except you, free out the water, she will lie like a log and so consequent, sink to spend a mast. to spend a mast or yard be when they be break by foul weather. spring a mast and to spring a mast be when it be crack in any place. in this extremity, he that do the ship can have too much judgement. a yoke nor experience to try her drift or how she cape, which be two term also use in the trial of the run or set of currant. a yoke be when the sea be so rough as that man can govern the helm with their hand. and then they seize a block to the helm on each side at the end and reeviug two fall through. they, like gunner tackle, bring they to the ship side, and so some be at the one side of the tackle, some at the other. they steer she with much more ease than they can with a single rope with a double turn about the helm. when the storm be past, though the wind may alter three or four point of the compass or more, yet the sea for a good time will go the same way. then, if your course be right against it, you shall meet it right. a head, so we call it a head sea. sometime, when there be but little wind, a head sea, there will come a contrary sea and present the wind after it, whereby we may judge that from whence it come. be much wind for common before any great storm. the sea will come that way. now, if the ship may run on shore in ose or mud, she may escape, or billage on a rock or anchor flooke, repair her leak. but if she split or sink she be a wrack but see the storm decrease. let we try if she will endure the hullocke of a sail, hullocke which sometime be a piece of the mizzen sail or some other little sail part open to keep her head to the sea. but if yet she will, weather coil, we will loose a hullocke of her foresail and put the helm a weather and it will bring her head where her stern. be courage, my heart it clear up. set your foresail now it be fair weather large. lask out with all your sail. go large or lask, that be when we have a fresh gale or fair wind and all sail draw. but for more haste, unparrell the. mizzen yard and launch it and the sail over her lee quarter and fit give at the further end to keep the yard steady and with a boome, boome it out. this we call a goose-wing. goosew, who be at helm there? sirrah, you must be among the point. well, master, the channel be broad enough. yet you can steer. betwixt a pair of sheat. those be word of mockery, betwixt the cunner and the stearesman. but to proceed, get your larboard tack aboard, hale off your starboard sheat, keep your coarse upon the point. you be direct port. he will lay she by the lee, the stay, or back stay, that be, when all the sail flutter in the wind, and be not keep full, that be. full of wind, they fall upon the mast and shrowd so that the ship go a drift upon her broad side. fill the sail, keep full, full and by make ready to tack about be. but for every man to stand to handle the sail and rope, they must hale, tack about be to bear up the helm. and that bring she to stay all her sail, lie flat against the shrowd. then as she turn, we say she be pay. then let rise your lee tack and hale off your sheat and trim all your sail as they be before which be cast of that boling, which be the weather bol and hale up, teach the other. so all your sheats brase and tack be trim by. a wind, as before, to belay, be to make fast the rope in their proper place, round in, round in, be, when the wind largesse let rise, the main tack and before tack and hale aft the fore sheet to the cat head and the main sheet to the cubbridge head. this be round in or round aft the sail, round aft pasarado, the sheat, be there they hale they down to keep they firm from fly up with a pasarado, which be any rope wherewith we hale down the sheat block of the main or fore sail when they be hale aft the clew of the main sail to the cubbridge head of the main mast and the clew of the fore sail to the cat head. do this when the ship go large, observe, observe the height, that be at twelve a clock to take the height of the sun, or in the night, the north star, or in the forenoon and afternoon. if you miss these by, find the azimuth end. alnicanter, dead water. dead water be the eddie water. follow the stern of the ship, not pass away so quick as that slide by her side. the wake, the wake of a ship be the smooth water. a stern, show the way she have go in the sea. by this we judge what way she do make. for if the wake be right, a stern, we know she make good her way forward. but if to lee-ward a point or two, we then think to the lee-ward, of her course. but she be a nimble ship that in turn or tack about will not fall to thou lee-ward of she wake when she have weather. it disimbogue be to pass some narrow strait or currant into the main ocean out of some great gulf or bay. disimbogue a drift, a drift be any thing float in the sea, that be of wood, rockweed. rockweed do grow by the shore and be a sign of land. yet it be oft find far in the sea, lay the ship by the lee to try the dipsie line. dipsie line, which be a small line, some hundred and fifty fathom long, with a long plummet at the end, make hollow wherein be put tallow that will bring up any gravel, which be first mark at twenty fathom and after increase by ten to the end. and those distinguish by so many small knot upon each little string that be fix at the mark through the stroud or midst of the line, show it be so many time ten fathom deep plummet. where the plummet do rest from draw the line out of your hand. this be only use in deep water when we think we approach the shore, for in the main sea, at 300. fathom, we find no bottom. bring the ship to right that. be again under sail as she be. some use a log line, log line and a minute glass to know what way she make. but that be so uncertain it be not worth the labour to try it. one to the top to look out for land, land to ken. to lay a land the man cry out, land to which be just so far as a ken or a man may discover, descry or see the land. and to lay a land be to sail from it just so far as you can see it. good land fall. a good land fall be when we fall just with our reckon. if otherwise a bad land fall. but however how it bear, bad land fall a head land. a point land mark to ^ai^e a land. to make land a reach, set it by the compass and bend your cable to the anchor. a head land or a point of land do lie further cut at sea than the rest. a land mark be any mountain, rock, church, wind-mill or the like that the pilot can know by compare one by another how they bear by the compass. a reach be the distance of two point, so far as you can see they in a right line, as white hall and london bride or white hall and the end of lambeth towards chelsey. fetch the sound line. sound line, this be big than the dipsie-line and be mark at two fathom. next the lead with a. piece of black leather at three. fathom the like, but slit, at 5.. fathom with a piece of white cloth at 7.. fathom with a piece of red in a piece of white leather at 15.. with a white cloth, etc. the sound lead be six or seven pound, weight the lead, and near a foot long he that do heave this lead, stand by the horse or in the chain and do sing. fathom by the mark 5. c and a shaftment less 4.0. this be to find where the ship may sail by the depth of the water. foul water. foul water, be when she come into shallow water where she raise the sand or ose with her way, yet not touch the ground but she can feel her helm so well as in deep water. when a ship sail with a large wind towards the land or a fair wind into a harbour, bear in, we say she bear in with the land or harbour. and when she will not come near the land but go more roome-way than her couse, we say she bear off, bear off. but a ship board bear off, be use to every thing you will thrust from you. bear up, hold off. bear up, be to bring the ship to go large or, before the wind to hold off, be when we heave the cable at the capsterne, if it be great and stiff or slimy with ose surge. it surge or slip back unless they keep it close to the whelp and then they either hold it fast with nipper or bring it to the i care capsterne and this be call hold off as you approach the store. shorten your sail when you be in harbour, take in your sail and come to a anchor wherein much judgement be require neale to, to know well the sound. if it be neal to, that be deep water, close aboard the shore or shallow, or if the leeunder the weather. shore or the lee shore be sandy, clay, osie or foul and rocky ground, but the lee shore all man will shun, that can avoid it. a roade off, or a road which be a open place near the shore, or the off, which be the open sea from the shore or the midst of any great stream, be call the off land lock, land lock be when the land be round about you. now the ship be say to ride, to ride so long as the anchor do hold and come not home. ride a great road to ride a great road. be when the wind have much power, they will strike their top mast and the yard alongst ship and the deep the water be it. require more cable. when we have rid in any distress we say we have rid hawse full, ride a stress, ride betwixt, because the water break into the hawse. to ride betwixt wind and tide be when the wind and tide be contrary and of equal power, wind and tide which will make she roll extreme, yet not strain much the cable. to ride thwart be to ride with her side to the tide. ride thwart tide and then she never strain it. ride a pike to ride a pike. be to pick your yard when you ride among many ship. ride cross to ride across be to hoist the main and fore yard to the hound and top alike when the water be go and the ship. lie dry, we say she be sew. if her head but lie dry, sew she be sew a head. but if she can all lie dry she can sew there. sew water bear be when there be no more water than will just bear she from the ground water. bear water line, the water line be to that bend or place she shall swim in when she be load. last to more to more a ship be to lay out her anchor as be most fit for she to ride by, and the way be diverse as first to more a fair birth from any annoyance. more cross to more a cross be to lay one anchor to one side of the stream and the other to the other, right against one another, and so they bear equal ebb and flood. more alongst to more alongst. be to lay a anchor amid the stream ahead and another asterne when you fear drive a shore, water shot, water shot. be to more quarter betwixt, both neither cross nor alongst the ride in a open ride they will more. that way they think the wind will come the most to hurt they. more proviso to more a proviso be to have one anchor in the river and a hawser. a shore which be moor with her head, a shore, otherwise two cable be the least. and four, cable the best to more by chap x. proper term for the wind, ebb, flood and eddy, with their definition and a estimate of the depth of the sea by the height of the hill and the largeness of the earth: a calm, a breze, when there be not a breath of wind, stir it be a calm or a stark calm. a breze be a wind blow out of the sea and common in fair weather, begin about nine in the morning and last till near night, so likewise all the night. it be from the shore, which be call a turnado or a sea-turne, but this be but upon such coast where it blow thus most certain except it be a storm or very. foul weather, as in barbaria, egypt and the most of the levant. we have such brezes in most hot country in summer, but they be very uncertain. a fresh gale, a fresh gale be that do present, blow after a calm when the wind begin to quicken. or blow a loom gale, a fair loom gale be the best to sail in because the sea go not high and we bear out all our sail. a stiff gale be so much wind as our topsail can endure to bear eddie wind. a eddie wind be check by the sail, a mountain turn or any such thing that make it return back again. it over blow. it over blow when we can bear no topsail, a gust, a flaw. of wind be a gust which be very violent upon a sudden a spout, but quick end. a spout in the west indies, common fall in those gust which, be as it be a small river, fall entire from the cloud, like out of our water spout, which make the sea where it fall rebound in flash, exceed high whirl wind, run round a whirl wind and blow diverse way at once. a storm, a storm be know to every one not to be much less than a tempest, a tempest that will blow down house and tree up by the root. a mounsoune. a mounsoune be a constant wind in the east indies that blow always three month together one way, and the next three month the. contrary way. a hurricane, a hurricane be so violent in the west indies it will continue three, four or five week, but they have it not pass once in five, six or seven year. but than it be with such extremity that the sea fly like rain and the wave so high they over flow the low ground by the sea in so much that ship have be drive over top of high tree. there grow many league into the land and there leave, as be captain francis nelson, a englishman and a excellent seaman. for one we say a calm sea or becalm. becalm when it be so smooth the ship move very little and the man leap over board to swim. a rough sea be when the wave grow high, a rough sea, a overgrow sea, surge, the rutilio of the sea, the roar of the sea, flood and ebb. a overgrow sea when the surge and billow go high, the rutilio of the sea, where it do dash against anything. and the roar of the sea be most common, observe a shore a little before a storm or after a storm. flood, be when the water begin to rise, which be young flood, as we call it, than quarter flood, half flood, full sea, still water or high water. so when it ebb, quarter ebb, half ebb, three quarter ebb, low water or dead low water. every one do know. and also that, as at a spring tide the sea or water be at the high, so at a neape tide it be at the low. this word tide be common both to flood and ebb, for you say as well tide of ebb as tide of flood. a tide of ebb, a tide of flood, a windward tide, a lee-ward tide, or a windward tide when the tide run against the stream. as a leewarde tide, that be, when the wind and the tide go both one way, which make the water as smooth as the other rough. to tide over to a place. to tide over be to go over with the tide of ebb or flood and stop the contrary by anchor till the next. tide. thus you may work against the wind if it over blow. not a tide gate. a tide gate be where the tide run strong. tide and half tide, it flow. tide and half tide that be, it will be half flood by the shore before it begin to flow in the channel, for although the tide of flood run aloft, yet the tide of ebb run close by the ground. a eddie tide be where the water do run back contrary to the tide. eddie tide that be when some headland or great point in a river hinder the free passage of the stream. that cause the water on the other side the point to turn round by the shore, as in a circle, till it fall. into the tide again, as touch the reason of ebb and flood and to know how far it be to the bottom of the deep place of the sea. i will not take upon i to discourse of, as know the same to be the secret of god, unrevealed to man only. i will set down a philosophical speculation of diverse man opinion touch the depth of the sea, which i hope will not be think much impertinent to the subject of this book by the judicious reader. the height of mountain perpendicular. fabianus in and cleomides conceive the depth of the sea to be fifteen furlong, that be a mile and ^ part. plutarch compare it equal to the high mountain. scallinger and other conceit the hill. far surpass the deepness of the sea and that in few place it be more than a hundred pace in depth. it may be he mean in some narrow sea, but in the main ocean experience have teach we it be much more than twice so much, for i have found 300.. fathom, yet find no ground. eratosthenes in theon, that great mathematitian, write the high mountain perpendicular be but ten furlong, that be one mile and a quarter. also affirm this to be the height of the hill p^lius in thessalia, but xenagoras in plutarch, observe the height of olympus in the same region, to be twenty pace more, which be 1270.. pace. but sure all those mean only those mountain in or about greece where they live and be best acquaint. but how these may compare with the alps in asia, atlas in africa, caucasus in india, the andes in peru and diverse other have not yet be examine. but whatsoever, the hill may be above the superficies of the earth. the height of the hill compare with the superficies of the earth and depth of the sea. many hold opinion the sea be much deep. who suppose that the earth at the first frame be in the superficies regular and spherical, as the holy scripture direct we to believe, because the water cover and compass all the face of the earth. also that the face of the earth be equal to that of the sea. damascen note that the unevenness and irregularity which now be see in the earth superficies be cause by take some part out of the upper face of the earth in sundry place to make it more hollow, and lay they in other place to make it more convex, or by raise up some part and depress other to make room and receipt for the sea. that mutation be wrought by the power of the word of the lord. let the water be gather into one place, that the dry land may appear. as for aquinas, dionysius, catharianus and some divine that conceit there be no mutation, but a violent accumulation of the water. or heap they up on high, be unreasonable because it be against nature that water be a flexible and a ponderous body, so to consist and stay itself and not fall to the low part about it, where in nature there be nothing to hinder it, or if it be restrain supernatural by the hand and bridle of almighty god, lest it shall overwhelm and drown all the land. it must follow that god, even in the very institution of nature, impose a perpetual violence upon nature, and this with all that at the deluge. there be no necessity to break up the spring of the deep and to open the cattaract of heaven and pour down water continual so many day and night together. see the only. withdraw of that hand or let go of that bridle which restrain the water, will present, have overwhelm all how all the hill and dry land above the superficies of the sea have make room for the sea, therefore they be in equal height and depth. but both by scripture, the experience of navigator and reason, in make estimation of the depth of the sea, reckon not only the height of the hill above the common superficies of the earth but the height of all the dry land above the superficies of the sea, because the whole mass of earth that now appear above the water, be take as it be out of the place which the water now possess, must be equal to the place out of. which it be take. so consequent, it seem that the height or elevation of the one shall answer the descend or depth of the other, and therefore, in estimate the depth of the sea, we consider not only the erection of the hill above the ordinary land, but the advantage of the dry land above the sea, which latter- i mean the height of the ordinary main land- exclude the hill which proper answer the extraordinary deep and whirlpool in the sea. the rest be hold more in large continent above the sea than that of the hill, be above the land, that there be small difference betwixt the spring first rise out of the earth and their fall into the sea, for that the plain face of the dry land be not level or equal distant from the centre, but have a great descent towards the sea and a rise towards the midland part. although it appear not plain to the eye yet to reason, it be most manifest because we find that part of the earth, the sea cover, descend low and low towards the sea. for the sea which touch the upper face of it, be know by nature to be level and even distant from the centre, be observe to wax deep and deep the further one sail from the shore, coward the main ocean. even so, in that part which be untover the stream of river on all side, from the midland part towards the sea, slide from the high to the low, declare so much who course be some 1000 or 2000 mile, in which declination, pliny, in his derivation of water, require one cubit of decline in 240. foot of proceed. but columella, viturnius and other, in their conduction of water, require somewhat less, namely that in the proceed of 200. foot forward, there shall be allow one foot. of descend downward, which yet, in the course of 1000 mile, as danubius, volgha or indus, etc. have so much or more which will make five mile of descent in perpendicular account, and in the course of 2000 or more, as nilus, niger and the river of the amazon, have 10. mile or more of the like descent. these be not take as rule of necessity the determination of these question, as though water can not run without that advantage. for that respect, the conveyor of water in these time content themselves with one inch in 600. foot, as philander and viturnius observe, but be rather under a rule of commodity for expedition and wholesomeness of water, so convey, leave rest too long in pipe, it shall contract. some unwholesome condition, or else through the slackness of motion or long closeness or banishment from the air, gather some aptness and disposition to putr^fie. although i say such excess of advantage, as in the artificial conveyance of water the forename author require, be not of necessity exact in the natural derivation of they. yet certain it be that the descent of river be continual and their courselong and in many place swift and in some place headlong and furious. note the difference betwixt the spring of the river and their fall into the sea be not great. the difference of height or advantage can be great, betwixt the spring of the river and their out, let betwixt the first rise out of the earth and their fall. into the sea, unto which declinity of land. see the deepness of the sea in proportion answer, as i before declare, and not only to the height of the hill. it be conclude that the deepness to be much more than the philosopher common repute, and although the deepness of the sardinian sea, which aristotle say be the deep of the mediterranean, record by posidonius in strabo, to have be find but 1000 fathom, which be but a mile and a five part, and the great breadth not past 600.. mile, then see if in so narrow a sea it be so deep, what may we esteem the main ocean to be, that in many place be five time so broad. see the broad the sea be if. they be entire and free from land. they be answerable. observe to be the deep. if you desire any further satisfaction, read the first part of purchas his pilgrimage, where you may read how to find all those author at large. now, because he have take near 100 time as much from i, i have make bold to borrow this from he see he have found such deep water for this, our ship to fail in. be a gentleman who person i love and who memory and virtue i will ever honour. chap 11, proper sea term belong to the good or bad condition of ship. how to find they and amend they. a ship that will try hull and ride well at anchor, a wholesome ship we. call a wholesome ship. a long ship that draw much water will do all this. but if she draw much water and be short, she may hull well but neither try nor ride well. if she draw little water and belong, she may try and ride well- a unwholesome ship- but never hull well, which be call a unwholesome ship. howse a ship? the howse in of a ship be when she be past the breadth of her bear she be bring in narrow to her upper work. it be certain this make her wholesome in the sea without roll, because the weight of her ordnance do counterpoise her breadth under water. but it be not so good in a man of war because it take away a great deal of her room. nor will her tack ever so well come aboard, as if she be lay out aloft and not flare, flare which be when she be a little howse in near the water, and then the upper work do hang over again and be lay out, brother, aloft. this make a ship more roomy aloft for man to use their arm in. but sir walter rawleighs proportion, which be to be proportional wrought to her other work, be the best because the counter poise on each side do make she swim perpendicular or straight, and consequent, steady, which be the best. if a ship be narrow and her bearing either not lay out enough or too low than you must. make she broad and her bear the high by rip off the plank two or three, strike under water and as much above and put other timber upon the first and then put on the plank upon those timber. this will make she bear a better sail but it be a hindrance to her sail. this be to be do when a ship be cranke-sided and will bear no sail. cranke side and be call fur. note also fur that when a ship have a deep keel it do keep she from roll. if she be floty and her keel shallow, put on another keel under the first to make it deep, for it will make she hold more in the water. this we call a false keel, a false keel gripe. likewise, if her stem be too flat to make she cut water, the better, and not gripe, which be when she will not keep a wind. well, fix another stem before it, a false stem, and that be call a false stem, which will make she rid more way and bear a better sail. the run also, the run of a ship be as much to be regard for. if it be too short and too ^ull below the water, come but slow to the rudder because the force of it be break by her breadth and then to put a false stem post to lengthen she be the next remedy. but to lengthen she be better. for when a ship come off handsome by degree and her tuck do not lie too low, which will hinder the water from come swift to the rudder, make she she can steer well and they be call as they be a good run or a bad. a good run, a bad run. when a ship have lose a piece of her keel and that we can come well to mend it, you much patch a new piece unto it. and bind it with a stirrup, a syrup which be a iron, come round about it and the keel up to the other side of the ship, whereto it be strong nail with spikes. her rake also may be a defect, her rake which be so much of the hull as, by a perpendicular line, the end of the keel be from the set on of the stem, so much as it, without that, forward on and in like manner, the set in of her stem. post your french man, give great rake forward on which make she give good way and keep a good wind. but if she have not a full bow she will pitch her head extreme in the sea. if she have but a small rake, she be so blusse that the sea meet she so sudden upon the bow she can cut the water much. but the long a ship be, the full shall be her bow, but the mean be the best loom. the loom of a ship be her prospective, that be as she do show great or little, her water draught be so many foot as she go in the water. but the ship that draw most water be common, the most wholesome but the least. draught go best but roll most. and we say a ship do heel on starboard or larboard, heel that be to that side. she do lean most ouerset overthrow to overset or overthrow a ship be by bear too much sail you bring her keel upward. or on shore, overthrow she by ground she so that she fall upon one side. and we say a ship be walt when she be not stiff wale and have not ballast enough in she to keep she stiff wall rear and wall rear when she be right, build up after she come to her bear. it make she ill shape and unseemly but it give she within much room and she be very wholesome if her bear be well lay out. the masting of a ship be much to be consider and will much cause she to sail well or ill. as i have relate, in the masting a ship, iron sick, iron sick be when the bolt spikes or nail be, so eat with rust they stand hollow in the plank and so make her leak the which to prevent, they use to put lead over all the bolt head under water. trim last the trim of a ship do much amend or impair she sail and so alter her condition to find her trim. that be how she will sail best be by try she sail with another ship, so many glass trim a head and so many a stern, and so many upon a even keel. also the case of her mast and shroud, for some ship will sail much better when they be stack than when they be. teach chap 12: consideration for a sea captain in the choice of his ship and in place his ordnance, in give chase, board and enter a man of war like himself or a defend merchant man in land service, we call a man of war a soldier, either on foot or horse. how to choose a ship fit to make a man of wane and at sea, a ship which, if she be not as well build condition and provide as near fit such a employment as may be, she may prove either as a horseman that know not how to hold his reins keep. his seat in his saddle and stirrup carry his body, nor how to help his horse with leg and spur in a curvet, gallop or stop, or, as a excellent horseman that know all this, mount upon a jade that will do nothing, which be he mount. according to his experience he will do more with that one than half a dozen of the other, though as well provide as himself. but i confess, every horseman can mount himself alike, neither every seaman ship himself as he will. i mean not for outward ornament, which the better they be, the less to be dislike, for there can be a brave sight than a ship in her bravery, but of a competent sufficiency as the business require. but be i to choose a ship for myself, i will have she, sail well, yet strong build her deck flush and flat and so roomy that man may pass with ease. her bow and chase, so gally-like contrive, shall bear as many ordnance as with conveniency she can, for that always come most to fight. and so stiff she shall bear a stiff sail and bear out her low tier in any reasonable weather. neither shall her gunroome be unprovided not man like a merchantman, which, if they be double man, that be to have twice so many man as will sail she. they think it be too many in regard of the charge. yet, to speak true, there be few merchant ship in the world do. any way exceed. we and those man they entertain in good voyage, have such good pay and such acquaintance one with another in ship themselves that thirty or forty of they will trouble a man of war with three or four time their number. man with press, man be half of they scarce, hale, boulings, yea, and many time a pirate who be common the best man. but they fight only for wealth, not for honour nor revenge, except they be extreme constrain. but such a ship as i have speak of, well man, with rather too many than too few, with all sufficient officer, shot, powder, victual, and all their appurtenance, in my opinion may well pass muster for a man of war, his reward that first. descry a ship or enter a prize now be at sea. the top be seldom without one or other to look out for purchase. because he that first descry a sail, if she prove prize be to have a good suit of apparel or so much money as be set down by order for his reward, as also he that do first enter a ship, there be a certain reward. allow. he, when we see a ship alter her course and use all the mean she can to fetch you up, you be the chase and he the chaser in give chase or chase or to escape, be chase. there be require a infinite judgement and experience for there be no rule for it, but the short way. to fetch up your chase, be the best how to give chase and escape the chaser. if you be too lee-ward, get all your tack aboard and shape your course as he do to meet he at the near angle you can, than he must either alter his course and tack as you tack as near the wind as he can lie to keep his own till night and then strike a hull that you may not descry he by his sail, or do his best to lose you in the dark. for look how much he fall to lee-ward. he fall so much in your way. if he be right ahead of you, that be call a stern chase. if you weather he, for every man in chase, do seek to get the weather because you can board he. except you weather he, he will lask or go large. if you gather on he that way, he will try you before the wind. th^^. if your ordnance can reach he, if he can outstrip you, he be go. but suppose you be to windward if he clap close by a wind and there go ahead sea and you a lee-ward ship. if you do the like, your ship will so beat against the sea. she will make no way. therefore you must go a little more large. though you chase under his lee till you can run ahead, board and board be when two ship lie together, side by side. but he that know how to defend himself, board and board and work well, will so his ship as force you to enter upon his quarter, which be the high part of the ship and but the mizzen shroud to enter by, from whence he may do you much hurt with little danger, except you fire he, which a pirate will never do, neither sink you, if he can choose, except you be able to force he to defend himself. but in a sea fight we call board in board, where we can, the great advantage for your ordnance be to board, he thwart the. hawse, because you may use all the ordnance you have on one side and she only they in her prow. but the best and safe board for enter be on the bow board and enter a ship. but you must be careful to clear the deck with burn granado fire-pot, poutche of powder, powder chest to which give fire by a gunpodwer match to prevent train to the powder chest, which be long board, join like a triangle with diverse broad ledge on either side wherein lie as many peeble stone or beatch as can there lie those be. fire will make all clear before they beside. in a extremity a man will rather blow up the quarter deck, half deck before castle or any thing than be. take by he he know a mortal enemy and common. there be more man lose in enter if the chase stand to her defence in a instant than in a long fight, board and board if she be provide of her close fight. i confess the charge upon trench and the entrance of a breach in a rampire be attempt as desperate as a man will think can be perform. but he that have try himself as oft in the enter a resist ship, as i have do both they and the other, he will sure confess there be no such dangerous service ashore as a resolve, resolute fight at sea. a ship close fight be small, ledge of wood lay cross one another like the grate of. iron in a prison window betwixt the main mast and the fore mast and be call grate or net, as be say, which be make of small rope, much in like manner, cover with a sail, the which to undo be to heave a kedger or fix a grapple into. they tie in a rope but a chain of iron be better, and shear off will tear it in piece if the rope and anchor hold. some have use shear hook which be hook like sickel fix in the end of the yard arm that if a ship under sail come to board she, those shear will cut her shroud and spoil her tackle but they be so subject to break their own yard and cut all the. rope come from the topsail, they be out of request. to conclude, if a ship be open, present to board she be the best way to take she. but if you see your chase strip himself into fight sail, evident sign that a chase will fight, that be to put out his colour in the poop, his flag in the main top, his streamer or pendant as the end of his yard arm. furl his spret-saile, pike his mizzen and sling his main yard. provide yourself to fight now, because i will not be tedious in describe a fight at sea, i have trouble you with this short preamble that you may the plain understand it. chap 13: how to manage a fight at sea with the proper. term in a fight, large express and the order of a navy at sea. for this master piece of this work, i confess i may do better to leave it to every particular man, conceit as it be, or those of long practice or more experience. yet because i have see many book of the art of war by land, many book of the art of war for the land, none for the sea and never any for the sea, see all man so silent in this most difficult service and there be so many young captain and other that desire to be captain who know very little or nothing at all to any purpose for their better understanding. i have proceed thus far now for this that follow what i have see, do and conceive. by my small experience i refer i to their friendly construction and well advise, consideration. a sail, how bear she, or stand she to windward or lee-ward? set he by the compass, he stand right ahead. or on the weather-bow or lee-bow, let fly your colour if you have a consort else, not out with all your sail. a steady man to the helm, sit close to keep her steady. give he chase or fetch he up. he hold his own. no, to give chase. we gather on he captain out ^oes his flag and pendant, also his waste clothes and top arm be clothes, top arm which be a long. red cloth, about three quarter of a yard broad edge on each side, with calico or white linen cloth that go round about the ship on the out side of all her upper work, before and aft and before the cubbridge head, also about the fore and main top as well, for the countenance and grace of the ship as to cover the man for be see he furle and sling his main yard in, go his spret-saile. thus they use to strip themselves into their short sail, fight sail to hale a ship, or figt sail, which be only the fore sail, the main and fore top sail, because the rest shall not be fire nor spoil beside. they will be troublesome to handle. hinder our sight. and the use our arm, he make ready his close fight, fore and aft. how to begin a fight, master? how stand the chase right on head. i say: well, we shall reach he by and by what. be all ready, yea, yea. every man to his charge. dowse your topsail to salute he for the sea. hale he, with a noise of trumpet. whence be your ship of spain, whence be you of england, be you a merchant or a man of war, we be of the sea. he wave we to lee-ward with his draw sword. call amain for the king of spain and spring his loufe. give he a chase piece with your broad side and run a good birth ahead of he do do. we have the wind of he and he tack about, tack you about also and keep your loufe. be yare at the helm, edge in with he. give he a volley of small shot, also your prow and broad side, as before, and keep your loufe. he pay, we shoot for shot. well, we shall require he what? be you ready again? yea, yea. try he once more, as before. do do keep your loufe and loge your ordnance again. be all ready, yea, yea. edge in in with he again. begin with your bow piece, proceed with your broad side and let she fall off with the wind to give she also your full. chase your weather broad side and bring she round that the stern may. also discharge and your tack close aboard again. do do the wind veere the sea go too high to board? she and we be shoot through and thorough. and between wind a^d water, try the pump. bear up the helm, master. let we breathe and refresh a little. and sling a man over board to stop the leak, that be to truss he up about the middle in a piece of canvas. how to sling a man over board and a rope to keep he from sink and his arm at liberty, with a malet in the one hand and a plug lap in okum and well far in a tarpawling clout in the other, which he will quick beat into the hole or hole the bullet make. what cheer mate. be all well, all well, all well, all well. then make ready to bear up with he again and withal your great and small shot. charge he, and in the smoke board he, thwart the hawse on the bow mid ship, or rather than fail on his quarter, or make fast your grapple, if you can, to his close fight and shear off. captain, we be foul on each other and the ship be on fire. cut any thing to get clear and smother the fire with wet clothes. in such a case they will present be such friend as to help one the other all they can to get clear, lest they both shall burn together and sink. and if they be generous, the fire quench, drink kind one to another, heave their can over board and then begin again as before. well, master the day be, spend the night, draw on a consultation and direction in a sea fight, and how they bury their dead, let we consult chirurgeon, look to the wound and wind up the slay with each a weight or bullet at their head and foot to make they sink and give they three gun for their funeral. swabber, make clean the ship purser, record their name, watch, be vigilant to keep your birth to wind. ward that we lose. he not in the night. gunner, sponge your ordnance. soldier, scour your piece, carpenter about your leak boat swain and the rest. repair the sail and shroud and cook. see you observe your direction against the morning, watch boy, holla, master, holla, be the kettle boil yea, yea, boatswain, call up the man to prayer and break fast. boy, fetch my cellar of bottle, a preparation for a fresh charge, a health to you all. fore and aft courage my heart for a fresh charge. gunner, beat open the port and out with your low tire and bring i from the weather side to the lee, so many piece as we have port to bear upon he master, lay he aboard loufe for loufe. mid ship man, see the top and yard. well, man with stone, fi^e pot and brass bail to throw among they before we enter or if. we be put off. charge they with all your great and small shot in the smoke. let we enter they in the shroud and every squadron at his best advantage. so sound drum and trumpet and saint george for england. how a prize do yield and how to entertain he seaman, like they. hang out a flag of truce, hale he a main, a base, or take in his flag. strike their sail and come aboard with their captain, purser and gunner, with their commission cocket or bill of load out. go the boat they be launch from the ship side. entertain they with a general cry: god save the captain and all the company with the trumpet sound. examine they in particular and then conclude your condition. with feast, freedom or punishment as you find occasion, but always have as much care to their wound as your own. and if there be either young, woman or age man, use they noble, which be ever the nature of a generous disposition. to conclude, if you surprise he or enter perforce, you may stow the man, rifle, pillage or sack and cry a prize. how to call a counsel of war and order a navy at sea, to call a council of war in a fleet? there be your council of war to manage all business of import and the common council for matter of small moment, when they will have a meeting where the admiral do appoint it. if in the admiral they hang out a flag in the main shroud, if in the vice admiral, in the before shroud, if in the rear admiral in the mizzen, if there be many squadron, the admiral of each squadron, upon sundry occasion do carry in their main top flag of sundry colour, or else they be distinguish by several pendant from the yard arm. every night or morning they be to come under the lee of the admiral to salute he and know his pleasure, but no admiral of any squadron be to bear. his flag in the main top in the presence of the admiral general, except the admiral come aboard, of he to council, to dinner or collation, and so any ship else where he so reside during that time, be to wear his flag in the main top. they use to martial or order, those squadron in rank, like manaples, which be four square, if the wind and sea permit, a good birth or distance from each other, that they becalm not one another nor come not foul of each other. the general common in the midst, his vice admiral in the front and his rear admiral in the rear, or otherwise like a half moon, which be two squadron, like two triangle for the two horn, and so the rest of the squadron behind each other a good distance, and the general in the midst of the half circle, from whence he see all his fleet and send his direction, as he find occasion, to who he please. now, between two navy they use often. stratagem for seaman especial in a harbour or road where they be at anchor to fill old bark with pitch tar, train oil, oil, brimstone, rosin, reed with dry wood and such combustible thing. sometime they link three or four together in the night and put they adrift as they find occasion to pass a fort. some will make both ship and sail all black. but if the fort keep but a fire on the other side and all the piece point blank with the fire, if they discharge what be betwixt they and the fire, the shot will hit. if the rule be true, observe, for when a ship be betwixt the fire and you, she do. keep you from see it till she be pass it. to conclude, there be as many stratagem, advantage and invention to be use as you find occasion, and therefore experience must be the best tutor. chap 14: the name of all sort of great ordnance and their appurtenance, with their proper term and exposition. also diverse observation concern their shoot, with a table of proportion for their weight of metal, weight of powder, weight of shot. and there best, at random and point blank, enlarge the name of great ordnance: a canon, royal or double canon, a canon, a canon serpentine, a bastard canon, a demi canon, a canon petro, a culvering, a basilisco, a demi culverin, a bastard culver, a sacar, a minion, a falcon, a falconet, a serpentine, a rabbinet carriages, to all those do belong. carriage whereon piece do lie support by a axletree betwixt two wheel trunnion. whereon do lie the piece? upon her trunnion, which be two knob cast with the piece on each of herside. which do lie in two half hole upon the two cheek of the carriage to raise she up or down as you will capsquare over they be the capsquare which be two broad piece of iron do cover they make fast by a pin with a fore lock to keep the piece from fall out. that the piece and carriage be draw along upon wheel. every one do know wheel. if she be for land service they have wheel make with spoke like coach wheel and according to their proportion, strong shod with iron truck. and the pin at the end of the axletree be call linch pin. if for sea she have truck which be round entire piece of wood, like wheel to mount a piece. to dismount a piece, bed quoine. to mount a piece, be ^o, lay she upon her carriage to dismount she. to take she down her bed, be a plank. do lie next the piece or the piece upon it upon the carriage and betwixt the piece and it they put their quoine, which be great wedge of wood with a little handle at the end to put they forward or backward for level the piece as you please, to trava a piece be to turn she which way you will, upon her platform. dispert to dispert. a piece be to find a difference betwixt the thickness of the metal at her mouth and britch or carnouse britch, carnouse musell, which be the great circle about her britch and her mussel ring be the great circle about her mouth, thereby to make a just shot. there be diverse way to dispert she, but the most easy be as good as the best and that be, but by put a little stick or a straw that be straight into the toutch hole to the low part of the sillind or concave, sillind, concave boar, which be the bear of the piece, and cut it off close by the metal, and then apply it in the same manner to the mouth and it will exact, show you. the difference how to dispert a piece which be set upon the mussel of the piece with a little clay, pitch or wax. it will be as the pin of any piece be to the sight level, to the carnouse or britch of the piece. otherways you may give her allowance according to your judgement. taper bore. taper bore be when a piece be wide at the mouth, then towards the britch, which be dangerous if the bullet go not home to burst she honicomb honeycomb be when she be ill cast or overmuch wear. she will be rugged within, which be dangerous for a cross bar shoot to catch hold by. or any rag of her wad be a fire and stick there may fire the next. charge you put in. she how to find it. and you may find if she be taper bore, either with a crooked wire at the end of a long staff by scratch up and down to see where you can catch any hold. or a light candle at the end of a staff, thrust up and down to see if you can see any fault, britchings. britchings be the rope by which you lash your ordnance fast to the ship side in foul weather. chamber, chamber be a charge make of brass or iron which we use to put in at the britch of a sling or murderer. contain just so much powder as will drive away the case of stone of shot or any thing in she. in a great piece. we call that her chamber, so far as the powder do reach when she be lade cartrage. a cartrage be a bag of canvas make upon a frame or a round piece of wood somewhat less than the bear of the piece they make. they also of paper. they have also cartrage, or rather case for cartrage, make of latin to keep the cartrage in which be to have no more powder in they than just the charge of your piece and they be close cover in those case of latin case to keep they dry and from any mischance by fire and be far more ready and safe than your ladle or budgbarrel a budgbarell. a budgbarrell be a little barrel make of latin fill with powder to carry from place to place for fear of fire in the cover it. have a long neck to fill the ladle withal without open a ladle be a long staff with a piece of thin copper at the end, like half a cartrage, a ladle in breadth and length so much as will hold no more powder than the due charge for the piece it belong to. a sponge, a sponge be such. another staff with a piece of a lamb skin at the end about it to thrust up and down the piece, to take off the dust, moisture or spark of fire if any remain in. she a rammer and a rammer be. a bob of wood at the other end to ram home the powder and the wadding wadding. wadding be okum, old clout or straw. put after the powder and the bullet wood case. a case be make of two piece of hollow wood. join together like two half cartrage fit to put into the boar of a piece. case shot and a case shoot be any kind of small bullet, nail, old iron or the like to put into the case to shoot out of the ordnance or murderer. these will do much mischief when we lie board and board but for sponge and rammer they use now a stiff rope a little more than the length of the piece which you may turn and wind within board. as you will, with much more ease and safety than the other. round shoot be a round bullet for any piece. round shoot, cross bar shoot. crosbarshot be also a round shot, but it have a long spike of iron cast with it, as if it do go through the midst of it, the end whereof be common arm, for fear of burst the piece. to arm a shot which be to bind a little okum in a little canvas at the end of each pike. trundle shot. trundle shot be only a bolt of iron sixteen or eighteen inch in length at both end sharp point and about a handful from each end a round broad bowl of lead, according to the bear of the piece cast. upon it. langrell shot run loose with a shackell. langrill shot to be shorten when you put it into the piece and when it fly out it do spread itself. it have at the end of either bar a half bullet, either of lead or iron, chain shot. chain shot be two bullet with a chain betwixt. they and some be contrive round as in a ball, yet will spread in, fly their full length in breadth. all these be use when you be near a ship to shoot down mast, yard, shroud, tear the sail, spoil the man or any thing that be above the deck. fire work, firework be diverse and of many composition. arrow of wild fire, pike of wild fire, granados of diverse sort. brass ball as arrow trim with wild fire to stick in the sail or ship side shoot, burn. pike of wild fire to strike, burn into a ship side to fire she. there be also diverse sort of granados, some to break and fly in abundance of piece every way, as will your brass ball and earthen pot which, when they be cover with quarter bullet, stick in pitch and the pot fill with good powder, in a crowd of people will make a incredible slaughter. some will burn under water and never extinguish till the stuff be consume. some only will burn and fume out a most stink poison smoke some be, but only a oil. be anoint on anything make of dry wood will take fire. by the heat of the sun, when the sun shine hot. there be also a powder which be lay in like manner upon any thing subject to burn, will take fire if either any rain or water light upon it. but those invention be bad on shore but much worse at sea and be naught because so dangerous and not easy to be quench, and their practice worse because they may do as much mischief to a friend as to a enemy. therefore i will leave they as they be: powder, serpentine powder, gross corn powder, fine corn powder. there be also diverse sort of powder. the serpentine be like dust and weak and will not keep at sea but be moist. the common sort be great corn. powder but gross and only use in great ordnance your fine corn powder for hand gun. be in goodness as your salt-peter be oft refine. and from ten penny a pound to eighteen penny a pound, a tomkin. a tomkin be a round piece of wood. put into the piece mouth and cover with tallow. a fid and a fid, a little okum, make like a nail. put in at the toutch hole and cover with a thin lead bind above it to keep the powder dry in the piece. shackle shackle be a kind of ring, but not round. make like they at the hatch corn by which we take they up and lay they down. but big fix to the midst of the port within board. through which we put a billet to keep fast the port for fly open in soul weather which may easy endanger. to cloy a piece or poison she, if not sink the ship. to cloy or poison a piece, be to drive a nail into her toutch hole than you can give fire to uncloy and to uncloy she. be to put as much oil as you can about the nail to make it glib and by a train, give fire to she by her mouth and so blow it out. compass, calliper. compass, calliper belong to the gunner and be like two half circle that have a handle and joint like a pair of compass, but they be blunt at the point to open as you please. for to dispert a piece horn. prime iron. a horn be his touch box, his primer. be a small long piece of iron, sharp at the small end, to pierce the cartrage through the toutch hole. his lint stock be a handsome carve stick lint stock more than half a yard long, with a cock at the one end to hold fast his match and a sharp pike in the other to stick it fast upon the deck or platform. upright. gunner quadrant, dark lantern, mortar: the name of small piece and their implement. the gunner quadrant be to level a piece or mount she to any random. a dark lantern be as well to be use by any body as he for mortar or such chamber as. be only use for triumph. there be no use for they in this service but for curriour, hargabusacrock, musket, bastard-musket, coliver, crabut, carbins, long pistol or short pistol, bandiler, bullet, bag, worm, scowrer, melt, ladle, lead mould, quarter shot. there belong to they, bandiliers, bullet, bag, worm, scowrer, melt, ladle, lead mould of all sort to cast their shot quarter bullet, be but any bullet quarter in four or eight part, and all those be as useful a shipboard as on shore for the soul, trunk bear, fortification, the diversity of their metal and diverse other curious theorme or term use about great ordnance. there be so many uncertainty as well in her mount level upon her platform, as also the accident that may happen in the powder. the ground, the air, and difference inproportion. i will not undertake to prescribe any certain artificial rule. these proportion follow, be near the matter. but for your better satisfaction, read master dig, pantrimetria, master smith or master burn, art of gunnery or master robert nortons exposition upon master dig. any of those will show the theoric at large, but to be a good gunner you must learn it by practice. a table of proportion for the weight and shoot of great ordnance. note that seldom in ship they use any ordnance great than canon. nor have they any certainty, either at point blank or any random. note your serpentine powder in old time be in meal, but now corn and make strong and call canon corn powder. but that for small ordnance be call corn powder fine and aught to have in strength a quarter more, because those small piece be better fortify than the great. now, if you have but one sort of powder for all, abate @ part and cut off @ of the breadth and length of your ladle. but cartrage, be now, find the best and most ready, provide always that all shot must be a quarter less than the height of the piece. chap 15, how they divide their share in a man of war. what book and instrument be fit for a sea man, with diverse advertisement for sea man and the use of the petty tally. the ship have one three part, the victuallar the other three, the other three part be for the company and this be subdivide thus in share share. in english ship they seldom use any marshal who share, among the french be equal with the boatswaine, all the rest of the younker or fore-mast-man, according to their desert, some 3., some 2. and @, some 1. and ^ and the boy 1., which be a single share or 1. and @ or, as they do deserve. now the master or his right hand mate, the gunner, boatswain and four quarter master do make the share, not. the captain, who have only this privilege to take away half a share or a whole share at most, to give from one to another as he best please for, to learn to observe the altitude, latitude, longitude, amplitude, the variation of the compass, the sun azimuth and almicanter, to shift the sun and moon and know the tide, your room, prick your card, say your compass and get some of these book. but practice be the best. master wright, error of navigation, master tapps, seaman calendar, the art of navigation, the sea regiment, the seaman secret waggoner, master gunter' work, the seaman glass for the scale, the new attracter for variation. master wright for use of the globe, master hewes for the same instrument fit for a. seaman, compass so many pair and sort as you will: a astrolabe quadrant, a cross staff, a back staff, a astrolabe, a nocturnal young gentleman that desire command at sea, advertisement for young commander, captain and other officer ought well to consider the condition of his ship, victual and company, for if there be more learner than sailor, how slight soever many esteem sailor. all the work to save ship good and life must lie upon they, especial in foul weather, than their labour hazard, wet and cold be so incredible i can express it. it be not then, the number of they that here can say at home what i can do. i can quick learn, and what a great matter be it to sail a ship. or go to sea. sure, those for a good time will do more trouble than good. i confess it be most necessary. such shall go, but not too many in one ship, for if the labour of threescore shall lie upon thirty as many time it do, they be so overcharge with labour, bruise and over-straining themselves, they fall sick of one disease or other. for there be no dally nor excuse. with storm, gust overgrow sea and lee-shore, and when their victual be putrify it, endanger all man of all other profession in light, thunder, storm and tempest, with rain and snow may shelter themselves in dry house by good fire, but those be the chief time seaman must stand to their tackle and attend with all. diligence, their great labour upon the deck. many suppose any thing be good enough to serve man at sea, and yet nothing sufficient for they ashore, either for their health, for their ease, or estate or state. a commander at sea shall do well to think the contrary and provide for himself and company in like manner. also serious to consider what will be his charge to furnish himself at sea with bedding, linen, arm and apparel, how to keep his table aboard and his expense on shore and provide his petty tally, which be a competent proportion according to your number of these particular follow: ^he petty tally, fine wheat, flower, close and well pack rice, currand, sugar, prune, cinnamon, ginger pepper, clove, green, ginger oil, butter. holland cheese or old cheese wine, vinegar, canary sack, the best wine, the best water, the juice of lemon for the scurvy, white biscuit, oatmeal, gammon of bacon, dry neat tongue beef, pack up in vinegar, leg of mutton mince and stew and close pack up with try suet or butter in earthen pot to entertain stranger, marmalade, sucket, almond comfit and such, like some it may be will say i will have man rather to feast than fight the use of the petty tally, but i say the want of those necessary occasion. the loss of more man than in any english fleet, have be slay since 88. for when a man be ill or at the point of death, i will know whether a dish of butter rice with a little cinnamon, ginger and sugar, a little mince meat or roast beef, a few stew prune, a race of green ginger, a flap-iacke, a can of fresh water brew with a little cinnamon, ginger and sugar be not better than a little poor john. or salt fish with oil and mustard, or biscuit butter cheese or oatmeal pottage. on fish day, or on flesh day, salt beef, pork and pease with six shilling beer, this be your ordinary ship allowance, and good for they be. well if well. condition which be not always, as seaman can too well witness, and after a storm, when poor man be all wet and some have not so much as a cloth to shift, he shake with cold. few of those but will tell you a little sack or be much better to keep they in health than a little small beer or cold water. although it be sweet now that every one shall provide those thing for himself, few of they have either that providence or mean, and there be neither alehouse tavern nor inneto burn a faggot in neither grocer, poulterer, apothecary nor butcher shop, and therefore the use of this petty tally be necessary and thus to be employ as there be occasion to entertain stranger as they be in quality, every commander shall show himself as like himself as he can as well, for the credit of the ship, and his setter forth as himself. but in that herein every one may moderate themselves according to their own pleasure. therefore, i leave it to their own discretion and this brief discourse and myself to their friendly construction and good opinion.