how ancient author report the new-world now call america be discover and part thereof first plant by the english call virginia, with the accident and proceed of the same @ the first book for the story of arthur malgo and brandon that say a thousand year ago they be in the north of america, or the friar of linn that by his black art go to the north pole in the year 1360.. in that i know they not let this suffice. the chronicle of wales report that madock, son to owen quine, prince of wales, see his two brethren at debate who shall inherit, prepare certain ship with man and munition and leave his country to seek adventure by sea. leave ireland north, he sail west till. see his two brethren at debate who shall inherit, prepare certain ship with man and munition and leave his country to seek adventure by sea. leave ireland north, he sail west till he come to a land unknown. return home and relate what pleasant and fruitful country he have see without inhabitant and for what barren ground his brethren and kindred do murder one another. he provide a number of ship and get with he such man and woman as be desirous to live in quietness. that arrive with he in this new land in the year 1170, leave many of his people there and return for more. but where this place be, no history can show. the spaniard say: hanno, a prince of carthage be the first. year 1170, leave many of his people there and return for more. but where this place be, no history can show. the spaniard say hanno, a prince of carthage, be the first and the next. christopher cullumbus, a genoesian, who they send to discover those unknown part 1492.. but we find by record cullumbus offer his service in the year 1488. to king henry the seven and by accident undertake it for the spaniard. in the interim, king henry give a commission to john cabot and his three son, sebastian lewis and sautius. john and sebastian well provide, set sail range a great part of this unknown world in the year 1497. for though cullumbus have find certain isle, it be 1498. ere he see the continent which well provide, set sail range a great part of this unknown world in the year 1497.. for though cullumbus have find certain isle, it be 1498.. ere he see the continent which be a year after cabot. now americus come a long time after, though the whole continent to this day be call america after his name. yet sebastian cabot discover much more than they all, for he sail to about forty degree southward of the line and to sixty-seaven towards the north, for which king henry the eight, knight he and make he grand pilate of england be very age king edward the six, give he a pension of 166l 13, 4d yearly. by his direction, sir hugh willowby be send to find out the country of. of england be very age. king edward the six give he a pension of 166l 13, 4d yearly. by his direction, sir hugh willowby, be send to find out the country of russia, but the next year he be find freeze to death in his ship and all his company, mr martin frobisher, be send in the year 1576. by our most gracious queen elizabeth, to search for the northwest passage, and for which he be knight honour and well reward. sir humphrey gilbert, a worthy knight, attempt a plantation in some of those part and obtain letter patent to his desire. but with this proviso he shall maintain possession in some of those vast country within the term of six year. yet when he be provide with obtain letter patent to his desire. but with this proviso he shall maintain possession in some of those vast country within the term of six year. yet when he be provide with a navy able to encounter a king power? even here at home they fall in division and so into confusion that they give over the design ere it be begin. notwithstanding all this loss, his undaunted spirit begin again. but his fleet fall with new-found land and he perish in his return. as at large you may read in the three volume of the english voyage, write by mr hackluit, upon all those relation and inducement sir walter raleigh, a noble gentleman and then in great esteem, undertake to send, to discover to the southward and english voyage, write by mr hackluit. upon all those relation and inducement, sir walter raleigh, a noble gentleman and then in great esteem, undertake to send to discover to the southward, and though his occasion and other employment be such he can not go himself. yet he procure her majesty letter patent and persuade many worthy knight and gentleman to adventure with he to find a place fit for a plantation. their proceed follow. the most famous renown and ever worthy of all memory for her courage, learning, judgement and virtue, queen elizabeth grant her letter patent to sir walter raleigh for the discover and plant new land and country not actual possess by any christian. this patenty get to be his assistant, sir richard grenvell the valiant. patent to sir walter raleigh for the discover and plant new land and country not actual possess by any christian. this patenty get to be his assistant, sir richard grenvell, the valiant mr william sanderson, a great friend to all such noble and worthy action, and diverse other gentleman and merchant who with all speed provide two small bark well furnish with all necessary, under the command of captain philip amidas and captain barlow. the 27. of april they set sail from the thames. the ten of may pass the canary and the ten of june the west indies, which unneedfull southerly course. but then no better be know occasion they in that season, much sickness their arrival. the second of july they fall with the coast of. the west indies, which unneedfull southerly course. but then no better be know occasion they, in that season, much sickness. their arrival, the second of july, they fall, with the coast of florida, in water where they feel a most delicate, sweet smell, though they see no land which ere long, they espy, think it the continent. a hundred and twenty mile they sail, not find any harbour, the first that appear, with much difficulty they enter and anchor, and after, thanks to god, they go to view the next land adjoin to take possession of it for the queen, most excellent majesty which do. they find their first land place very sandy and low ^^pundance ^f ^ but so full of grape that the very surge of it for the queen most excellent majesty. which do they find their first land place very sandy and low ^^pundance ^f ^, but so full of grape that the very surge of the sea sometime over-flowed they, of which they find such plenty in all place, both on the sand, the green soil and hill, as in the plain, as well on every little shrub, as also climb towards the top of high cedar that they do think in the world be not the like abundance the i will of w^kokon. we pass by the seaside towards the top of the next hill. be not high, from whence we may see the sea on both side and find it a i will of twenty mile in length, and towards the top of the next hill be not high, from whence we may see the sea on both side and find it a i will of twenty mile in length and six in breadth. the valley replenish with goodly tall cedar, discharge our musket, such a flock of crane, the most white, arise by we with such a cry as if a army of man have shout altogether this. i will have many goodly wood and decree, coney and foul in incredible abundance and, use the author own phrase, the wood be not such as you find in bohemia, moscovia or hercinia, barren and fruitless, but the high and red cedar of the world in lybanus be not many better they of the indies or libanus pynes. you find in bohemia, moscovia or hercinia, barren and fruitless, but the high and red cedar of the world in lybanus be not many better. they of the indies or libanus pynes, cypress, saxefras, the lentisk that bear mastic and many other of excellent smell and quality. till the three day we see not any of the people. then in a little boat, three of they appear. one of they go on shore to who we row, and he attend we, without any sign of fear. after he have speak, much though we understand not a word of his own accord, he come bold, aboard. we, we give he a shirt, conference with a savage, a hat, wine and meat, which he like well, and after he have, word of his own accord. he come, bold, aboard we, we give he a shirt, conference with a savage, a hat, wine and meat which he like well, and after he have well, view the bark and we, he go away in his own boat and within a quarter of a mile of, we, in half a hour, have load his boat with fish with which he come again to the point of land and there divide it in two part point, one part to the ship, the other to the pinnace, and so depart. the next d^y come, diverse boat, and in one of they the king brother. the arrival of the king brother with forty or fifty man, proper people, and their behaviour very civil, his next d^y come diverse boat and in one of they the king brother. the arrival of the king brother with forty or fifty man, proper people and their behaviour very civil. his name be granganame^. the king be call wingina, the country wingandacoa. leave his boat a little from our ship. he come with his train to the point where spread a matte. he sit down though we come to he well arm. he make sign to we to sit down without any show of fear, stroke his head and breast and also we to express his love. after he have make a long speech unto we, we present he with diverse toy which he kind accept. he be great regard by his people for none of they. his love. after he have make a long speech unto we, we present he with diverse toy which he kind accept. he be great regard by his people, for none of they do sit nor speak a word, but four on who we bestow present also. but he take all from. they make sign all thing do belong to he. the king himself, in a conflict with a king, his next neighbour and mortal enemy, be shoot in two place through the body and the thigh, yet recover whereby he lie at his chief town, six day journey from thence. a day or two after, show they what we have trade with. the savage granganamco. take most like to a pewter dish, make a hole in it, hang. day journey from thence a day or two after. show they what we have trade with. the savage granganamco take most like to a pewter dish, make a hole in it, hang it about his neck. for a breastplate, for which he give we twenty dear skin worth twenty crown, and for a copper kettell fifty skin worth fifty crown. much other truck we have. and after two day he come aboard and do eat and drink with we very merry. not long after he bring his wife and child. they be but of mean stature, but well favour and very bashful. she have a long coat of leather and about her privity a piece of the same, about her forehead a band of white coral and so but well favour and very bashful. she have a long coat of leather and about her privity a piece of the same, about her forehead a band of white coral and so have her husband in her ear be bracelet of pearl hang down to her middle, or the bigness of great pease. the rest of the woman have pendant of copper and the nobleman five or six in a ear, his apparel as his wife. only the woman wear their hair long on both side and the man but on one. they be of colour yellow but their hair be black. yet we see child that have very fair chesnut colour hair. after that these woman have be here with we there come down from all part. yellow but their hair be black. yet we see child that have very fair chesnut colour hair after that. these woman have be here with we. there come down from all part, great store of people with leather coral and diverse kind of die. but when granganameo be present, none dare trade but himself and they that wear red copper on their head as he do. when ever he come, he will signify by so many fire. he come with so many boat that we may know his strength. their boat be but one great tree which be but burn in the form of a trough with gin and fire till it be as they will have it for a armour. he will have, engage we, a bag. which be, but burn in the form of a trough with gin and fire till it be as they will have it. for a armour he will have, engage we, a bag of pearl, but we refuse as not regard it that we. may the better learn where it grow. he be very just of his promise, for oft we trust he and he will come within his day to keep his word. he send we common every day a brace of buck, coney, hare and fish, sometime melon, walnut, note, cucumber, pease and diverse root. this author say their corn grow three time in five month: in may they sow in july, reap in june they sow in august, reap in july, sow in august, reap we. this author say their corn grow three time in five month: in may they sow in july, reap in june they sow in august. reap in july, sow in august reap. we put some of our pease in the ground which in ten day be 14. inch high. the soil be most plentiful, sweet, wholesome and fruitful. of all o^her there be about 14. several sort of sweet smell: timber tree, the most part of the underwood bay, and such like such oak as we, but far, great and better. after this acquaintance, myself with seven more go twenty mile into the river occam that run towards the city skicoack, and the evening follow we come to a- i will call roanoak from the harbour where we enter. more go twenty mile into the river occam that run towards the city skicoack, and the evening follow we come to a i will call roanoak, from the harbour where we enter 7. league, the isle roanoak, at the north end be 9 house build with cedar fortify, round with sharp tree and the entrance like a turnpik. when we come towards it, the wife of granganameo come run out to meet we- her husband be absent- command her people to draw our boat ashore for beat on the billow. the great courtesy of a woman other she appoint to carry we on their back, a land other to bring our oar into the house for steal when we come into the other room, for there be five. other she appoint to carry we on their back a land other to bring our oar into the house for steal. when we come into the other room- for there be five in the house- she cause we to sit down by a great fire after take off our clothes and wash they of some our stocking and some our foot in warm water, and she herself take much pain to see all thing well order and to provide we victual a banquet. after we have thus dry ourselves, she bring we into a inner room where she set on the board stand a long the house somewhat like frumenty, sodden venison and roast fish, in like manner, melon, raw boil, root and fruit of diverse kind there. where she set on the board stand a long the house somewhat like frumenty, sodden venison and roast fish in like manner, melon, raw boil, root and fruit of diverse kind. there drink be common water, boil with ginger, sometime with saxefras and wholesome herb, but while the crape last they drink wine. more love she can not express. to entertain we they care, but only to defend themselves from the short winter and feed on what they find natural in summer in this fea house. be their idol. of who they ^ould we uncredible thing. when we be at meat, two or three of her man come among we with their bow and arrow which cause we to take our arm in hand. she perceive our distrust. when we be at meat, two or three of her man come among we with their bow and arrow which cause we to take our arm in hand. she perceive our distrust, cause their bow and arrow to be break and they beat out of the gate. but the evening approach, we return to our boat where, at she much grieve, bring our supper, half boil, pot and all. but when she see we but put our boat a little off from the shore and lie at anchor, perceive our jealousy, she send diverse man and 30. woman to sit all night on the shore side against we and send we five mat to cover we from the rain. do all she can to persuade we to her. 30. woman to sit all night on the shore side against we and send we five mat to cover we from the rain. do all she can to persuade we to her house. though there be no cause of doubt, we will not adventure, for on our safety depend the voyage. but a more kind love people can be beyond this. i will be the main land and the great river occam, skicoac, a great town on which stand, a town call pomeiock and six day high, their city, skicoak. those people never see it but say: there, father, affirm it to be above two hour journey about into this river fall. a other call cipo, where be find many mustells, wherein be pearl. likewise, another river call say there, father, affirm it to be above two hour journey about. into this river. fall a other call cipo, where be find many mustells, wherein be pearl. likewise another river call nomapona, on the one side whereof stand a great town call chawanock. the lord of the country be not subject to wingandacoa, beyond he a other king, they call menatonon. these. 3. be in league each with other towards the south. 4. day journey be sequotan, the southermost part of wingandacoa, adjoin to secotan. begin the country pomovik belong to the king call pomovik. in the country nusiok, upon the great river neus. these have mortal war with wingina, king of wingandacoa, betwixt piemacum and the lord of secotan. a peace be conclude, notwithstanding there be in the country nusiok, upon the great river neus. these have mortal war with wingina, king of wingandacoa, betwixt, piemacum and the lord of secotan. a peace be conclude notwithstanding. there be a mortal malice in the secotun, because this piemacum invite diverse man and 30. woman to a feast, and when they be altogether merry before their idol, which be but a mere illusion of the devil, they sudden slay all the man of secotan and keep the woman for their use. beyond roanoak be many isle full of fruit and other natural increase with many town a long the side of the continent. those isle lie 200. mile in length and between they and the main a great long sea, in some place, 20., 40. or many town a long the side of the continent. those isle lie 200. mile in length and between they and the main a great long sea, in some place 20., 40. or 50. mile broad, in other more, somewhere less, and in this sea be 100 isle of diverse bigness but to get into it you have but 3. passage, and they very dangerous though this you see for most part be, but the relation of saluage, because it be the first, i think it not a mis^e to remember they as they be write by they that return and arrive in england about the midst of september the same year. this discovery be so welcome into england that it please her majesty to call this country of they that return and arrive in england about the midst of september the same year. this discovery be so welcome into england that it please her majesty to call this country of wingandacoa virginia. by which name. now you be to understand how it be plant, how the country be call virginia, dissolve, reun and enlarge. the performer of this voyage be these follow: philip amadas, captain arthur barlow, captain william grenuill, john wood, james browewich, henry greene, beniamen wood, simon ferdinando of the company, nicholas peryman of the company, john hewes of the company sir richard grenuill. voyage to virginia for sir walter raleigh ^^85. the 9 of april, he depart from plymouth with 7.. sail sir richard grenvils, voyage 1585.. the chief man with he in. richard grenuill. voyage to virginia. for sir walter raleigh ^^85. the 9 of april. he depart from plymouth with 7.. sail sir richard grenvils, voyage 1585.. the chief man with he in command be master ralph layne, master thomas candish, master john arundel, master stukley, master bremige, master vincent, master h^ryot and master john clarke. the 14. day we fall with the canary and the 7. of may with dominico. in the west indies, we land at portorico after, with much a do at izabella on the north of hispaniola, pass by many iles. upon the 20. we fall with the main of florida and be put in great danger. upon cape fear. the 26. we anchor at wocokon where the admiral have like to be cast away. 20. we fall with the main of florida and be put in great danger upon cape fear the 26. we anchor at wocokon, where the admiral have like to be cast away. present we send to wingina, to roanoak, and master arundel go to the main with manteo a savage, and that day to croo^on the 11. the general victual, for 8. day, with a select company go to the main and discover the town of pomeiok, aquascogoc, secctan and the great lake call paquipe. at aquascogoc, the indian steal a silver cup, wherefore we burn the town and spoil their corn. so return to our fleet at tocokon, whence we weigh for hatorask, where we rest, and king wingina, brother with m^nteo, come aboard our admiral, the the town and spoil their corn. so return to our fleet at tocokon, whence we weigh for hatorask, where we rest, and king wingina, brother, with m^nteo, come aboard our admiral. the admiral go for weapomeiok and master john arundel for england. our general, in his way home, take a rich load ship of 300.. tun, with which he arrive at plymouth the 18. of september 1585.. these be leave under the command of master ralph layne to inhabit the country, but they return within a year. philip amidas, admiral, master thomas heryot, master acton, master stafford, master thomas luddington, master maruyn cap vaughan, master gardiner, master kendal, master predeox, master rogers, master haruy, master snelling, master antony russee, master allen, master michael pollison, master thomas bockner, master. stafford, master thomas luddington, master maruyn cap vaughan, master gardiner, master kendal, master predeox, master rogers, master haruy, master snelling, master antony russee, master allen, master michael pollison, master thomas bockner, master james mason, master david salter, master james skinner, with diverse other, to the number of 108.. touch the most remarkable thing of the country, and our proceed from the 17 of august 1585.. till the 18. of june 1586.. their first plantation: we make roanoack our habitation, the utmost of our discovery. southward, be secotan, as we esteem, 80. league from roanoacke, the passage from thence be think a broad sound within the main, be without ken of land, yet full of flat and shall that our pinnace can not pass, and we have but one. from thence be, think, a broad sound within the main be without ken of land, yet full of flat and shall that our pinnace can not pass. and we have but one boat with 4. oar that will carry but 15. man with their provision for 7. day, so that because the winter approach, we leave those discovery till a strong supply. to the northward, our far be to a town of the chesapeack, from roanoack 130. mile. the passage be very shallow and dangerous by reason of the breadth of the sound and the little succour for a storm. but this teritory be 15. mile from the shore for pleasantn of seat, for temporature of climate, fertility of soil and commodity of the sea beside bear good. succour for a storm, but this teritory be 15. mile from the shore, for pleasantn of seat, for temporature of climate, fertility of soil and commodity of the sea beside bear, good wood, saxefras, walnut, etc. be not to be excel by any other whatsoever. there be sundry other king, they call weroances as the mangoack, trypanik and opposian which come to visit we to the northwest, our far be chawonock, from roanoack 130. chawonock mile. our passage lie through a broad sound but all fresh water and the channel navigable for a ship but out of it full of shovel. the town, by the way, by the water be passaquenock, the woman town, chepanoe, weapomciok. from muscamunge we enter the river and jurisdiction of chawonock, there it. of it full of shovel. the town, by the way, by the water, be passaquenock, the woman town, chepanoe, weapomciok. from muscamunge we enter the river and jurisdiction of chawonock. there it begin to straiten and at chawonock it be as thames, at lambeth betwixt. they, as we pass, be goodly high land on the left hand and there be a town call ohanock, chawonock, 700.. man, where be a great corn field. it be subject to chawonock, which be the great province upon the river and the town itself can put seven hundred man into the field beside the force of the re^t. the king, be lame but have more understanding than all the rest. the river of moratoc be more famous than all the rest and the field beside the force of the re^t. the king be lame but have more understanding than all the rest. the river of moratoc be more famous than all the rest and open into the sound of weapometok and where there be but a very small currant in chawonock, it have so strong a currant from the south-west as we doubt how to row against it. strange thing, they report of the head of this river and of moratoc itself, a principal town on it, and be thirty or forty day journey to the head. this lame king be call menatonon. menatonon, his relation of the i will of pearl and a rich mine and the sea by it. when i have he prisoner two day, he tell. lame king be call menatonon. menatonon, his relation of the i will of pearl and a rich mine and the sea by it. when i have he prisoner two day, he tell i that 3. d^yes journey in a canow up the river chawonock, then land and go four day journey northeast. there be a king who country lie on the sea but his best place of strength be a island in a bay environ with deep water, where he take that abundance of pearl that not only his skin and his noble but also his bed and house be garnish therewith. this king be at chawonock two year ago to trade with black pearl, his worst sort, whereof i have a rope, but they be naught. but bed and house be garnish therewith. this king be at chawonock two year ago to trade with black pearl, his worst sort, whereof i have a rope, but they be naught. but that king, he say, have store of white and have traffic with white man, for who he reserve they, he promise i guide to he, but advise i to go strong, for he be unwilling. stranger shall come in his country, for his country be populous and valiant man. if a supply have come in april, i resolve to have send a small bark to the northward to have find it, while i with small boat and 200. man will have go to the head of the river chawonock with sufficient guide by land inskonse myself. to the northward to have find it, while i, with small boat and 200. man will have go to the head of the river chawonock with sufficient guide, by land inskonse myself every two day, where i will leave garrison for my retreat, till i come to this bay, very near unto it be the river of moratoc, direct from the west. the head of it spring out of a main rock which stand so near the sea that in storm the sea beat over it into this fresh spring that of itself, at the surse, be a violent stream. i intend, with two wherry and forty person, to have menatonons son for guide, to try this present till i can meet with some of the moratock or be a violent stream. i intend, with two wherry and forty person, to have menatonons son for guide, to try this present till i can meet with some of the moratock or mangoak, but hope of get more victual from the saluage, we, as narrow escape, starve in that discovery. as ever, man do, pemissapan, his treachery for pemissapan, who have change his name of wingina upon the death of his brother granganameo have give both the chawonest and mangoak word of my purpose. also, he tell i, the chawonock have assemble two or three thousand to assault i at roanok, urge i daily to go against they and they against we, a great assembly, i find at my come thither, which sudden approach do so dismay they. to assault. i at roanok urge i daily to go against they and they against we. a great assembly, i find, at my come thither which sudden approach do so dismay they. the discovery of the river morat^c that we have the better of they and this confederacy against we be procure by pemissapan himself, our chief friend. we trust he send word also to the moratok and the mangoak: i come to invade they, that they all flee up into the high country so that where i assure myself both of succour and provision, i find all abandon, but be thus far on my journey, 160. mile from home and but victual for two day, beside the casualty of cross wind, storm and the saluage treachery though. find all abandon but be thus far on my journey, 160.. mile from home and but victual for two day, beside the casualty of cross wind, storm and the saluage treachery. though we intend no hurt to any, i give my company to understand we be only draw forth upon these vain hope by the saluage to bring we to confusion a noble resolution, a council we hold to go forward or return, but they all be absolute resolve but three that whilst there be but one pint of corn for a man, they will not leave the search of that river, for they have two mastiff dog which boil with saxefras leave if the worst fall out upon they and the pottage. they will live two day. leave the search of that river, for they have two mastiff dog which boil with saxefras. leave if the worst fall out upon they and the pottage they will live two day, which will bring they to the sound where they shall find fish-for two day more to pass it to roanock, which two day they have rather fast. then go back a foot till they have see the mangoak, either as friend or foe, though i do foresee the danger and misery. yet the desire i have to see the mangoak be for that there be a province call chaunis, temoatan, frequent by they and well know to all those country where be a mine of copper they call wassador, they say they take it out of. be a province call chaunis temoatan, frequent by they and well know to all those country, where be a mine of copper they call wassador. they say they take it out of a river that fall swift from high rock in shallow water, in great bowl, cover with leather, leave a part open to receive the mettle. the strange mine of chaunis temoatan which by the change of the colour of the water where the spout fall, they sudden chop down and have the bowlefull which they cast into the fire. it present melt and do yield in five part at the first melt. two part mettle for three of ore. the mangoak have such plenty of it, they beautify their house with great plate thereof. this the yield in five part at the first melt. two part mettle for three of ore. the mangoak have such plenty of it they beautify their house with great plate thereof. this the savage report, and young skiko, the king of chawonock, son, my prisoner, that have be prisoner among the mangoak^ but never at chaunis temoatan, for he say that be twenty day journey ove^ and from the mangoak. menatonon also confirm all this and promise i guide to this mettle country by land, to the mangoak, be but one day journey, but seven by water, which make i so willing to have meet they for some assay of this mettle. but when we come there we find no creature. only we may see where have be their. which make i so willing to have meet they for some assay of this mettle. but when we come there we find no creature. only we may see where have be their fire. after our two day journey and our victual spend in the evening we hear some call, as we think manteo, who be with i in the boat. this make we glad. he make they a friendly answer, which they answer with a song we think for welcome. but he tell we they come to fight present. they do let fly their arrow about the boat but do no hurt the other boat, scour the shore, we land, but they all be flee. and how to find they we know. not the great currant of the the boat but do no hurt the other boat, scour the shore, we land, but they all be flee. and how to find they, we know, not the great currant of the river morat^^. so the next morning we return to the mouth of the river. that cost we four day. row up and here our dog pottage stand we in good stead, for we have nothing else. the next day we fast, be windbound and can not pass the sound. but the day follow we come to chippanum where the people be flee but their wire afford we fish. thus be near spend the next day. god bring we to roanocke. i conclude, a good mine or the south sea will make this country quick inhabit and wire afford we fish. thus be near, spend the next day. god bring we to roanocke. i conclude. a good mine or the south sea will make this country quick inhabit and so for pleasure and profit comparable with any in the world. otherwise there will be nothing worth the fetch. provide there be find a better harbour than yet there be, which must be northward, if there be any master vaughan, no less hope of the goodness of the mine than master heriot, that the river moratock head either rise by the bay of mexico, or very near the south sea, or some part that open near the same, which can, with that facility, be do as from the bay of pearl by ensconce. four day journey. or very near the south sea or some part that open near the same, which can with that facility be do, as from the bay of pearl by ensconce four day journey to the chawonok, mangoak and moratock etc. the conspiracy of pemissapan, the discovery of it and our return for england with sir francis drake ensenore, a savage father to pemissapan, the best friend we have after the death of when i be in those discovery can not prevail any thing with the king from destroy we that all this time god have preserve by his good counsel to the king to be friendly unto we. the conspiracy of pemissapan. pemissapan, think as the brute be in this last journey we be slay and starve, begin to. his good counsel to the king to be friendly unto we, the conspiracy of pemissapan. pemissapan, think, as the brute be in this last journey we be slay and starve, begin to blaspheme our god that will suffer it and not defend we, so that old ensenore have no more credit for we, for he begin by all the device he can to invade we. but in the begin of this brute, when they see we all return the report false and have manteo and three saluage more with we, how little we esteem all the people we meet and fear neither hunger, kill or any thing and have bring their great king son prisoner with we to roanock it a little, assuage all his device and bring people we meet and fear neither hunger, kill or any thing, and have bring their great king, son, prisoner, with we to roanock it a little, assuage all his device and bring ensenore in respect again. that our god be good and we, their friend and our foe, shall perish, for we can do^ they more hurt, be dead then live, and that be a hundred mile from they shot and strike they sick to death, and that when we die it be but for a time than we return again, but that which wrought the most fear among they be the handiwork of almighty god. for certain day after my return, menatonon send messenger to i with pearl, and okisco, king of weopomcoke, to yield himself servant. most fear among they be the handiwork of almighty god. for certain day after my return, menatonon send messenger to i, with pearl and okisco, king of weopomcoke, to yield himself servant to the queen of england. okisco with twenty-foure of his principal man come to pemissapan to acknowledge this duty and subjection and will perform it all, which so change the heart of pemissapan that, upon the advice of ensenore, when we be ready to famish, they come and make we wire and plant their field. they intend to abandon we not have one corn till the next harvest to sustain we the death of a most rare savage. this be do our old friend ensenore die the twenty of april than all our enemy wrought with. till the next harvest to sustain we the death of a most rare savage. this be do our old friend ensenore die the twenty of april than all our enemy wrought with pemissapan to put in practice his device, which he easy embrace though they have plant corn by we, and at dasamonpeack, two league from we, yet they get okisco, our tributary, to get seven or eight hundred. and the mandoage, with the chisapeans, shall do the like to meet, as their custom be, to solemnize the funeral of ensenore, half of who shall lie hide to cut off the straggler, seek crab and provision. the rest come out of the main upon the signal by fire. twenty of the principal of pemissapan man have charge in. hide to cut off the straggler, seek crab and provision. the rest come out of the main upon the signal by fire. twenty of the principal of pemissapan man have charge in the night to beset my house, put fire in the reed that cover it, which may cause i run out so naked and amaze they may without danger knock out my brain. the same order for mr heriots and the rest for all shall have be fire at a instant. in the mean time they shall sell we nothing and in the night spoil our wire to make nenessitie disperse we, for if we be but ten together a hundred of they will not meddle with we. so our famine increase. i be force to send. our wire to make nenessitie disperse we, for if we be but ten together a hundred of they will not meddle with we, so our famine increase. i be force to send captain stafford to croatan with twenty to feed himself and see if he can espy any sail pass the coast. mr predeox with ten to hatarask upon the same occasion, and other small party to the main to live upon root and oyster pemissapan sequester himself. i shall not importune he for victual and to draw his troop. find not the chawonest so forward as he expect, be a people more faithful and powerful and desire our friendship and be offend with he for raise such tale and all his project be reveal to i by. as he expect, be a people more faithful and powerful and desire our friendship and be offend with he for raise such tale and all his project be reveal to i by skico, my prisoner, who find himself as well, use by i as pemissapan tell i all these trouble cause. i send to pemissapan to put suspicion in his head i be to go present to croatan to meet a fleet. come to i though i know no such matter and that he will lend i m^n to fish and hunt. he send i word he will come himself to roanock but delay time eight day that all his man be there to be assemble, not like so much company. i resolve the next day to go. he will come himself to roanock but delay time eight day that all his man be there to be assemble, not like so much company. i resolve the next day to go visit he, but first to give they in the i will, a canuissado and at a instant to seize on all their canoe about the i will. but the town take the alarm before i mean it, for when i send to take the canoe he meet one, go from the shore a slaughter of two savage, overthrow she and cut off two savage head. whereupon the cry arise: be by their spy, perceive, for they keep as good watch over we as we of they upon this. they to their bow and we to our. head. whereupon the cry arise: be by their spy, perceive, for they keep as good watch over we as we of they upon this. they to their bow and we to our arm. three or four of they at the first be slay, the rest flee into the wood. the next morning i go to dassamonpeack and send pemissapan word i be go to croatan and take he in my way to complain osocon will have steal my prisoner skico. hereupon he do abide my come and be among eight of the principal. i give the watchword to my man and immediate they have that they purpose for we himself be shoot through with a pistol, fall down as dead. pemissapan slay and ^ other but present start. watchword to my man, and immediate they have that they purpose for we himself be, shoot through with a pistol, fall down as dead. pemissapan slay and ^ other but present start up and run away from they all till a irish boy shoot he over the buttock where they take he and cut off his head. seven day after captain stafforton send to i, he descry twentie-three sail. the next day come to i himself, of who i must say this from the first to the last, he neither spare labour or peril by land or sea, fair weather or foul to perform any serious service commit to he. he bring i a letter from sir francis drake who generous mind offer to supply all my defect. or sea, fair weather or foul, to perform any serious service commit to he. he bring i a letter from sir francis drake who, generous mind, offer to supply all my defect of ship, boat, munition, victual, clothes and man. to further this action, and upon good consultation and deliberation, he appoint i a ship of 70. tun, a most generous courtesy of sir francis drake, with a hundred man and four month victual, two pinnace, four small boat with two sufficient master, with sufficient gangs. all this be make ready for i sudden arise such a storm for four day that have like to have drive the whole fleet on shore. many of they be force to the sea, whereof my ship so late give i be. a storm for four day that have like to have drive the whole fleet on shore. many of they be force to the sea, whereof my ship so late give i be one with all my provision and company. appoint, notwithstanding the storm, cease the general, appoint i a ship of 170.. tun, with all provision as before, to carry i into england the next august or when i have perform such discovery as i think fit. yet they dare not undertake to bring she into the harbour, but she must ride in the road, leave the care of the rest to myself. advise i to consider with my company what be fit, and with my best speed, return he answer hereupon, call my company together who be the care of the rest to myself, advise i to consider with my company what be fit, and with my best speed, return. he answer hereupon. call my company together who be all as privy of the general offer as myself. their whole request be in regard of all those former misery and no hope of the return of sir richard grenvill, and with a general consent they desire i to urge he virginia abandon. we may all go with he for england in his fleet. for who relief in that storm he have sustain more peril of wrack then in all his honourable action against his enemy. so, with praise to god, we set sail in june 1586. and arrive in portsmouth the 27. of july the. peril of wrack then in all his honourable action against his enemy. so, with praise to god, we set sail in june 1586.. and arrive in portsmouth the 27. of july the same year. leave this remembrance to posterity. to reason, lend i thy attentive ear, exempt thyself from mind-distracting care, lest that here thus project for thy good by thou reject. be ere understand. write by mr ralph layne, governor, the observation of mr thomas heriot in this voyage for merchandise and victual. what before be write be also confirm by that learned mathematician, mr thomas heriot, with they in the country, who particular relation of all the beast, bird, fish, fowl, fruit and root commodity, and how they may be useful. because i have write it. thomas heriot with they in the country, who particular relation of all the beast, bird, fish, fowl, fruit and root commodity, and how they may be useful, because i have write it before for the most part in the discourse of captain amidas and captain layne, except silk grass, wormesilke, flax like hemp, alum, wapeith or tar, rosen and turpentine, civet-cat, iron over copper that hold silver coprose and pearl. let those brief suffice because i will not trouble you with one thing twice: die for dyes, showmack. the herb wasebur, little root call chapacor, die and the bark of a tree call by the inhabitant tangomockonominge, which be for diverse sort of red. what more than be relate be. a herb in dutch call melden, describe like. and the bark of a tree, call by the inhabitant tangomockonominge, which be for diverse sort of red, what more than be relate be a herb. in dutch call melden describe like a orange. grow four foot high. the seed will make good broth, a strange salt, and the stalk burn to ash, make a kind of salt- other salt, they know not, and we use of it for potherb of their tobacco. we find plenty which they esteem. their chief physic rootes ground nut tiswaw we call china root. they grow in cluster and bring forth a briar stalk but the leaf be far unlike which will climb up to the top of the high tree. the use know be to cut it in small piece than. forth a briar stalk but the leaf be far unlike which will climb up to the top of the high tree. the use know be to cut it in small piece than stamp and strain it with water and boil, make a jelly good to eat. cassavia grow in marsh which the indian oft use for bread and broth. habascon be like a parsnip, naught of itself except compound and their leek like those in england. fruit that be strange: sequenummener, a kind of berry like caper, and three kind of berry like acorn, call sagatamenor, osamenor and pummuckoner. beast extraordinary, saquenuckot and maquowoc, two kind of beast great than coney and very good meat. in some place such plenty of gray coney like hair that all the osamenor and pummuckoner beast, extraordinary saquenuckot and maquowoc, two kind of beast great than coney and very good meat. in some place, such plenty of gray coney like hair that all the people make they mantle of their skin. i have the name of 28.. several sort that be disperse in the country, of which 12. kind we have discover and good to eat. but the savage sometime kill a lion and eat he fish. there be plenty of sturgeon in february, march, april and may, all herring in abundance, some such as we, but the most part of 18.20 or 24.. ynche^, long and more, trout, porpiss, ray, mullers, old-wife, pla^ce, tortoise, both by sea and land, crab, oyster, mussel, scalop, periwinkle crevice, secanank, we have the. most part of 18.20 or 24.. ynche^, long and more, trout, porpiss, ray, mullers, old-wife, pla^ce, tortoise, both by sea and land, crab, oyster, mussel, scalop, periwinkle, crevice, secanank- we have the picture of 12.. sort more, but their name we know not: fowl, turkey, stockdove, partridge, crane, heron, swan goose, parrot, falcon, merlin. i have the name in their language of 86.. several sort, their wood be such as we in england for the most part, except rakeock, a grea^ sweet tree whereof they make their canowes, and ascopo, a kind of tree like laurel and saxefras. their nature and manner, their clothing, town house, war, art, tool, handy craft and education be much like they in that part of virginia we now inhabit, which at large and saxefras, their nature and manner, their clothing, town house, war, art, tool, handy craft and education, be much like they in that part of virginia we now inhabit, which at large you may read in the description thereof, but the relation of their religion be strange, as this author report their religion, some religion they have, which, although it be far from the truth, yet be as it be, there be hope. it may be the easy reform. they believe there be many god, which they call mantoac, but of different sort and degree. also that there be one chief god that have be from all eternity, who, as they say, when he purpose first to make the world how the world be make, make first other. that there be one chief god that have be from all eternity, who, as they say, when he purpose first to make the world, how the world be make, make first other god of a principal order to be as instrument to be use in the creation and government to follow, and after the sun, moon and star, as petty god and the instrument of the other order, more principal, first, they say, be make water, out of which by the god be make all diversity of creature that be visible or invisible, how man be make for mankind, they say, a woman be make first, which by the work of one of the god conceive and bring forth child, and so they have their beginning. but how? make for mankind. they say a woman be make first, which, by the work of one of the god, conceive and bring forth child. and so they have their beginning. but how many year or age since? they know not, have no record, but only tradition from father to son how they use their god. they think that all the god be of human shape and therefore represent they by image in the form of man, which they call kewasowok. one alone be call kewasa. they they place in their temple where they worship, pray, sing and make many offering the common sort. think they also god whether they go after death? they believe the immortality of the soul when life depart from the body. according to the and make many offering the common sort, think they also god, whether they go after death. they believe the immortality of the soul. when life depart from the body, according to the good or bad work it have, do it be c^rried up to the tabernacle of the god to perpetual happiness, or to popogusso, a great pit which they think to be at the further part of the world where the sun set and there burn continual? to confirm this, they tell i of two man that have be late dead and revive again. the one happen but few year before our come into the country, of a bad man which be dead and bury the next day the earth over he be see to move, be. one happen, but few year before our come into the country, of a bad man which be dead and bury the next day the earth over. he be see to move, be take up. who tell they his soul be very near, enter into popogusso, have not one of the god, save he and give he leave to return again to teach his friend what they shall do to avoid such torment. the other happen the same year. we be there, but sixty mile from we, which they tell i for news, that one be dead, bury and take up as the first show two man rise from death that although his body have lie dead in the grave, yet his soul live and have travail far in bury and take up as the first show. two man rise from death that although his body have lie dead in the grave, yet his soul live and have travail far in a long, broad way on both side, whereof grow more sweet, fair and delicate tree and fruit than ever he have see before. at length he come to most brave and fair house, near which he meet his father that be dead long ago, who give he charge to go back to show his friend what good there be to do, to enjoy the pleasure of that place which, when he have do he shall come again. what subtlety so ever be in the weroances and priest. this opinion work so much in the common sort. pleasure of that place which, when he have do, he shall come again. what subtlety so ever be in the weroances and priest, this opinion work so much in the common sort that they have great respect to their governor, the subtlety of their priest, and as great care to avoid torment after death and to enjoy bliss. yet they have diverse sort of punishment, according to the offence, according to the greatness of the fact, and this be the sum of their religion, which i learn by have special familiarity with their priest, wherein they be not so sure ground nor give such credit, but through converse with we, they be bring into great doubt of their own and no small admiration of we, of which many be not so sure ground nor give such credit, but through converse with we they be bring into great doubt of their own and no small admiration of we, of which many desire to learn more than we have mean, for want of utterance in their language to express most thing they see with we as mathematical instrument, sea compass, their simplicity, the virtue of the loadstone perspective, glass burn, glass clock to go of themselves, book write gun and such like so far exceed their capacity that they think they be rather the work of god than man, or at least the god have. teach we how to make they, which love we so much, better than they and cause many of they give credit to what god than man, or at least the god have. teach we how to make they, which love we so much, better than they and cause. many of they give credit to what wespake concern our god. in all place where i come, i do my best to make his immortal glory know and i tell they, although the bible i show they contain all yet of itself, it be not of any such virtue as i think they do conceive. notwithstanding, many will be glad to touch it, to kiss and embrace it, to hold it to their breast and head and strike all their body over with it. the king wingina, where we dwell, will oft be with we at prayer. twice he be exceed sick and to their breast and head and strike all their body over with it. the king wingina, where we dwell, will oft be with we at prayer. twice he be exceed sick and like to die and doubt of any help from his priest. their desire of salvation think he be in such danger for offend. we and our god send for some of we to pray and be a mean to our god. he may live with he after death and so do many other in the like case. one other strange accident leave, other will i mention before i end, which move the whole country that either know or hear of we to have we in wonderful admiration. there be no town where they have practise any. i mention before i end, which move the whole country that either know or hear of we to have we in wonderful admiration. there be no town where they have practise any villainy against we. we leave it unpunished because we seek by all possible mean to win they by gentleness. but within a few day after our departure they begin to die a wonderful accident in some town, twenty, in some forty, in some sixty, and in one a hundred and twenty, which be very many in respect of their number. and this happen in no place we can learn where we have be, but where they have use some practice to betray we. and this disease be so strange they neither know what it be nor no place we can learn where we have be, but where they have use some practice to betray we and this disease be so strange. they neither know what it be nor how to cure it, nor have they know the like time out of mind. a thing special observe by we, as also by themselves, in so much that some of they, who be our friend especial wingina, have observe such effect in four or five town that they be persuade it be the work of god through our mean, and that we by he may kill and slay who we will without weapon, and not come near they and thereupon, when they have any understanding that any of their enemy abuse we in our journey. they may kill and slay who we will without weapon and not come near they, and thereupon, when they have any understanding that any of their enemy abuse we in our journey, they will entreat we. we will be a mean to our god that they, as the other that have deal ill with we, may die in like sort, although we show they their request be ungodly and that our god will not subject himself to any such request of man, but all thing as he please come to pass, and that we, to show ourselves his true servant, ought rather to pray for the contrary. yet, because the effect sell out so sudden after, according to their desire, they think it come to pass by our mean. his true servant ought rather to pray for the contrary. yet because the effect sell out so sudden after, according to their desire, they think it come to pass by our mean and will come give we thanks in their manner that though we satisfy they not in word, yet in deed, we have fulfil their desire. their strange opinion, this marvelous accident in all the country wrought so strange opinion of we that they can not tell whether to think we god or man, and the rather that all the space of their sickness there be no man of we know to die or much sick. they note also we have no woman nor care for any of they. some therefore think we be not bear of. be no man of we know to die or much sick. they note also we have no woman, nor care for any of they. some therefore think we be not bear of woman and therefore not mortal, but that we be man of a old generation many year past and rise again from immortality. some will prophesy there be more of our generation yet to come, to kill they and take their place, those that be to come after we. they imagine to be in the air, yet invisible and without body, and that they, by our entreaty for love of we do, make the people die as they do by shoot invisible bullet into they to confirm this, their physician to excuse their ignorance in cure the our entreaty for love of. we do make the people die as they do by shoot invisible bullet into they to confirm this their physician to excuse their ignorance. in cure the disease will make the simple people believe that the string of blood they suck out of the sick body be the string wherein the invisible bullet be tie and cast. some think we shoot they ourselves from the place where we dwell and kill the people that have offend we as we list how far distant soever, and other say it be the special work of god for our sake, as we have cause in some sort to think. no less whatsoever. some do or may imagine to the contrary, especial some astrologer, by the eclipse. work of god for our sake, as we have cause in some sort to think, no less whatsoever some do or may imagine to the contrary, especial some astrologer, by the eclipse of the sun we see that year before our voyage, and by a comet which begin to appear but a few day before the sickness begin, but to exclude they from be the special cause of so special a accident, there be far reason than i think fit to present or allege these their opinion. i have set down that you may see. there be hope to embrace the truth and honour, obey fear and love we by good deal and government though some of our company towards the latter end, before we come away with. be hope to embrace the truth and honour. obey fear and love we by good deal and government though some of our company, towards the latter end, before we come away with sir francis drake, show themselves too furious in slay some of the people in some town upon cause that on our part may have be bear with more mildness notwithstanding, they just have deserve it. the best, nevertheless, in this as in all, action beside be to be endeavour and hope, and of the worst that may happen, notice to be take with consideration and as much as may be eschew the better to allure they hereafter to civility and christianity call. thus you may see how nature herself delight herself in sundry instrument that sundry. and as much as may be eschew, the better. to allure they hereafter to civility and christianity call. thus you may see how nature herself delight herself in sundry instrument, that sundry thing be do to deck the earth with ornament. nor suffer she, her servant. all shall run one race, but will the walk of every one frame in a diverse pace, that diverse way and diverse work. the world may better grace. write by thomas heriot, one of the voyage, how, sir richard grenvill go to relieve they in the year of our lord 1586.. sir walter raleigh and his associate prepare a ship of a hundred tun, fraught plentiful of all thing necessary, but before they set sail from england, it be easter and arrive. 1586.. sir walter raleigh and his associate prepare a ship of a hundred tun, fraught plentiful of all thing necessary. but before they set sail from england it be easter and arrive at hatora^k, they, after some time, spend in seek the colony up in the country and not find. they return with all the provision again to england about 14. or 15.. day after sir richard grenvill, accompany with three ship well appoint, arrive there who not find the aforesaid ship, according to his expectation, nor hear any news of the colony there seat and leave by he as be say 1585.. travail up and down to seek they, but when he can hear no news of they and find their habitation, abandon unwilling to lose the leave by he as be say 1585.. travail up and down to seek they, but when he can hear no news of they and find their habitation abandon. unwilling to lose the possession of the country, sir richard grenvill leave fifty ^en. after good deliberation, he land fifty man in the i will of roanoak, plentiful furnish with all manner of provision for two year, and so return for england where many begin strange to of those cross beginning and he which cause- i remember a old say of euripides- who broach aught that be new, to fool untaught himself shall judge, be unwise and good for naught. three ship more send to relieve they by mr white. we go the old course by the west indies master. to fool untaught himself shall judge, be unwise and good for naught. three ship more send to relieve they by mr white. we go the old course by the west indies. master white, his voyage 1687.. and simon ferdinando, our continual pilot, mistake virginia for cape, fear we sail not much to have be cast away upon the conceit of our all-knowing ferdinando, have it not be prevent by the vigilancy of captain stafford. we come to hatorask the 22. of july and with forty of our best man intend at roanoack to find the 50 man leave by sir richard grenvill, but we find nothing but the bone of a man and where the plantation have be, the house unhurt but overgrow with weed and the fort. man leave by sir richard grenvill, but we find nothing but the bone of a man and where the plantation have be, the house unhurt but overgrow with weed and the fort deface which much perplex we. by the history, it seem simon ferdinando do what he can to bring this voyage to confusion. but yet they all arrive at hatorask, they repair the old house at roanock and master george, how one of the council straggle abroad, one of the council slay, be slay by the savage not long after master stafford with 20.. man go to croatan with manteo, who friend dwell there, of who we think to have some news of our 50 man, they at first make show to fight. but when they hear go to croatan with manteo, who friend dwell there of, who we think, to have some news of our 50 man, they at first make show to fight, but when they hear manteo they throw away their arm and be friend and desire. there may be a token give to be know by lest we may hurt they by misprision, as the year before one have be by master layne. that be ever their friend and there present, yet lame. the next day we have conference with. they concern the people of secotan, aquascogoc and pomeiok. will they of croatan to see if they will accept our friendship and renew our old acquaintance which they willing embrace and promise to bring their king and governor to roanoak to. will they of croatan, to see if they will accept our friendship and renew our old acquaintance, which they willing embrace and promise to bring their king and governor to roanoak to confirm it. we also understand that, master, how be slay by the man of wingina of dassamonpeack and by they of roanoack. that the fifty man leave by sir richard grenvill be sudden set upon by three hundred of secotan aquascogoc. how the fifty man be slain^ and dassamonpeack first, they intrude themselves among 11 of they by friendship. one they slay, the rest retire to their house. they set they on fire. that our man, with what come next to hand, be force to make their passage among they where one of they be shoot. retire to their house, they set they on fire that our man with what come next to hand be force to make their passage among they, where one of they be shoot in the mouth and present die and a savage slay by he on both side more be hurt. but our man retire to the water side, get their boat and ere they have row a quarter of a mile towards hatorask, they take up four of their fellow gather, crab and oyster. at last they land on a little. i will by hatorask where they remain a while, but after depart they know not whether. so take our leaf of the croatans. we come to our fleet at hatorask. the governor have long expect the king. they remain a while but after depart they know not whether so. take our leaf of the croatans. we come to our fleet at hatorask. the governor have long expect the king and governor of pomeiok, secotan, aquascogoc and dassamonpeack and the 7. day expire and no news of they be. also inform by those of croatan that they of dassamonpeack, slay master how and be at the drive our man from raonoack, he think no long to defer the revenge, wherefore, about midnight, with captain stafford and twentie-foure man, whereof manteo be one for our guide that behave himself towards we as a most faithful english man, he set forward a ill misprision. the next day, by break of day we land and get beyond their house. guide that behave himself towards we as a most faithful english man, he set forward a ill misprision. the next day, by break of day, we land and get beyond their house. where see they sit by the fire. we assault they, the miserable soul amaze, flee into the reed where one be shoot through and we think to have be full revenge. but we be deceive, for they be our friend, come from croatan to gather their corn because they understand our enemy be, flee after the death of master how and leave all behind. they for the bird, but they have like to have pay too dear for it. have we not chance upon a weroances wife with a child at her back and a savage they for the bird, but they have like to have pay too dear for it. have we not chance upon a weroances wife with a child at her back and a savage that know captain stafford that run to? he call he by his name. be thus disappoint of our purpose. we gather the fruit we find ripe, leave the rest unspoyl and take menatonon, his wife with her child, and the rest with we, to roanoak. though this mistake grieve manteo, yet he impute it to their own folly because they have not keep promise to come to the governor at the day appoint the 13. of august. our savage manteo be christen and call lord of dassamonpeack in reward of his faithfulness, and the 18 a. to come to the governor at the day. appoint: the 13. of august, our savage manteo be christen and call lord of dassamonpeack, in reward of his faithfulness, and the 18, a child bear in virginia. ellinor the governors, daughter and wife to ananias, dare be deliver of a daughter in roanoak which be the first christian there bear be call virginia. our ship be ready to depart. such a storm arise as the admiral be force to cut her cable and it be six day ere she can recover the shore that make we doubt she have be lose because the most of her best man be on shore at this time. controversy do grow betwixt, our governor and the assistant about. choose one of they 12.. she have be lose because the most of her best man be on shore at this time. controversy do grow betwixt our governor and the assistant about choose one of they 12. to go as factor for they all to england, for all refuse save one, who all man think most insufficient. the conclusion be by a general consent. they will have the governor go himself, for that they think. none will. so true, procure there supply as he. a controversy who to send for factor to england, which, though he do what he can to excuse it. yet their importunity will not cease till he undertake it and have it under all their hand. how unwilling he be, but that necessity and reason do double constrain. he. excuse it. yet their importunity will not cease till he undertake it and have it under all their hand. how unwilling he be. but that necessity and reason do double constrain. he at their set sail for england, weigh anchor. twelve of the man in the flyboat be throw from the capstern by the break of a bar and most of they so hurt that some never recover it the second time. they have the like fortune be but 15.. they cut the cable and keep company with their admiral to flower and the admiral stay there, look for purchase. but the flyboat man grow so weak they be. drive to smerwick in the west of ireland, the governor go for england and simon ferdinando with much ado. there look for purchase, but the flyboat man grow so weak they be. drive to smerwick in the west of ireland. the governor go for england and simon ferdinando, with much ado, at last arrive at portsmouth, 1587.. the name of those be land in this plantation be john white, governor roger bayley, ananias dare, simon ferdinando, christopher couper, thomas stevens, john samson, thomas smith, harvey, roger, prat, george how, antony cage, with diverse other to the number of about 115.. the five voyage to virginia undertake by mr john white, 1589.. the 20. of march, three ship go from plymouth, master white, his return to virginia and pass betwixt barbary and mogadoro to dominico in the west indies. after we have do some exploit in those part. three ship go from plymouth, master white, his return to virginia, and pass betwixt barbary and mogadoro to dominico in the west indies. after we have do some exploit in those part, the three of august, we fall with the low sandy isle westward of wokokon, but by reason of ill weather it be the 11 ere we can anchor there, and on the 12. we come to croatan, where be a great breach in 35 degree and a half in the north-east point of the, i will the 15.. we come to hatorask in 36. degree and a terse at 4. fathom, 3 league from shore where we may perceive a smoke at the place where i leave the colony 1587.. the next morning, captain, cook, captain. degree and a terse at 4.. fathom 3 league from shore where we may perceive a smoke at the place where i leave the colony 1587.. the next morning captain cook, captain spicer and their company with two boat leave ^ur ship and discharge some ordnance to give they notice of our come. but when we come there we find no man nor sign of any that have be there late and so return to our bo. the next morning we prepare again for roanoack. captain spicer have then send his boat ashore for water so it be ten of the clock ere we put from the ship which ride two mile from the shore, the admiral boat be a mile before the other as she pass the. it be ten of the clock, ere we put from the ship which ride two mile from the shore, the admiral boat be a mile before the other as she pass the bar. a sea break into the boat and fill her half full of water. but by god, good will and the careful stearage of captain cook, though our provision be much wet, we safe escape the wind blow hard at north-east which cause so great a current and a breach upon the bar. captain spicer pass half over, but by the indiscreet steer of ralph skinner their boat be overset. the man that can catch hold hang about she. the next sea cast she on ground where some let go their hold to wade to shore. ralph skinner. their boat be overset. the man that can catch hold hang about she. the next sea cast she on ground where some let go their hold to wade to shore, but the sea beat they down. captain spicer and seven other drown. the boat thus toss up and down, captain spicer and skinner hang there till they be drown. but 4. that can swim a little, keep themselves in deep water, be save by the mean of captain cook that, present upon the oversetting of their boat, ship himself to save what he can. thus, of eleven, seven of the chief be drown. this so discomfit all the sailor. we have much to do to get they any more to seek further for the planter, but thus of eleven, seven of the chief be drown. this so discomfit all the sailor. we have much to do to get they any more to seek further for the planter, but by their captain forwardness at last they fit themselves again for hatorask in 2 boat with 19 person. it be late ere we arrive but see a fire through the wood. we sound a trumpet but no answer can we hear. the next morning we go to it but can see nothing but the grass and some rot tree burn. we go up and down the i will and at last find three fair roman letter carve cro which present we know to signify the place where i shall find they, according to a secret note. down the, i will and at last find three fair roman letter carve, cro which present, we know, to signify the place where i shall find they, according to a secret note between they and i, which be to write the name of the place they will be in upon some tree, door or post and, if they have be in any distress to signify it by, make a cross over it, for at my departure they intend to go fifty mile into the main but we find no sign of distress. then we go to a place where they be leave in sundry house, but we find they all take down and the place strong enclose with a high palizado, very fortlike, and in one of the a place where they be, leave in sundry house. but we find they all take down and the place strong enclose with a high palizado, very fortlike, and in one of the chief post carve in fair capital, letter, croatan, without any sign of distress. they find where they have bury their provision and many bar of iron, two pig of lead, four fowler iron shot and such like heavy thing throw here and there, overgrow with grass and weed. we go by the shore to seek for their boat but can find none, nor any of the ordnance i leave. they at last, some of the sailor find diverse chist, have be hide and dig up again and much of the good spoil and scatter up and of the ordnance i leave, they at last, some of the sailor find diverse chist, have be hide and dig up again and much of the good spoil and scatter up and down, which when i see i know three of they to be my own but book picture and all thing else be spoil. though it much grieve i, yet it do much comfort i that i do know they be at croatan. so we return to our ship but have like to have be cast away by a great storm that continue all that night. the next morning we weigh anchor for croatan, have the anchor apike, the cable break by the mean, whereof we lose another, let fall the three, the ship yet go. so night. the next morning we weigh anchor for croatan, have the anchor apike, the cable break by the mean, whereof we lose another, let fall the three, the ship yet go. so fast a drift we fail. not much there to have split, but god, bring we into deep water. consider, we have but one anchor and our provision near spend. we resolve to go forthwith to s john isle, hispaniola, or trinidado, to refresh ourselves and seek for purchase that winter and the next spring come again to seek our countryman. but our vice admiral will not but go direct for england and we our course for trinidado, but within two day after the wind change we be constrain for the western isle to refresh ourselves where. will not but go direct for england, and we our course for trinidado, but within two day after the wind change, we be constrain for the western isle to refresh ourselves, where we meet with many of the queen ship, our own consort and diverse other. the end of this plantation, the 23. of seeptember 1590.. and thus we leave, seek our colony that be never any of they find, nor see to this day, 1622.. and this be the conclusion of this plantation, after so much time, labour and charge consume, whereby we see not all at once, nor all alike, nor ever, have it be that god do offer and confer his blessing upon man. write by master john white, a brief relation of the description. all at once, nor all alike, nor ever. have it be that god do offer and confer his blessing upon man. write by master john white a brief relation of the description of elizabeth isle and some other towards the north part of virginia and what else they discover in the year 1602.. by captain bartholomew gosnoll and captain bartholomew gilbert and diverse other gentleman, their associate, 12. year it lay dead. all hope of virginia thus abandon. it lay dead and obscure from 1590. till this year 1602.. that captain gosnoll, with 32. and himself in a small bark, set sail from dartmouth upon the 26. of march, though the wind favour we not at the first but force we as far southward as the asore, which in a small bark, set sail from dartmouth upon the 26. of march, though the wind favour we not at the first but force we as far southward as the asore, which be not much out of our way. we run direct west from thence, whereby we make our journey short than heretofore by 500 league. the weakness of our ship, the badness of our sailor and our ignorance of the coast cause we carry but a low sail that make our passage long than we expect. on friday, the 11. of may, we make land. it be somewhat low where appear certain hummock or hill in it. the shore white sand, but very rocky, yet overgrow with fair tree. come to a anchor: 8 indian in a. it be somewhat low, where appear certain hummock or hill in it. the shore, white sand, but very rocky, yet overgrow with fair tree. come to a anchor 8 indian in a baske, shallop with mast and sail, come bold aboard. we, it seem, by their sign and such thing as they have. some biskiner have fish there be about the latitude of 43. but the harbour be naught and doubt the weather. we go not ashore but weigh and stand to the southward into the sea. the next morning we find ourselves embay with a mighty headland within a league of the shore. we anchor their first land and captain gosnoll, myself and three other go to it in our boat. be a white sand and a. mighty headland within a league of the shore. we anchor their first land and captain gosnoll, myself and three other go to it in our boat. be a white sand and a bold coast, though the weather be hot. we march to the high hill. we can see where we perceive this headland, part of the main near environ with land. as we be return to our ship, a good, proper, lusty young man come to we with who we have but small conference and so we leave. he herein 5. or 6. hour. we take more cod than we know what to do with, which make we persuade ourselves there may be find a good fish in march, april and may. at length we come among these. more cod than we know what to do with, which make we persuade ourselves there may be find a good fish in march, april and may. at length we come among these fair isle, some, a league martha vineyard, 2.3.5 or 6.. from the main, by one of they we anchor, we find it four mile in compass without house or inhabitant in it, be a lake near a mile in circuit. the rest overgrow with tree which so well as the bush be so overgrow with vine we can scarce pass they and by the blossom we may perceive there will be plenty of strawberry, respises, gousberry and diverse other fruit. beside dear and other beast we see and crane, heron with divers other sort of foul. blossom we may perceive there will be plenty of strawberry, respises, gousberry and diverse other fruit. beside dear and other beast we see and crane, heron with divers other sort of foul which make we call it martha vineyard. the rest of the isle be replenish with such like very rocky elizabeth island and much tinctured stone like mineral, though we meet many indian, yet we can not see their habitation. they give we fish, tobacco and such thing as they have. but the next isle we arrive at be but two league from the main and 16. mile about environ. so with creek and cove it seem like many isle link together by small passage like bridge in it be many place of plain grass and such. and 16. mile about environ. so with creek and cove it seem like many isle link together by small passage like bridge. in it be many place of plain grass and such other fruit and berry as before be mention. in mid-may we do sow wheat, barley, oates and pease which in 14. day spring up 9 inch. the soil be fat and lusty, the crust thereof gray, a foot or less in depth. it be full of high timber oak, their leaf thrice so broad as we cedar straight, and tall beech, holly, walnut, hazel, cherry tree, like we, but the stalk bear the blossom or fruit thereof like a cluster of grape, forty or fifty in a bunch. there be a tree of orange colour. who? cherry tree like we, but the stalk bear the blossom or fruit thereof like a cluster of grape, forty or fifty in a bunch. there be a tree of orange colour who bark in the fill be as smooth as velvet. there be a lake of fresh water three mile in compass, in the midst a isle, contain a acre or thereabouts overgrow with wood. here be many tortoise and abundance of all sort of fowl who, young one, we take and eat at our pleasure. ground nut as big as egg, as good as potato and 40. on a string, not two inch under ground, all sort of shell, fish as schalops, mussel, cockle, crab, lobster, welk, oyster, exceed good and very great, but not to cloy. and 40. on a string, not two inch under ground, all sort of shell fish as schalops, mussel, cockle, crab, lobster, welk, oyster, exceed good and very great. but not to cloy you with particular what god and nature have bestow on those place, i refer you to the author own write. at large we call this isle elizabeth isle, from whence we go right over to the main where we stand a while as ravish at the beauty and dilicacy of the sweetness beside diverse, clear lake, whereof we see no end, and meadow very large and full of green grass, etc. here we espy 7.. savage at first, they express some fear, but by our courteous usage of they they follow we to the neck of. large and full of green grass, etc. here we espy, 7. savage, at first they express some fear, but by our courteous usage of they they follow we to the neck of land which we think have be sever from the main. but we find it otherwise. here we imagine be a river, but because the day be far spend, we leave to discover it till better leisure. but of good harbour there be no doubt. consider the land be all rocky and break land. the next day we determine to fortify ourselves in the isle in the lake. three week we spend in, build we there a house, but the second day after our come from the main 11. canoe with near 50. savage come towards we. in the lake. three week we spend in build we there a house but the second day after our come from the main 11. canoe with near 50. savage come towards we. be unwilling, they shall see our building. we go to and exchange with they knife, hatchet, bead, bell and such trifle for some bever, lyzard, martin, fox, wild cat skin and such like. we see they have much red copper whereof they make chain collar and drink cup. a ' copper mine which they so little esteem. they will give we for small toy and signify unto we they have it out of the earth in the main. three day they stay with we but every night retire two or three mile from we after with and signify unto we. they have it out of the earth. in the main three day they stay with we but every night retire two or three mile from we. after, with many sign of love and friendship, they depart. seven of they stay behind that do help we to dig and carry saxafras and do any thing they can be of a comely proportion and the best condition of any savage we have yet encounter. they have no beard but counterfeit, as they do think we also be, for which they will have change with some of our man that have great beard. some of the base sort will steal, but the better sort we find very civil and just. we see but three of their woman. some of our man that have great beard, some of the base sort will steal, but the better sort we find very civil and just. we see but three of their woman, and they be but of mean stature, attire in skin like the man, but fat and well favour the wholesomeness and temperature of this climate. do not only argue the people to be answerable to this description, but also of a perfect constitution of body, active, strong, healthful and very witty, as the sundry toy by they so cunning wrought may well testify for ourselves. we find ourselves rather increase in health and strength, then otherwise, for all our toil, bad diet and lodging, yet not one of we be touch with any sickness. twelve intend. ourselves we find ourselves rather increase in health and strength, then otherwise, for all our toil, bad diet and lodging, yet not one of we be touch with any sickness. twelve intend here a while to have stay, but upon better consideration, how mean we be, provide their return. we leave this island with as many true sorrowful eye as be before, desirous to see it the 18. of june and arrive at e^mouth the 23 of july. but yet man mind do such itself explay, as god great will do, frame it every way, and such thought man have on earth, that do but live as man may crave, but god do only give. write by john brierton. one of the voyage, a voyage of captain martin. such thought man have on earth that do but live as man may crave, but god do only give. write by john brierton, one of the voyage, a voyage of captain martin bring, with two bark from bristol for the north part of virginia 1603.. by the inducement and persuasion of mr richard hackluite, mr john whitsun be maior with his brethren, the alderman and most of the merchant of the city of bristol raise a stock of 1000l to furnish out two bark, the one of 50. tun with 30. man and boy, the other 26. tun with 13. man and boy. have martin bring, a understanding gentleman and a sufficient mariner for captain and robert salterne, his assistant, who have be with captain gosnoll there. the 26. tun with 13. man and boy have martin bring, a understanding gentleman and a sufficient mariner for captain, and robert salterne, his assistant, who have be with captain gosnoll there the year before for pilot. though they be much cross by contrary wind upon the coast of england and the death of that ever most memorable miracle of the world, our most dear sovereign lady and queen elizabeth. yet at last they pass by the western isle and, about the 7. of june, fall upon the north part of virginia about the degree of forty three, where they find plenty of most sort of fish and see a high country full of great wood of sundry sort as they range the coast at a place they name. three, where they find plenty of most sort of fish and see a high country full of great wood of sundry sort as they range the coast at a place they name whitsun bay. they be kind use by the native that come to they in troop of ten, twenty and thirty and sometime more. but because in this voyage, for most part they follow the course of captain gosnoll and have make no relation but to the same effect, he write before. we will thus conclude: lay hand unto this work with all thy wit, but pray that god will speed and perfect it. robert salterne. a relation of a discovery towards the northward of virginia by captain george waymouth, 1605.. employ thither by the right honourable. but pray that god will speed and perfect it. robert salterne. a relation of a discovery towards the northward of virginia by captain george waymouth, 1605.. employ thither by the right honourable thomas arundel, baron of warder, in the reign of our most royal king james. upon tuesday, the five of march, we set sail from ratcliff, but by contrary wind we be force into dartmouth till the last of this month then, with 29.. as good sea man and all necessary provision as can possible be get, we put to sea, and the 24 of april fall with flower and we intend, as we be, direct towards the southward of 39, but the wind so cross we. we fall more northwards about 41. and 20.. minute we. april fall with flower and we intend, as we be direct towards the southward of 39, but the wind so cross we. we fall more northwards, about 41. and 20.. minute we sound at 100 fathom dangerous shovel, and by that we have run 6 league, we have but 5. yet see no land from the main top we descry a whitish sandy cleft, west, northwest, some 6. league from we, but ere we have run two league further, we find many shovel and breach sometime in 4. fathom and the next throw 15. or 18. be thus embay among those shovel. we be constrain to put back again, which we do with no small danger, though both the wind and weather be as fair as we can. be thus embay among those shovel we be constrain to put back again, which we do with no small danger, though both the wind and weather be as fair as we can desire. thus we part from the land which we have not before so much desire, and at the first sight rejoice, as now we all, joyful, praise god that he have deliver we from so eminent danger. here we find excellent cod, cod and whale, and see many whale, as we have do 2. or 3. day before. be thus constrain to put to sea the want of wood and water cause we take the best advantage of the wind to fall with the shore wheresoever, but we find our sea card most direct, false. the sea, the want of wood and water, cause we take the best advantage of the wind to fall with the shore wheresoever, but we find our sea card most direct, false. the 17. of may we make the land again, but it blow so hard we dare not approach it. the next day it appear to we a main high land, but we find it a island of 6. mile in compass. within a league of it. we come to a anchor and go on shore for wood and water, their first land, of which we find sufficient. the water gush forth down the rocky cliff in many place, which be all overgrow with fir, birch, beech and oak, as the verge be with gousberry, strawberry, wild pease. find sufficient. the water gush forth down the rocky cliff in many place, which be all overgrow with fir, birch, beech and oak as the verge, be with gousberry, strawberry, wild pease and rise bush and much foul of diverse sort that breed among the rock. here, as in all place else where we come, we find cod enough. from hence we may discern the main land and very high mountain. the next day, because we ride too open to the sea, we weigh and come to the isle adjoin to the main, among which we find a excellent road defend from all wind for ship of any burden in 6.7.8.9 or 10.. fathom upon a clay oze, this be upon a whitsonday, wherefore we call it pentecost. find a excellent road, defend from all wind for ship of any burden, in 6.7.8.9 or 10. fathom upon a clay oze this be upon a whitsonday, wherefore we call it pentecost harbour. pentecost harbour, here i can omit, for foolish fear of imputation, of flattery, the painful industry of our captain who, as at sea he be always most careful and vigilant, so at land he refuse no pain, but his labour be ever as much, or rather more, than any man which not only encourage other with better content but also effect much. with great expedition we dig a garden, the 22. of may the captain diligence, where among our garden-seed we sow pease and barley which in 16. day grow up 8. inch, although this great expedition. we dig a garden, the 22. of may the captain diligence, where among our garden-seed we sow pease and barley which in 16. day grow up 8. inch, although this be but the crust of the ground and much inferior to the mould we after find in the main. after we have take order for all our necessary business, we march through two of these isle: the big be, 4. or 5. mile in compass. we find here all sort of ordinary tree beside vine, currant, spruce, yew, angelica and diverse gum. in so much many of our company wish themselves settle here. upon the 30. our captain, with 13. go to discover the main. we in the ship espy, 3. canowes that come towards the. much many of our company wish themselves settle here upon the 30. our captain, with 13. go to discover the main. we in the ship espy, 3. canowes that come towards the ship which, after they have well view one of they, come aboard with 3. man and by our good usage of they, not long after the rest two day, we have their company in all respect they be, but like they at elizabeth isle, therefore this may suffice for their description in this time. our captain have discover a fair river, trend into the main 40 mile and return back to bring in the ship the savage also keep their word and bring we 40. bever, oter and sable skin for the value of 5. shilling. main 40 mile and return back to bring in the ship the savage. also, keep their word and bring we 40. bever, oter and sable skin for the value of 5. shilling in knife trade with the savage glass comb and such toy, and thus we use they so kind as we can because we intend to inhabit in their country. they lie aboard with we and we ashore with they. but it be, but as change, man for man, as hostage, and in this manner, many time we have their company. at last they desire our captain to go with they to the main to trade with their bashabe which be their chief lord, which we do our boat well, man with 14.. yet will they row? our captain to go with they to the main to trade with their bashabe, which be their chief lord, which we do our boat well, man with 14.. yet will they row fast with 3.. oar in their canowes, then we with 8. but when we see our old acquaintance, will not stay aboard we, as before, for hostage, but do what they can to draw we into a narrow c^ke. we exchange one owen griffin with they for a young fellow of they, their treachery that he may see if he can discover any treachery, as he do, for he find there assemble 283.. savage with bow and arrow but not any thing at all to trade, as they pretend. these thing consider, we conceit they to. as he do, for he find there assemble 283.. savage with bow and arrow, but not any thing at all. to trade, as they pretend these thing consider. we conceit they to be, but, as all savage ever have, be kind till they find opportunity to do mischief, wherefoer we determine to take some of they before they shall suspect we have discover their plot, lest they shall absent themselves from we five savage surprise. so the first that ever after come into the ship be three which we keep, and two we take on shore with much ado, with two canowes, their bow and arrow. some time we spend in sound all the isle channel and inlet thereabouts, and we find 4.. several way a ship may with much ado, with two canowes, their bow and arrow. some time we spend in sound all the isle, channel and inlet thereabouts and we find 4. several way a ship may be bring into this bay. in the interim there come 2. canowes, more bold, aboard we signify we shall bring our ship to the place where he dwell to trade. we excuse ourselves why we can not, but use they kind, yet get they away with all the speed we can that they shall not be perceive by they in the howl than we go up the river 26. mile, a description of the river of which i have rather not write then by my relation, detract from it. it be in breadth a mile near. go up the river, 26. mile- a description of the river of which i have rather not write, then by my relation, detract from it. it be in breadth a mile, near 40. mile, and a channel of 6.7.8.9 or 10. fathom, and on both side, every half mile, gallant coves to contain, in many of they, 100 sail, where they may lie on oze, without cable or anchor, only moor with a hanser and it flow, 18. foot that you may make dock or ship, with much facility beside the land, be most rich, trend all along on both side in a equal plain, neither rocky nor mountainous, but verge with a green border of grass, do make tender to the beholder her pleasant fertility. if by all along on both side in a equal plain, neither rocky nor mountainous, but verge with a green border of grass, do make tender to the beholder her pleasant fertility if, by cleanse away the wood she be convert into meadow. the wood be great and tall, such as be speak of in the islelands, and well water with many fresh spring. our man that have see oranoque, so famous in the world, ear reogrande, loyer and slion report though they be great and goodly river, yet be not comparable to it. leave our ship. we go high till we be 7. mile high than the salt water flow. we march towards the mountain we have see, but the weather be so hot and our labour so great. go high till we be 7. mile high than the salt water flow. we march towards the mountain we have see, but the weather be so hot and our labour so great, as our captain be content to return. after we have erect a cross, we leave this fair land and river, in which the high we go the better, we like it and return to our ship. by the way, we meet a canow that much desire one of our man to go up to their basshabe, but we know their intent and so turn they off. and though we have both time and provision to have discover much more and may have find peradventure good trade yet, because our company be but small, we will not they off, and though we have both time and provision to have discover much more and may have find peradventure good trade, yet because our company be but small, we will not hazard so hopeful a business as this, be either for our private or particular end, be more regardful of a public good and promulgate god, holy church, by plant christianity, which be the intent of our adventurer, so well as we return by the isle in the entry of the sound. we call they st george isle and because on sunday we set out of england, on sunday also, the 16. of june, we depart. hence when we have run 30. league, we have 40. fathom ^hen 70. then 100 after 2. or 3.. watch more. of england. on sunday, also, the 16. of june, we depart. hence, when we have run 30. league, we have 40. fathom, ^hen 70. then 100, after 2. or 3. watch more- we be in 24. fathom, where we take so much cod as we do know what to do with. and the 18. of july come to dartmouth, and all our man as well. god be thank, as when they go forth. thus, may you see, god have not all his gift bestow on all or any one word. sweet and wit, sharp courage, strength of bone, all rarity of mind and part do all concur in none. write by james rosier, one of the voyage virginia. @ the second book, the six voyage, 1606.. to another: of bone. all rarity of mind and part do all concur in none. write by james rosier, one of the voyage, virginia @ the second book, the six voyage, 1606.. to another part of virginia, where now be plant our english colony who god increase and preserve, discover and describe by captain john smith, sometime governor of the country. by these former relation you may see what inconvenience still cross those good intent and how great a matter it be all this time to find but a harbour, although there be so many. but this virginia be a country in america between the degree of 34. and 45. of the north latitude, the latitude, the bound thereof on the east side be the great ocean on the south. be a country in america between the degree of 34. and 45. of the north latitude, the latitude, the bound thereof, on the east side be the great ocean, on the south lie florida, on the north francia, as for the west thereof the limit be unknown. of all this country we purpose nor to speak, but only of that part which be plant by the english man in the year of our lord 1606.. and this be under the degree 37.38 and 39. the temperature of this country do agree well with english constitution, be once season to the country, which appear by this that though by many occasion our people fall sick, yet do they recover by very small mean and continue in health, though there once season to the country, which appear by this that though by many occasion our people fall sick, yet do they recover by very small mean and continue in health, though there be other great cause not only to have make they sick but even to end their day, etc. the summer be hot, as in spain, the winter cold, as in france or england. the temperature: the heat of summer be in june, july and august, but common, the cool breese assuage the vehemency of the heat. the chief of winter be half december, january, february and half march. the cold be extreme sharp, but here the proverb be true that no extreme long continue in the year 1607.. be a extraordinary frost in most of europe. february and half march the cold be extreme, sharp, but here the proverb be true that no extreme long continue in the year 1607.. be a extraordinary frost in most of europe and this frost be find as extreme in virginia. but the next year for 8. or 10. day of ill weather, other 14. day will be as summer. the wind here be variable. the wind but the like thunder and lightning to purify the air i have seldom either see or hear in europe. from the south-west come the great gust with thunder and heat. the northwest wind be common, cool and bring fair weather with it. from the north be the great cold, and from the east and southeast, as from the bermuda, fog and heat. the northwest wind be common, cool and bring fair weather with it. from the north be the great cold, and from the east and southeast, as from the bermuda, fog and reins. some time there be great drought, other time much rain, yet great necessity of neither by reason. we see not, but that all the rarity of needful fruit in europe may be there in great plenty by the industry of man, as appear by those we there plant. there be but one entrance by sea into this country, the entrance cape henry, and that be at the mouth of a very goodly bay, 18. or 20. mile broad. the cape on the south be call cape henry in honour of our most noble prince, the. that be at the mouth of a very goodly bay, 18. or 20. mile broad. the cape on the south be call cape henry, in honour of our most noble prince. the land, white, hilly sand like unto the down and all along the shore great plenty of pine and firre. the north cape be call cape charles in honour of the worthy duke of york, cape charles, the isle before it, smith isle by the name of the discover within be a country that may have the prerogative over the most pleasant place, know for large and pleasant navigable river. the country. heaven and earth never agree better to frame a place for man habitation, be it full, manure and inhabit by industrious people. here be mountain. large and pleasant navigable river. the country, heaven and earth never agree better to frame a place for man habitation, be it full, manure and inhabit by industrious people. here be mountain, hill, plain, valley, river and brook, all run most pleasant into a fair bay compass. but for the mouth, with fruitful and delightsome land in the bay and river be many isle, both great and small, some woody, some plain, most of they low and not inhabit. this bay lie north and south, in which the water flow near 200. mile and have a channel for 140 mile of depth, betwixt 6 and 15 fathom hold in breadth, for the most part 10 or 14 mile from the head of the bay to the northwest, the channel for 140 mile of depth. betwixt 6 and 15 fathom hold in breadth, for the most part 10 or 14 mile. from the head of the bay to the northwest the land be mountainous, and so in a manner from thence by a south-west line, so that the more southward, the far off from the bay be those mountain from which fall certain brook which after come to five principal navigable river. these run from the northwest into the south east and so into the west side of the bay where the fall of every river be within 20 or 15 mile one of another. the mountain, the mountain be of diverse nature, for at the head of the bay the rock be of a composition like river be within 20 or 15 mile one of another. the mountain. the mountain be of diverse nature, for at the head of the bay the rock be of a composition like mill stone, some of marble etc. and many piece like crystal we find as throw down by water from those mountain, for in winter they be cover with much snow and when it dissolve, the water fall with such violence that it cause great inundation in some narrow valley which be scarce perceive be once in the river. these water wash from the rock such glister tincture that the ground in some place seem as guild, where both the rock and the earth be so splendent to behold. that better judgement than we may have be. such glister tincture that the ground in some place seem as guild, where both the rock and the earth be so splendent to behold that better judgement than we may have be persuade they contain more than probability. the vesture of the earth in most place do manifest, prove the nature of the soil to be lusty and very rich. the colour of the earth we find in diverse place the soil resemble bowl ammoniac and lemnia, fuller earth marle and diverse other such appearance, but general for the most part it be a black sandy mould, in some place a fat slimy clay, in other place a very barren gravel. but the best ground be know by the vesture it bear as by the greatness of tree. mould, in some place a fat, slimy clay, in other place a very barren gravel. but the best ground be know by the vesture it bear as by the greatness of tree or abundance of weed, etc. the valley, the country be not mountainous nor yet low, but such pleasant, plain, hill and fertile valley, one pretty cross another, and water so convenient, with fresh brook and spring plain, no less commodious, then delightsome, by the river. be many plain marsh contain some 20, some 100, some 200 acre, some more, some less. other plain there be few, but only where the savage inhabit, but all overgrow with tree and weed. be a plain wilderness, as god first make it. on the west side of the bay we. be few, but only where the savage inhabit but all overgrow with tree and weed. be a plain wilderness, as god first make it. on the west side of the bay we say be 5.. fair and delightful navigable river, the first of those and the next to the mouth of the bay, have his course from the west, northwest, the river powhatan. it be call powhatan according to the name of a principal country that lie upon it. the mouth of this river be near three mile in breadth, yet do the shovel force the channel so near the land that a sacre will overshoot it at point blank. it be navigable: 150 mile. the shall and sound be here, needless to be express, it fall from. channel so near the land that a sacre will overshoot it at point blank. it be navigable 150 mile. the shall and sound be here, needless to be express. it fall from rock far west, in a country inhabit by a nation they call, but where it come into our discovery, it be powhatan in the far place. that be diligent. observe, be fall rock, shovel etc. which make it past navigation any high thence in the run downward. the river be enrich with many goodly brook, which be maintain by a infinite number of small rundle and pleasant spring that disperse themselves for best service, as do the vein of a man body, the branch from the south there fall into it first, the pleasant river of rundle and pleasant spring that disperse themselves for best service, as do the vein of a man body, the branch from the south there fall into it. first the pleasant river of apamatuck. next, more to the east, be two small river of quiyoughcohanocke, a little far. be a bay wherein fall 3 or 4 pretty brook and creek that half entrench the inhabitant of warraskoyac than the river of nandsamund, and last the brook of chisapeack. from the north side be the river of chickahamania, the back river of james town, another by the cedar isle where we live ten week upon oyster, than a convenient harbour for fisher boat at kecoughtan that so turn itself into bay and creek. it make that place very pleasant to. isle where we live ten week upon oyster, than a convenient harbour for fisher boat at kecoughtan that so turn itself into bay and creek, it make that place very pleasant to inhabit. their cornefield be gird therein in a manner as peninsulaes the most of these river be inhabit by several nation, or rather family. of the name of the river they have also over those some governor as their king, which they call werowance in a peninsula on the north side of this river. be the english plant in a place by they call james town in honour of the king most excellent majesty james town the first and next the river mouth be the kecoughtan, the several inhabitant who, beside their woman and child, have james town in honour of the king. most excellent majesty james town, the first and next the river mouth be the kecoughtan. the several inhabitant who beside their woman and child, have not past 20.. fight man, the paspaheghe, on who land be seat. james town, some 40. mile from the bay, have not past 40.. the river call chickahamania, near 250.. the weanock, 100. the arrowhatock, 30.. the place call powhatan, some 40.. on the south side this river, the appamatuck, have sixty fight man, the quiyougcohanock, 25.. the nandsamunds, 200.. the chesapeack, 100. of this last place, the bay bear the name. in all these place be a several commander, which they call werowance, except the chickahamanians who be govern by the priest and their assistant. this last place, the bay bear the name. in all these place be a several commander, which they call werowance, except the chickahamanians who be govern by the priest and their assistant or their elder, call caw-cawwassoughes. in summer no place afford more plenty of sturgeon, nor in winter more abundance of foul, especial in the time of frost. i take once 52 sturgeon at a draught, at another 68. from the late end of may till the end of june be take few but young sturgeon of two foot or a yard long. from thence till the midst of september they of two or three yard long and few other, and in 4 or 5 hour with one net be ordinary. take 7 or 8, often more. till the midst of september. they of two or three yard long and few other, and in 4 or 5 hour with one net be ordinary, take 7 or 8 often more, seldom less. in the small river all the year there be good plenty of small fish so that with hook those that will take pain have sufficient. fourteen mile northward from the river powhatan be the river pamaunkee, r pamaunkee, which be navigable 60 or 70 mile, but with catch and small bark 30 or 40 mile far at the ordinary flow of the salt water. it divide itself into two gallant branch. on the south side inhabit the people of youghtanund the inhabitant, who have about 60 man for war on the north branch, mattapament. salt water it divide itself into two gallant branch. on the south side inhabit the people of youghtanund the inhabitant, who have about 60 man for war. on the north branch, mattapament, who have 30 man. where this river be divide, the country be call pamaunkee and nourish near 300 able man, about 25.. mile low on the north side of this river, be werawocomoco, where their great king inhabit. when i be deliver, he prisoner, yet there be not past 40 able man. ten or twelve mile low on the south side of this river, be chiskiack, which have some 40 or 50 man. these, as also apamatuck, irrohatock and powhatan, be their great king, chief, alliance and inhabitant. the rest his conquest before we come to. be chiskiack, which have some 40 or 50 man. these, as also apamatuck, irrohatock and powhatan, be their great king, chief, alliance and inhabitant the rest his conquest. before we come to the three river that fall from the mountain payankatank r there be another river some 30 mile navigable that come from the inland, call payankatanke. the inhabitant be about 50 or 60 serviceable man. the three navigable river be call toppahanock toppahanock r this be navigable, some 130 mile. at the top of it inhabit the people call mannahoack, among the mountain, but they be above the place we describe. the inhabitant upon this river on the north side be the people: cuttatawoman with 30 fight man high. be the moraughtacund with 80. beyond they rapahanock. be above the place. we describe the inhabitant upon this river. on the north side be the people cuttatawoman with 30 fight man high. be the moraughtacund with 80. beyond they, rapahanock with 100. far above be another cuttatawoman with 20.. on the south, be the pleasant seat of nantaughtacund have 150 man. this river also, as the two former be, replenish with fish and foul. the four river be call patawomeke, 6 or 7 mile in breadth, patawomek r. it be navigable, 140 mile and feed as the rest, with many sweet river and spring which fall from the border hill. these hill, many of they be plant and yield no less plenty and variety of fruit than the river exceed with abundance of fish. it be. which fall from the border hill. these hill, many of they be plant and yield no less plenty and variety of fruit than the river exceed with abundance of fish. it be inhabit on both side, the inhabitant first on the south side, at the very entrance, be wighcocomoco, and have some 130 man. beyond they sekacawone with 30.. the onawmanient with 100 and the patawomeke more than 200.. here do the river divide itself into 3 or 4 convenient branch, the great of the least be call quiyough, trend northwest but the river itself turn north-east and be still a navigable stream. on the western side of this buy be tauxenent with 40 man. on the north of this river, be secowocomoco with 40.. somewhat further, potapaco. north-east and be still a navigable stream. on the western side of this buy be tauxenent with 40 man. on the north of this river be secowocomoco with 40.. somewhat further, potapaco with 20.. in the east part be pamacaeack with 60.. after, moyowance with 100 and last nacotchtanke with 80.. the river above this place make his passage down a low, pleasant valley, overshadow in many place, with high rocky mountain, from whence distil innumerable, sweet and pleasant spring r the five river be call of a less proportion than the rest, but the channel be 16 fathom deep. in some place here be infinite skull of diverse kind of fish, more than elsewhere. upon this river dwell the people call acquintanacksuak and mattapanient two hundred man. be 16 fathom deep in some place. here be infinite skull of diverse kind of fish, more than elsewhere. upon this river dwell the people call acquintanacksuak and mattapanient. two hundred man be the great strength that can be there perceive, but they inhabit together and not so disperse as the rest. these of all other we find most civil to give entertainment. bolus r, the head of the bay, thirty league northward be a river not inhabit yet navigable, for the red clay resemble bowl ammoniac, we call it bolus. at the end of the bay, where it be 6 or 7 mile in breadth, it divide itself into 4. branch. the best come northwest, from among the mountain, but though canoe may go a day journey. bay, where it be 6 or 7 mile in breadth it divide itself into 4. branch, the best come northwest from among the mountain. but though canoe may go a day journey or two up it, we can not get two mile up it with our boat, for rock upon it be seat the sasquesahanock. sasquesahanock, near it, north and by west run a creek, a mile and a half at the head whereof the eble. leave we on shore where we find many tree cut with hatchet. the next tide keep the shore to seek for some savage, for within thirty league sail we see not any. be a barren country, we go up another small river like a creek, 6 or 7 mile from thence return. for some savage, for within thirty league sail we see not any be a barren country. we go up another small river like a creek, 6 or 7 mile from thence return, we meet 7 canowes of the massowomek with who we have conference by sign, for we understand one another scarce a word. the next day we discover the small river and people of tockwhogh trend eastward, have, lose our grapnel among the rock of sasquesahanock. we be then near 200 mile from home and our barge about two run and have in it but 12 man to perform this discovery wherein we lie above 12 week upon those great water in those unknown country, have nothing but a little meal, oatmeal and water to feed we. 12 man to perform this discovery, wherein we lie above 12 week upon those great water in those unknown country, have nothing but a little meal, oatmeal and water to feed we and scarce, half sufficient of that for half that time. but what provision we get among the savage and such root and fish as we catch by accident and god direction. nor have we a mariner, nor any have skill to trim the sail, but two sailor and myself. the rest be gentleman or they be as ignorant in such toil and labour. yet necessity in a short time, by good word and example, make they do that. that cause they ever after to fear no colour. what i do with this small mean, i leave. necessity in a short time, by good word and example, make they do that. that cause they ever after to fear no colour. what i do with this small mean, i leave to the reader to judge, and the map i make of the country which be but a small matter in regard of the magnitude thereof. but to proceed, 60 of those sasquesahanock come to we, with skin, bow, arrow, target bead, sword and tobacco pipe. for present, such great and well proportion man be seldom see, for they seem like giant to the english yea, and to the neighbour, yet seem of a honest and simple disposition. with much ado, restrain from adore we, as god, those be the strange people of all those country both. yea and to the neighbour, yet seem of a honest and simple disposition with much ado, restrain from, adore we as god. those be the strange people of all those country, both in language and attire. for their language it may well beseem their proportion. sound from they the description of a sasquesahanough as a voice in a vault. their attire be the skin of bear and wolf. some have cassock make of bear head and skin. that a man head go through the skin, neck and the ear of the bear fasten to his shoulder. the nose and tooth hang down his breast. another bear face split behind he and at the end of the nose hang a paw. the half sleeve come to the elbow be. the nose and tooth hang down his breast, another bear face split behind he and at the end of the nose hang a paw. the half sleeve come to the elbow be the neck of bear and the arm through the mouth. with paw hang at their nose. one have the head of a wolf hang in a chain for a jewel, his tobacco pipe. three quarter of a yard long, pretty carve with a bird, a dear or some such devise at the great end, sufficient to beat out one brain, with bow, arrow and club suitable to their greatness. these be scarce know. to powhatan they can make near 600 able man and be pallifadoe in their town to defend they from the massawomeke, their mortal. club suitable to their greatness. these be scarce know. to powhatan they can make near 600 able man and be pallifadoe in their town to defend they from the massawomeke, their mortal enemy. five of their chief werowance come aboard we and cross the bay in their barge. the picture of the great of they be signify in the map: the calf of, who leg be three quarter of a yard about and all the rest of his limb so answerable to that proportion that he seem the goodly man we ever behold. his hair the one side be long, the other shore close, with a ridge over his crown like a cock comb his arrow be five quarter long, head with the splinter of a white christall-like. one side be long, the other shore close with a ridge over his crown like a cock comb, his arrow be five quarter long, head with the splinter of a white christall-like stone in form of a heart, a inch broad and a inch and a half or more long. these he wear in a wolf skin at his back for his quiver, his bow in the one hand and his club in the other, as be describe. on the east side, the bay be the river tockwhogh, tockwhogh r, and upon it a people that can make 100 man seat some seven mile within the river where they have a fort, very well pallisadoe, and mantel with bark of tree. next they be oziny with sixty man. can make 100 man seat some seven mile within the river where they have a fort, very well, pallisadoe, and mantel with bark of tree. next they be oziny, with sixty man. more, to the south of that east side of the bay, the river rapahanock- rapahanock r, kuskarawaock r wighcocomoco r, near unto which be the river kuskarawaock, upon which be seat a people with 200 man. after that be the river tants wighcocomoco, and on it a people with 100 man. the people of those river be of little stature, of another language from the rest, and very rude, but they on the river acohanock with 40 man accomack r and they of accomack, 80 man, do equalise any of the territory of powhatan and speak. the rest and very rude. but they on the river acohanock, with 40 man, accomack r and they of accomack, 80 man, do equalise any of the territory of powhatan and speak his language. who, over all those do rule as king southward, we go to some part of chawonock and the mangoag to search for they leave by mr white chawonock. among those people be thus many, several nation of sundry language that environ powhatans territory, the chawonocke, the mangoag, the several language, the monacan, the mannahoke, the masawomeke, the powhatans, the sasquesahanock, the atquanachuke, the tockwoghe and the kuscarawaoke. all those, not any one understand another but by interpreter their several habitation be more plain, describe by this annex map which will present to the eye. the tockwoghe and the kuscarawaoke, all those, not any one understand another, but by interpreter their several habitation be more plain, describe by this annex map which will present to the eye the way of the mountain and current of the river, with their several turn, bay, shovel, isle, inlet and creek, the breadth of the water, the distance of place and such like, in which map observe this, that as far as you see the little cross on river, mountain or other place have be discover. the rest be have by information of the savage and be set down according to their instruction. thus have i walk a wayless way, with uncouth pace which yet no christian man do ever trace, but yet i know this not. and be set down according to their instruction. thus have i walk a wayless way, with uncouth pace which yet no christian man do ever trace, but yet i know this not affect the mind. which ear do hear as that, which eye do find of such thing which be natural in virginia and how they use they? virginia do afford many excellent vegetable and live creature. why there be little grass? yet grass there be little or none. but what grow in low marsh for all the country be overgrow with tree who, droppings continual, turn their grass to weed by reason of the rankness of the ground which will soon be amend by good husbandry wood with their fruit, the wood that be most common be. turn their grass to weed by reason of the rankness of the ground which will soon be amend by good husbandry wood with their fruit. the wood that be most common be oak and walnut. many of their oak be so tall and straight that they will bear two foot and a half square of good timber. for 20 yard long of this wood there be two or three, several kind, the acorn of one kind who bark be more white than the other and somewhat sweetish, which be boil at last afford a sweet oil that they keep in gourd to anoint their head and joint the fruit they eat, make in bread or otherwise. there be also some elm, some black walnut tree elm and some that they keep in gourd to anoint their head and joint the fruit they eat, make in bread or otherwise. there be also some elm, some black walnut tree, elm and some ash of ash and elm they make soap ash. if the tree be very great the ash will be good and melt to hard lump, but if they be small it will be but powder and not so good as the other. of walnut there be 2 or 3 kind walnut, suppose cypress. there be a kind of wood we call cypress because both the wood, the fruit and leaf do most resemble it. and of those tree there be some near three fathom about at the foot, very straight, and 50, 60 or 80 foot. the wood, the fruit and leaf do most resemble it. and of those tree there be some near three fathom about at the foot, very straight and 50, 60 or 80 foot without a branch by the dwell of the savage be some great mulberry, tree mulberry, and in some part of the country they be find grow natural in pretty grove. there be a assay make to make silk, and sure the worm prosper excellent well, till the master workman fall sick, during which time they be eat with rat chestnut. in some part be find some chestnut who wild fruit equalise the best in france, spain, germany or italy. plum there be of three sort: the red and white be like our hedge plum, but the find some chestnut. who wild fruit equalise the best in france, spain, germany or italy. plum there be of three sort. the red and white be like our hedge plum, but the other, which they call putchamin, grow as high as a palmeta. the fruit be like a meddler. it be first green, then yellow and red when it be ripe. if it be not ripe it will draw a man mouth awry with much torment, but when it be ripe it be as delicious as a apricot cherry. they have cherry and those be much like a damson, but for their taste and colour we call they cherry. we see some few crab but very small and bitter. of vine, great abundance in many part that climb. like a damson, but for their taste and colour we call they cherry. we see some few crab, but very small and bitter, of vine, great abundance in many part that climb the top of the high tree in some place vine, but these bear but few grape, except by the river and savage habitation. where they be not overshadow from the sun, they be cover with fruit, though never pruine nor manure. of those hedge grape we make near twenty gallon of wine, which be like our french, british wine, but certain they will prove good, be they well manure. there be another sort of grape near as great as a cherry. this they call messamin. they be sit and the juice thick. neither do the taste. good, be they well manure. there be another sort of grape near as great as a cherry. this they call messamin. they be sit and the juice thick. neither do the taste so well please, when they be make in wine. they have a small fruit grow on little tree husk like a chestnut, but the fruit most like a very small acorn, chechinquamin. this they call chechinquamin, which they esteem a great dainty. they have a berry much like our gooseberry in greatness, colour and taste. those they call rawcomens. rawcomens, and do eat they raw or boil. of these natural fruit they live a great part of the year which they use in this manner: the walnut chestnut acorn. how they use their fruit and chechinquamin. raw or boil of these natural fruit they live a great part of the year which they use in this manner: the walnut, chestnut acorn- how they use their fruit and chechinquamin be dry to keep. when they need walnut, they break they between two stone, yet some part of the shell will cleave to the fruit. then do they dry they again upon a mat over a hurdle. after they put it into a mortar of wood and beat it very small that do they mix it with water that the shell may sink to the bottom. this water will be colour as milk, which they call pawcohiccora walnut and keep it for their use. the fruit, like meddler, they call putchamin. they cast upon hurdle on. the bottom. this water will be colour as milk, which they call pawcohiccora walnut, and keep it for their use. the fruit, like meddler, they call putchamin. they cast upon, hurdle on a mat and preserve they as prune of their chestnut and chechinquamins boil. they make both broth and bread for their chief man or at their great feast. beside those fruit tree there be a white popular and another tree like unto it that yield a very clear and a odoriferous gum, like turpentine gum, saxafiastrees, which some call balsom. there be also cedar and saxafras tree. they also yield gum in a small proportion of themselves. we try, conclusion, to extract it out of the wood, but nature afford more than our art berry in. and saxafras tree. they also yield gum in a small proportion of themselves. we try, conclusion, to extract it out of the wood. but nature afford more than our art berry. in the watery valley grow a berry which they call ocoughtanamnis, very much like unto caper. these they dry in summer. when they eat they, they boil they near half a day. matoum, for otherwise they differ not much from poison. mattoum grow as our bents. the seed be not much unlike to rye, though much small. this they use for a dainty bread butter with dear suet strawberry. during summer there be either strawberry which ripen in april or mulberry which ripen in may and june, raspise hurt, or a fruit that the inhabitant call maracock. with dear suet strawberry during summer. there be either strawberry which ripen in april or mulberry which ripen in may and june, raspise, hurt, or a fruit that the inhabitant call maracock, which be a pleasant, wholesome fruit, much like a lemoned. many herb in the spring be common, disperse throughout the wood, herb good for broth and salad, as violet, purslane, sorrell, etc. beside many we use who name we know not rootes. the chief root they have for food be call tockawhoughe. it grow like a flag in marsh. in one day a savage will gather sufficient for a week. these root be much of the greatness and taste of potato. they use to cover a great many of they with oak leave and ferne and will gather sufficient for a week. these root be much of the greatness and taste of potato. they use to cover a great many of they with oak leave and ferne and then cover all with earth in the manner of a coalpit over it. on each side they continue a great fire 24 hour before they dare eat it raw. it be no better than poison and be roast, except it be tender and the heat abate, or slice and dry in the sun, mix with sorrel and meal or such like. it will prickle and torment the throat extreme. and yet in summer they use this ordinary for bread. they have another root which they call wighsacan wig^sacan, a root pocones, a small root, as the and torment the throat extreme. and yet in summer they use this ordinary for bread. they have another root which they call wighsacan, wig^sacan a root. pocones, a small root as the other, feed the body, so this cure their hurt and disease. it be a small root which they bruise and apply to the wound. pocones be a small root that grow in the mountain which be dry and beat in powder, turn red, and this they use for swell, ache, anoint their joint, paint their head and garment. they account it very precious and of much worth. musquaspen be a root of the bigness of a finger. musquaspen, a root and as red as blood. in dry it will wither almost to nothing. this they use. of much worth. musquaspen be a root of the bigness of a finger. musquaspen a root and as red as blood. in dry it will wither almost to nothing. this they use to paint their mat target and such like. there be also pellitory of spain, sasafrage and diverse other simple pellitory sasafrage which the apothecary gather and commend to be good and medicinable. in the low marsh grow. plot of onion. onion contain a acre of ground or more in many place, but they be small, not past the bigness of the top of one thumb of beast. the chief be dear. nothing differ from we. their chief beast be dear. squirrel in the desert towards the head of the river. there be many, but among the thumb of beast the chief be dear. nothing differ from we. their chief beast be dear squirrel. in the desert, towards the head of the river, there be many, but among the river few. there be a beast they call much like a badger, but use to live on tree as squirrel do their squirrel. some be near as great as our small sort of wild rabbit, some blackish or black and white, but the most be gray. a small beast they have they call assapanick, but we call they fly squirrel. assapanick a squirrel fly opassom, because spread their leg and so stretch the largeness of their skin that they have be see to fly 30 or 40 yard. a opassom have a head like a swine. opassom because spread their leg and so stretch the largeness of their skin that they have be see to fly 30 or 40 yard. a opassom have a head like a swine and a tail like a rat and be of the bigness of a cat. under her belly she have a bag wherein she lodge, carry and suckle her young mussascus. a mussascus be a beast of the form and nature of our water rat, but many of they smell exceed strong of musk. their hare no big than our coney and few of they to be find. their bear be very little in comparison of those of muscovia and tartary bear. the beaver be as big as a ordinary water dog, but his leg exceed short. to be find their bear be very little in comparison of those of muscovia and tartary bear the beaver be as big as a ordinary water dog but his leg exceed short the beaver, his forefoot like a dog, his hinder foot like a swan, his tail somewhat like the form of a racket, bare, without hair, which to eat the savage esteem a great delicate. they have many otter which as the beaver they take with snare otter and esteem the skin great ornament. and of all those beast they use to feed when they catch they a vtchunquoye be like a wild cat. their fox be like our silver haired coney vtchunquoye, foxes-dogge of a small proportion and not smell like those in england their dog. catch they a vtchunquoye. be like a wild cat, their fox, be like our silver haired coney, vtchunquoye, foxes-dogge of a small proportion and not smell like those in england, their dog of that country. be like their wolf and can bark but howl and the wolf not much big than our english fox, martin, powlecat, weasel, martin, polecat, weasel and minx. and minx we know they have because we have see many of their skin, though very seldom any of they alive. but one thing be strange: that we can never perceive their vermin destroy our hen egg nor chicken, nor do any hurt, nor their fly nor serpent any way pernicious. where in the south part of america they be always dangerous and often deadly of. our hen egg, nor chicken, nor do any hurt, nor their fly, nor serpent any way pernicious, where in the south part of america they be always dangerous and often deadly. of bird, the eagle be the great devourer hawk. there be of diverse sort, bird, as our falconer call they sparrowhawke, lanaret, goshawkes, falcon and osperaye, but they all prey most upon fish. their partridge be little big than our quail wild turkey. be as big as our tame. there be woosel or blackbird with red shoulder thrush and diverse sort of small bird, some red, some blue, scarce so big as a wren, but few in summer. in winter there be great, plenty of swan, crane, gray and white with black wing, heron, goose, brant, duck. red, some blue scarce, so big as a wren, but few in summer. in winter there be great, plenty of swan, crane, gray and white, with black wing, heron, goose, brant, duck, widgeon, dotterell, oxeies, parrot and pigeon of all those sort, great abundance and some other strange kind to we unknown by name, but in summer not any or a very few to be see. of fish we be best acquaint with sturgeon, grampus, porpus, seales, fish, stingray, who tail be very dangerous, bretts, mullet, white, salmond, trout, sole, plaice, herring, conyfish, rockfish, eeles, catfish, p^arch of three sort, crab, shrimp, crevice, oyster, cocles and muscle. but the most strange fish be a small one, so like the picture of st george his dragon as possible can. p^arch of three sort: crab, shrimp, crevice, oyster, cocles and muscle. but the most strange fish be a small one, so like the picture of st george, his dragon, as possible can be, except his leg and wing, and the toadefish which will swell till it be like to burst when it come into the air. the rock concern the entrails of the earth. little can be say for certainty there want good refiner for those that take upon they to have skill this way: take up the wash from the mountain and some moskered shine, stone and spangle which the water bring down, flatter themselves in their own vain conceit to have be suppose what they be, not by the mean of that ore, if it prove. stone and spangle which the water bring down, flatter themselves in their own vain conceit to have be suppose what they be, not by the mean of that ore, if it prove, as their art and judgement expect only this. be certain that many region lie in the same latitude, afford mine very rich of diverse nature. the crust also of these rock will easy persuade a man to believe there be other mine than iron and steel, if there be. but mean and man of experience that know the mine from spar of their plant fruit in virginia, and how they use they, how they divide the year. they divide the year into five season. their winter some call popanow the spring, cattapeuk, the summer cohattayough the. fruit in virginia and how they use they, how they divide the year. they divide the year into five season. their winter some call popanow the spring, cattapeuk the summer, cohattayough, the ear of their corn, nepinough, the harvest and fall of leaf taquitock from september until the midst of november, be the chief feast and sacrifice. then have they plenty of fruit as well. plant as natural as corn, green and ripe fish, foul and wild beast exceed fat. how they prepare the ground. the great labour they take be in plant their corn for the country. natural be overgrow with wood to prepare the ground. they bruise the bark of the tree near the root. then do they scorch the root with fire that they grow. the country natural be overgrow with wood. to prepare the ground, they bruise the bark of the tree near the root. then do they scorch the root with fire that they grow no more the next year. with a crooked piece of wood they beat up the weed by the root and in that mould they plant their corne. their manner be this: they make a hole in the earth with a stick and into it they put four grain of wheat and two of bean. these hol^s they make four foot one from another. their woman and child do continual keep it with weed and when it be grow middle high, they hill it about like a hop-yard. how they plant? in april they begin to plant. woman and child do continual keep it with weed and when it be grow middle high they hill it about like a hop-yard. how they plant: in april they begin to plant, but their chief plantation be in may, and so they continue till the midst of june. what they plant in april they reap in august. for may, in september, for june, in october, every stalk of their corn common bear two ear, some three, seldom any four, many but one and some none. every care ordinary have betwixt 200 and 500 grain. the stalk be green, have a sweet juice in it, somewhat like a sugar cane, which be the cause that when they gather their corn green they suck the stalk. for, as we gather, be green, have a sweet juice in it, somewhat like a sugar cane, which be the cause that when they gather their corn green they suck the stalk. for as we gather green pease, so do they their corn be green, which excel their old. they plant also pease. they call assentamen^, which be the same they call in italy fag^h, their bean be the same the turk call garnanses. but these they much esteem for dainty, how they use their corne, their corn. they roast in the ear green and bruise it in a mortar of wood with a polt, lap it in, roll in the leaf of their corn and so boil it for a dainty. they also reserve that corn late plant. that will not. of wood with a polt, lap it in, roll in the leaf of their corn and so boil it for a dainty. they also reserve that corn, late plant that will not ripe by. roast it in hot ash. the heat thereof dry it in winter. they esteem it be boil with bean for a rare dish. they call pausarowmena their old wheat. they first steep a night in hot water, in the morning pound it in a mortar. they use a small basket for their thames, than pound again the great and so separate by, dash their hand in the basket, receive the flower in a platter make of wood, scrape to that form with burn and shell, temper this flower with water. they make it either. dash their hand in the basket, receive the flower in a platter, make of wood, scrape to that form with burn and shell, temper this flower with water. they make it either in cake, cover they with ash till they be bake and then wash they in fair water. they dry, present with their own heat, or else boil they in water, eat the broth with the bread which they call ponap. the grouce and piece of the corn remain by fan in a platter or in the wind away. the bran they boil 3 or 4 hour with water, which be a ordinary food they call vstatahamen. but some, more thrifty than clean, do burn the core of the ear to powder which they call pungnough mingle. 4 hour with water, which be a ordinary food they call vstatahamen. but some, more thrifty than clean, do burn the core of the ear to powder which they call pungnough, mingle that in their meal, but it never taste well in bread nor broth. how they use their fish and flesh. their fish and flesh they boil either very tender, or boil it so long on hurdle over the fire, or else, after the spanish fashion, put it on a spit. they turn first the one side than the other till it be as dry as their jerkin beef in the west indies that they may keep it a month or more without putrify. the broth of fish or flesh they eat as common as the meat. as their jerkin beef in the west indies, that they may keep it a month or more without putrify the broth of fish or flesh they eat as common as the meat in may. also, among their corn they plant pumpeon plant fruit and a fruit like unto a musk melon, but less and worse, which they call macock. these increase, exceed and ripen in the begin of july and continue until september. they plant also maracock, a wild fruit like a lemon, which also increase infinite. they begin to ripe in september and continue till the end of october, when all their fruit be gather. little else they plant, and this be do by their woman and child. neither do this long suffice they for near three. the end of october, when all their fruit be gather. little else they plant, and this be do by their woman and child. neither do this long suffice they for near three part of the year. they only observe time and season and live of what the country natural afford from hand to mouth etc. the commodity in virginia or that may be have by industry, the mildness of the air, the fertility of the soil and situation of the river be so propitious to the nature and use of man as no place be more convenient for pleasure, profit and man sustenance under that latitude or climate. here will live any beast, as horse, goat, sheep, ass, hen, etc. a proof cattle will live well, as appear. convenient for pleasure, profit and man sustenance. under that latitude or climate here will live any beast as horse, goat, sheep, ass, hen, etc. a proof: cattle will live well, as appear by they. that be carry thither the water, isle and shoal be full of safe harbour for ship of war or merchandise, for boat of all sort, for transportation or fish, etc. the bay and river have much merchantable fish and place fit for salt coat, build of ship, make of iron etc. muscovia and polonia do yearly receive many thousand for pitch, tarre, the commodity soap-ash, rosen, flax, cordage, sturgeon, mast, yard, wainscot, firre, glass and such like. also swethland for iron and copper, france in like manner for wine, canvas and salt, spain asmuch the commodity: soap-ash, rosen, flax, cordage, sturgeon, mast, yard, wainscot, firre, glass and such like. also, swethland for iron and copper. france in like manner for wine, canvas and salt. spain asmuch for iron, steele, fig, reason and sack. italy with silk and velvet, consume our chief commodity. holland maintain itself by fish and trade at our own door. all these temporize with other for necessity, but all as uncertain as peace or war. beside the charge, travel and danger in transport, they, by sea, land, storm and pirate. then how much have virginia the prerogative of all those flourish kingdom for the benefit of our land when, as within one hundred mile, all those be to be have either ready provide by nature or else to be. of all those flourish kingdom for the benefit of our land, when, as within one hundred mile, all those be to be have either ready provide by nature, or else to be prepare be there. but industrious man to labour only of copper we may doubt be want, but there be good probability that both copper and better mineral be there to be have for their labour. other country have it. so then here be a place, a nurse for soldier, a practice for mariner, a trade for merchant, a reward for the good and that which be most of all a business most acceptable to god, to bring such poor infidel to the knowledge of god and his holy gospel, of the natural inhabitant of virginia, the which be most of all a business most acceptable to god, to bring such poor infidel to the knowledge of god and his holy gospel, of the natural inhabitant of virginia. the land be not populous, for the man be few, their far great number be of woman and child. within 60 mile of james town there be about some 5000 people, but of able man fit for their war scarce 1500.. the numbe^^ to nourish so many together they have yet no mean because they make so small a benefit of their land. seven hundred man be the most, be see together when they think to have. surprise, captain smith, a description of the people. the barber be it never so fertile. six or seven hundred have man be the most be see together when they think to have surprise. captain smith, a description of the people the barber, be it never so fertile, six or seven hundred have be the most have be see together when they gather themselves to have surprise. i at pamaunkee have but fifteen to withstand the worst of their fury, as small as the proportion of ground that have yet be discover be in comparison of that yet unknown. the people differ very much in stature, especial in language, as before be express. some be very great as the sasquesahaneck, other very little as the wighcocomocoe, but general, tall and straight, of a comely proportion and of a colour brown when they be of any age. but they be as the sasquesahaneck, other, very little as the wighcocomocoe, but general, tall and straight, of a comely proportion and of a colour brown when they be of any age, but they be bear white. their hair be general black, but few have any beard. the man wear half their beard, shave the other half long for barber. they use their woman who, with two shell, will grate away the hair of any fashion they please. the woman be cut in many fashion agreeable to their year, the constitution, but ever some part remain long. they be very strong, of a able body and full of agility, able to endure to lie in the wood under a tree by the fire in the worst of winter or in the very strong of a able body and full of agility, able to endure to lie in the wood under a tree by the fire in the worst of winter, or in the weed and grass in ambuscado in the summer. the disposition they be, inconstant in every thing. but what fear constrain they to keep? crafty, timorous, quick of apprehension and very ingenuous. some be of disposition, fearful, some bold, most cautelous. all savage, general covetous of copper bead and such like trash, they be soon move to anger and so malicious that they seldom forget a injury. they seldom steal one from another, lest their conjurer shall reveal it, and so they be pursue and punish. that they be thus fear, be certain, but that any can. a injury they seldom steal one from another lest their conjurer shall reveal it. and so they be pursue and punish. that they be thus fear be certain. but that any can reveal their offence by conjuration, i be doubtful. their woman be careful not to be suspect of dishonesty without the leave of their husband. each household know their own land and garden and most live of their own labour. the possession for their apparel they be sometime cover with the skin of wild beast which in winter be dress with the hair but in summer without their attire. the better sort use large mantle of dear skin. not much differ in fashion from the irish mantle. some embroider with white bead, some with copper, other paint. summer without their attire. the better sort use large mantle of dear skin. not much differ in fashion from the irish mantle. some embroider with white bead, some with copper, other paint after their manner, but the common sort have scarce to cover their nakedness but with grass, the leaf of tree or such like. we have see some use mantle make of turkey feather so pretty wrought and weave with thread that nothing can be discern but the feather that be exceed warm and very handsome. but the woman be always cover about their middle with a skin their ornament and very shamefast to be see bare. they adorn themselves most with copper bead and paint their woman. some have their leg, hand, breast and face cunning. with a skin their ornament and very shamefast to be see bare. they adorn themselves most with copper bead and paint their woman. some have their leg, hand, breast and face cunning embroider with diverse work as beast serpent, artificial wrought into their flesh with black spot in each ear. common they have 3 great hole whereat they hang chain, bracelet or copper. some of their man wear in those hole a small green and yellow colour snake, near half a yard in length which crawl and lap herself about his neck, oftentimes familiar, will kiss his lip. other wear a dead rat tie by the tail. some on their head wear the wing of a bird or some large feather with a rattle. those rattle be somewhat. his lip. other wear a dead rat tie by the tail. some on their head wear the wing of a bird or some large feather with a rattle. those rattle be somewhat like the chape of a rapier but less, which they take from the tail of a snake. many have the whole skin of a hawk or some strange foul stuff with the wing abroad. other a broad piece of copper and some the hand of their enemy dry. their head and shoulder be paint red with the root bray to powder mix with oil. this they hold in summer to preserve they from the heat and in winter from the cold. many other form of paint they use, but he be the most gallant, that be. this they hold in summer to preserve they from the heat and in winter from the cold. many other form of paint they use. but he be the most gallant, that be the most monstrous to behold. their building. their building and habitation be for the most part by the river or not far distant from some fresh spring. their house be build like our arbour of small young spring bow and tie and so close cover with mat or the bark of tree. very handsome that notwithstanding either wind, rain or weather, they be as warm as stoove but very smoky. yet at the top of the house there be a hole make for the smoke to go into right over the fire, against the fire they warm as stoove but very smoky. yet at the top of the house there be a hole make for the smoke to go into right over the fire. against the fire they lie on little hurdle of reed, cover with a mat. their lodging bear from the ground a foot and more by a hurdle of wood. on these round about the house they lie head and point one by the other against the fire. some cover with mat, some with skin and some stark naked lie on the ground, from 6 to 20 in a house. their house be in the midst of their field or garden, their garden, which be small plot of ground, some 20 acre, some 40. some 100, some 200. some more, some house. their house be in the midst of their field or garden, their garden, which be small plot of ground, some 20 acre, some 40.. some 100, some 200.. some more, some less. in some place from 2 to 50 of those house together or but a little separate by grove of tree. near their habitation be little small wood or old tree on the ground by reason of their burn of they for fire so that a man may gallop a horse among these wood any way, but where the creek or river shall hinder man. woman, how they use their child and child have their several name according to the several humour of their parent, their woman. they say be easy, deliver of child, yet do man, woman, how they use their child and child have their several name according to the several humour of their parent. their woman. they say be easy, deliver of child. yet do they love child very dear. to make they hardy in the cold morning they they wash in the river and by paint and ointment so tan their skin that after a year or two no weather will hurt. they, the man, bestow their time in fish hunt, war the industry of their woman and such manlike exercise scorn to be see in any woman-like exercise, which be the cause that the woman be very painful and the man often idle. the woman and child do the rest of the work. they make mat, basket, pot, mortar. exercise, which be the cause that the woman be very painful and the man often idle. the woman and child do the rest of the work. they make mat, basket, pot, mortar, pound their corn, make their bread, prepare their victual, plant their corn, gather their corn, bear all kind of burden and such like. how they strike, fire their fire. they kindle present by chafe, a dry point, stick in a hole of a little square piece of wood. that fire itself will so fire moss leaf or any such like dry thing that will quick burn. in march and april they live much upon their fish wire and feed on fish, turkey and squirrel the order of diet. in may and june they plant their field. quick burn. in march and april they live much upon their fish wire and feed on fish, turkey and squirrel. the order of diet: in may and june they plant their field and live most of acorn, walnut and fish. but to amend their diet, some disperse themselves in small company and live upon fish, beast, crab, oyster, land, tortoise, strawberry, mulberry and such like. in june, july and august they feed upon the root of tocknough berry, fish and green wheat. it be strange to see how their body alter with their diet. even as the dear and wild beast they seem fat and lean, strong and weak. powhatan, their great king, and some other that be provident, roast their fish and flesh upon hurdle, as before. the dear and wild beast. they seem fat and lean, strong and weak. powhatan, their great king, and some other that be provident, roast their fish and flesh upon hurdle, as before be express and keep it till scarce time for fish hunt and war they use much their bow and arrow how they make their bow^s and arrow. they bring their bow to the form of we by the scrape of a shell. their arrow be make some of straight young sprig which they head with bone, some 2 or 3 inch long. these they use to shoot at squirrel on tree. another sort of arrow they use make of reed. these be piece with wood, head with splinter of crystal or some sharp stone, the spur. use to shoot at squirrel on tree. another sort of arrow they use make of reed. these be piece with wood, head with splinter of crystal or some sharp stone, the spur of a turkey or the bill of some bird, their knife. for his knife he have the splinter of a reed to cut his feather in form. with this knife also he will joint a deer or any beast, shape his shoe, buskin, mantle etc. to make the of his arrow. he have the tooth of a beaver set in a stick wherewith he grate it by degree. his arrow head he quick make with a little bone which he ever wear at his bracert, of any splint of a stone or glass in the form. grate it by degree. his arrow head he quick make with a little bone which he ever wear at his bracert, of any splint of a stone or glass in the form of a heart and these they glue to the end of their arrow. with the sinew of deer and the top of deer horn boil to a jelly they make a glue that will not dissolve in cold water. their target and sword for their war also they use target that be round and make of the bark of tree and a sword of wood at their back. but oftentimes they use for sword the horn of a deer put through a piece of wood in form of a pickaxe, some a long stone sharpen at. wood at their back, but oftentimes they use for sword the horn of a deer put through a piece of wood in form of a pickaxe, some a long stone, sharpen at both end, use in the same manner. this they be wont to use also for hatchet, but now by truck. they have plenty of the same form of iron and those be their chief instrument and arm their fish, be much in bo their bo. these they make of one tree by burn and scratch away the coal with stone and shell till they have make it in form of a trough. some of they be a elne deep and forty or fifty foot in length, and some will bear 40 man, but the most ordinary have make it in form of a trough. some of they be a elne deep and forty or fifty foot in length, and some will bear 40 man, but the most ordinary be small and will bear 10, 20 or 30. according to their bigness. in stead of oar they use paddle and stick with which they will row fast than our barge. how they spin betwixt their hand and thigh their woman use to spin the bark of tree, dear sinew or a kind of grass they call pemmenaw. of these they make a thread, very even and ready. this thread serve for many use, as about their house apparel, as also they make net for fish, for the quantity, as formal brade as we they make. very even and ready. this thread serve for many use, as about their house apparel, as also they make net for fish for the quantity, as formal brade as we. they make also with it line for angle. their hook be either a bone, grate as they, their arrow, in the form of a crooked pin, or fish-hooke, their fishhook, or of the splinter of a bone tie to the cleft of a little stick and with the end of the line they tie on the bait. they use also long arrow tie in a line wherewith they shoot at fish in the river. but they of accawmack use staff like unto javelin head with bone. with these they dart fish swim in the water. they have also wherewith they shoot at fish in the river, but they of accawmack use staff like unto javelin head with bone. with these they dart fish swim in the water. they have also many artificial wire in which they get abundance of fish. in their hunt and fish they take extreme pain, yet it be their ordinary exercise. from their infancy. they esteem it a pleasure and be very proud to be expert therein, and by their continual range and travel they know all the advantage and place. most frequent with deer, beast, fish, foule, root and berry. at their hunt they leave their habitation and reduce themselves into company how they hunt as the tartar do and go to the most desert place with their family where they berry at their hunt. they leave their habitation and reduce themselves into company, how they hunt, as the tartar do, and go to the most desert place with their family where they spend their time in hunt and fowl up towards the mountain by the head of their river, where there be plenty of game for betwixt the river, the ground be so narrow that little come here which they devour. not it be a marvel they can so direct pass these desert some 3 or 4 day journey without habitation. their hunt house be like unto arbour cover with mat. these their woman bear after they with corn, acorn, mortar and all bag and baggage they use when they come to the place of exercise. every man unto arbour cover with mat. these their woman bear, after they with corn, acorn mortar and all bag and baggage they use when they come to the place of exercise. every man do his best to show his dexterity, for by their excel in those quality they get their wife. forty yard will they shoot, level or very near the mark, and 120 be their best at random. at their hunt in the desert they be common, two or three hundred together. have find the deer, they environ they with many fire and betwixt the fire they place themselves and some take their stand in the midst the dear be. thus fear, by the fire and their voice they chase. they so long within that circle that many they place themselves and some take their stand in the midst the dear be. thus fear by the fire and their voice. they chase they so long within that circle that many time they kill 6, 8, 10 or 15 at a hunt. they use also to drive they into some narrow point of land when they find that advantage, and so force they into the river where with their boat they have ambuscado to kill they. when they have shoot a dear by land, they follow he like bloodhound by the blood and strain and oftentimes so take they hare, partridge, turkey or egg fat or lean, young or old, they devour all they can catch in their power in one of these hunt they find i oftentimes so take they hare, partridge, turkey or egg, fat or lean, young or old, they devour all they can catch in their power. in one of these hunt they find i in the discovery of the head of the river of chickahamania, where they slay my man and take i prisoner in a bogmire where i see those exercise and gather these observation: one savage hunt alone. one savage hunt alone. use the skin of a dear slit on the one side and so put on his arm through the neck so that his hand come to the head, which be stuff, and the horn, head, eye, ear and every part as artificial counterfeit as they can devise, thus shroud his body in the skin by stalk. come to the head, which be stuff, and the horn, head, eye, ear and every part as artificial counterfeit as they can devise. thus shroud his body in the skin by stalk. he approach the deer, creep on the ground from one tree to another. if the dear chance to find fault or stand at gaze, he turn the head with his hand to his best advantage to seem like a deer also gaze and lick himself. so watch his best advantage to approach have, shoot he. he chase he by his blood and strain till he get he their consultation. when they intend any war, the werowance usual, have the advice of their, their priest and conjurer and their ally and ancient friend, but chief, the priest. he get he their consultation. when they intend any war, the werowance usual have the advice of their, their priest and conjurer and their ally and ancient friend, but chief, the priest, determine their resolution. every werowance or some lusty fellow, they appoint captain over every nation. they seldom make war for land or good, but for woman and child and principal, for revenge. they have many enemy, their enemy, namely all their western country, beyond the mountain and the head of the river, upon the head of the powhatans, be the monacan who chief habitation. be at rasauweak, unto who the mowhemenchughes, the massinnacack, the monahassanugh, the monasickapanoughs and other nation pay tribute. upon the head of the river of toppahanock, be a people call mannahoack to. be at rasauweak unto who the mowhemenchughes, the massinnacack, the monahassanugh, the monasickapanoughs and other nation pay tribute. upon the head of the river of toppahanock be a people call mannahoack. to these be contributor the tauxania, the shackaconias, the ontponeas, the tegninateos, the whonkenteae, the stegarake, the hassinnungae and diverse other, all confederate with the monacan, though many different in language and be very barbarous, live for the most part of wild beast and fruit. beyond the mountain from whence be the head of the river patawomeke, the savage report, inhabit their most mortal enemy, massawomeke. the massawomeke, upon a great salt water which by all likelihood be either some part of cannada, some great lake or some inlet of some sea that fall into the south. massawomeke. the massawomeke upon a great salt water which by all likelihood be either some part of cannada, some great lake or some inlet of some sea that fall into the south sea. these massawomeke be a great nation and very populous. for the head of all those river, especial the pattawomeke, the pautuxunte, the sasquesa^anocks, the tockwoughe, be continual torment by they, of who cruelty they general complain, and very importunate they be with i and my company to free they from these tormentor. to this purpose they offer food, conduct, assistance, their offer of subjection and continual subjection, which i conclude to effect. but the council then present emulate my success, will not think it fit to spare i forty man to be hazard in those subjection and continual subjection, which i conclude to effect. but the council then present, emulate my success, will not think it fit to spare i forty man to be hazard in those unknown region. have pass, as before be speak of, but with 12 an^ so be lose that opportunity. seven boat full of these massawomeke we encounter at the head of the bay, who target basket, sword, tobaccopipe, platter, bow and arrow and every thing show they much exceed they of our part and their dexterity in their small boat, make of the bark of tree, sow with bark and well lute with gum, argue that they be seat upon some great water against all these enemy. the powhatans be constrain sometime to fight their chief attempt. tree, sow with bark and well lute with gum, argue that they be seat upon some great water. against all these enemy, the powhatans be constrain sometime to fight. their chief attempt be by stratagem, treachery or surprisal. yet the werowance, woman and child they put, not to death but keep they captive. they have a method in war and for our pleasure they show it. we and it be in this manner. perform at mattapanient, have paint and disguise themselves in the fierce manner they can. devise their manner of battle. they divide themselves into two company, near a hundred in a company. the one company call the other powhatans, either army, have their captain, these as enemy, take their stand a musket, shoot one from another. two company, near a hundred in a company. the one company call the other powhatans, either army. have their captain, these as enemy. take their stand, a musket, shoot one from another, rank themselves 15 a breast, and each rank from another 4 or 5 yard, not in file but in the open betwixt their file, so the rear can shoot as convenient as the front. have thus pitch the field from either part. go a messenger with these, condition that whosoever be vanquish, such as escape upon their submission in two day after, shall live, but their wife and child shall be prize for the conqueror. the messenger be no soon return. but they approach in their order, on each flank a sergeant and in the rear but their wife and child shall be prize for the conqueror. the messenger be no soon return. but they approach in their order, on each flank a sergeant and in the rear a officer for lieutenant. all due keep their order, yet leap and sing after their accustom tune, which they only use in war. upon the first flight of arrow they give such horrible shout and screech as so many infernal hell hound can not have. make they more terrible when they have spend their arrow they join together pretty charge and retire every rank second other. as they get advantage they catch their enemy by the hair of the head and down. he come that be. take his enemy with his wooden sword, seem to beat. second other. as they get advantage, they catch their enemy by the hair of the head and down he come that be, take his enemy with his wooden sword, seem to beat out his brain, and still they creep to the rear to maintain the skirmish. the monacan decrease the powhatans charge. they, in the form of a half moon, they, unwilling to be enclose, flee all in a troop to their ambuscado on who they lead. they, very cunning, the monacan disperse themselves among the fresh man, whereupon the powhatans retire with all speed to their second, which the monacan see take that advantage to retire again to their own battle, and so each return to their own quarter, all their action, voice and gesture, both in their second, which the monacan see, take that advantage to retire again to their own battle and so each return to their own quarter. all their action, voice and gesture, both in charge and retire, be so strain to the height of their quality and nature that the strangeness thereof make it seem very delightful their music. for their music they use a thick cane on which they pipe as on a recorder for their war. they have a great deep platter of wood. they cover the mouth thereof with a skin. at each corner they tie a walnut which meet on the backside near the bottom with a small rope. they twitch they together till it be so teach and stiff that they may beat upon it. tie a walnut which meet on the backside, near the bottom with a small rope. they twitch they together till it be so teach and stiff that they may beat upon it as upon a drum. but their chief instrument be rattle make of small gourd or pumpeon shell. of these they have base, tenor, countertenor, mean and treble. these mingle with their voice, sometime twenty or thirty together make such a terrible noise as will rather affright then delight any man. their entertainment, if any great commander arrive at the habitation of a werowance, they spread a mat as the turk do, a carpet for he to sit upon. upon another right opposite, they sit themselves. then do all with a tuneable voice of shout bid he. spread a mat as the turk do a carpet for he to sit upon. upon another right opposite, they sit themselves. then do all, with a tuneable voice of shout, bid he welcome. after this, do two or more of their chief man make a oration, testify their love, which they do with such vehemency and so great passion that they sweat till they drop and be so out of breath they can scarce speak so that a man will take they to be exceed angry or stark mad. such victual as they have they spend free and at night. where his lodging be appoint, they set a woman, fresh paint, red with pocones and oil, to be his bedfellow. their trade, their manner of trade, be for. free, and at night, where his lodging be appoint, they set a woman, fresh, paint, red with pocones and oil, to be his bedfellow. their trade, their manner of trade, be for copper, bead and such like, for which they give such commodity as they have as skin, foul fish flesh and their country corne, but their victual be, their chief riches, their physic. every spring they make themselves sick with drink, the juice of a root they call wighsacan, and water whereof they pour so great a quantity that it purge they in a very violent manner so that in three or four day after they scarce recover their former health, their chirurgery. sometime they be trouble with dropsy, swell, ache and such like disease for cure. violent manner so that in three or four day after they scarce recover their former health, their chirurgery. sometime they be trouble with dropsy swell, ache and such like disease for cure, whereof they build a stove in the form of a dove-house with mat so close that a few coal therein cover with a pot will make the patient sweat. extreme for swell also, they use small piece of touchwood in the form of clove which prick on the grief, they burn close to the flesh and from thence draw the corruption with their mouth. with this root wighsacan they ordinary heal green wound. but to scarify a swell or make incision their best instrument be some splint stone, old ulcer or putrify. hurt be seldom see. with this root wighsacan they ordinary heal green wound, but to scarify a swell or make incision their best instrument be some splint stone, old ulcer or putrify hurt, be seldom see cure among they. their charm to cure they have many profess physician who with their charm and rattle, with a infernal rout of word and action, will seem to suck their inward grief from their navel or their grieve place. but of our chirurgeon they be so conceit that they believe any plaster will heal any hurt. but it be not always in physician skill to heal the patient that be sick and ill for sometime. sickness on the patient part prove strong far than all physician art of their religion there be yet in virginia. skill to heal the patient that be sick and ill for sometime. sickness on the patient part prove strong far than all physician art of their religion there be. yet in virginia no place discover to be so savage in which they have not a religion. deer and bow and arrow, all thing that be able to do, they hurt beyond their prevention. they adore with their kind of divine worship as the fire, water, lightning, thunder our ordnance piece their god, horse, etc. but their chief god they worship be the devil, he they call okee and serve he more of fear then love, they say they have conference with he and fashion themselves as near to his shape as they can imagine in their temple. they okee and serve he more of fear then love. they say they have conference with he and fashion themselves as near to his shape as they can imagine in their temple. they have his image, evil, favour, carve and then paint and adorn with chain of copper and bead and cover with a skin in such manner as the deformity may well suit with such a god. by he be common the sepulchre of their king, their body be first bowel, how they bury their king, then dry upon hurdle till they be very dry, and so about the most of their joint and neck they hang bracelet or chain of copper, pearl and such like, as they use to wear their inward they stuff with copper bead. so about the most of their joint and neck they hang bracelet or chain of copper, pearl and such like as they use to wear their inward. they stuff with copper bead, hatchet and such trash. then lap they they very careful in white skin and so roll they in mat for their wind sheet. and in the tomb, which be a arch make of mat, they lay, they orderly, what remain of this kind of wealth their king have. they set at their foot in basket. these temple and body be keep by their priest for their ordinary burial. they dig a deep hole in the earth with sharp stake- their ordinary burial, and the corpse be lap in skin and mat with their jewel they lay. for their ordinary burial. they dig a deep hole in the earth with sharp stake- their ordinary burial. and the corpse be lap in skin and mat with their jewel. they lay they upon, stick in the ground and so cover they with earth. the burial end. the woman be paint all their face with black coal and oil. do sit twenty-foure hour in the house, mourn and lament by turn, with such yell and howl as may express their great passion. in every territory of a werowance be a temple and a priest, two or three or more, their temple, their principal temple or place of superstition. be at vitamussack, at pamaunk^e, near unto, which be a house, temple or place of powhatans, upon the top of. three or more, their temple, their principal temple or place of superstition be at vitamussack, at pamaunk^e, near unto, which be a house, temple or place of powhatans. upon the top of certain red sandy hill in the wood there be three great house fill with image of their king and devil and tomb of their predecessor. those house be near sixty foot in length, build arbour-wise. after their build this place they count so holy as that. but the priest and king dare come into they, nor the savage dare not go up the river in boat by it, but they solemn cast some piece of copper, white bead or pocones into the river for fear their okee shall be offend and revenge of. they thus fear. in boat by it, but they solemn cast some piece of copper, white bead or pocones into the river for fear their okee shall be offend and revenge of they thus: fear be the first. their god beget till fear begin. their god be not in this place. common be resident seven priest. their ornament. for their priest, the chief differ from the rest in his ornament, but inferior priest can hardly be know from the common people. but that they have not so many hole in their ear to hang their jewel at the ornament of the chief priest, be certain attire for his head. make thus: they take a dozen or 16 or more snake skin and stuff they with moss and of weasel and other. of the chief priest be certain attire for his head. make thus: they take a dozen or 16 or more snake skin and stuff they with moss and of weasel and other vermin skin, a good many. all these they tie by their tail so as all their tail meet in the top of their head like a great tassel. round about this tassel, be as it be a crown of feather, the skin hang round about his head, neck and shoulder and in a manner cover his face, the face of all their priest. be paint as ugly as they can devise in their hand. they have every one his rattle, some base, some small. their devotion be most in song, which the chief priest begin and paint as ugly as they can devise in their hand. they have every one, his rattle, some base, some small. their devotion be most in song, which the chief priest begin and the rest follow. he sometime, he make invocation with break, sentence by start and strange passion, and at every pause the rest give a short groan. thus seek they, in deep foolishness, to climb the height of happiness. it can not be perceive that they keep any day as more holy than other, the time of solemnity, but only in some great distress of want, fear of enemy. time of triumph, and gather together their fruit. the whole country of man, woman and child come together to solemnity. the manner of their devotion be sometime to want fear of enemy, time of triumph, and gather together their fruit. the whole country of man, woman and child come together to solemnity. the manner of their devotion, be sometime to make a great fire in the house or field and all to sing and dance about it with rattle and shout together four or five hour sometime. they set a man in the midst and about he they dance and sing, he all the while clap his hand as if he will keep time, and after their song and dance end they go to ^heir feast through god. beget fear, man, blind mind, do rear a hell-god to the ghost, a heaven-god to the host. yea, god unto the sea. fear do create all these. they. ^heir feast. through god, beget fear. man, blind mind do rear. a hell-god to the ghost, a heaven-god to the host. yea, god unto the sea. fear do create all these. they have also diverse conjuration. their conjuration, one they make when i be their prisoner, of which hereafter you shall read at large their altar: they have also certain altar stone they call pawcorance, but these stand from their temple, some by their house, other in the wood and wildernes^es where they have have any extraordinary accident or encounter. and as you travel at those stone they will tell you the cause why they be there, erect which from age to age they instruct their child, as their best record of antiquity. upon these they offer blood. stone- they will tell you the cause why they be there- erect, which from age to age they instruct their child as their best record of antiquity. upon these they offer blood, dear suet and tobacco. this they do when they return from the war, sacrifice to the water, from hunt and upon many other occasion. they have also another superstition that they use in storm: when the water be rough in the river and sea coast, their conjurer run to the water side or pass in their boat. after many hellish outcry and invocation, they cast tobacco, copper, pocones or such trash into the water to pacific. that god, who they think to be very angry in those storm, before their dinner and supper, the better sort. cast tobacco, copper, pocones or such trash into the water to pacific that god, who they think to be very angry in those storm, before their dinner and supper, the better sort will take the first bit and cast it in the fire, which, be all the grace they be, know to use. in some part of the country they have yearly a sacrifice of child. such a one be at quiyoughcohanock, some ten mile from james town, and thus perform fifteen of the proper young boy between ten and fifteen year of age. they paint white their solemn sacrifice of child, which they call black-boye have bring they forth. the people spend the forenoon in dance and sing about they with rattle. in the afternoon they put white, their solemn sacrifice of child, which they call black-boye, have bring they forth. the people spend the forenoon in dance and sing about they with rattle. in the afternoon they put those child to the root of a tree by they all. the man stand in a guard, every one have a bastinado in his hand, make of reed, bind together this, make a lane between they all along, through which there be appoint five young man to fetch these child. so every one of the five go through the guard to fetch a child each after other by turn. the guard fierce beat they with their bastinado and they patient, endure and receive. all defend the child with their naked body from the unmerciful blow that each after other by turn the guard. fierce beat they with their bastinado and they, patient, endure and receive. all defend the child with their naked body from the unmerciful blow that pay they sound, though the child escape all this while the woman weep and cry out very passionate, provide mat, skin, moss and dry wood as thing fit their child funeral. after the child be thus pass the guard, the guard tear down the tree branch and bough with such violence that they rend the body and make wreath for their head or bedeck their hair with the leaf. what else be do with the child? be not see, but they be all cast on a heap in a valley as dead, where th^y make a. their hair with the leaf. what else be do with the child? be not see, but they be all cast on a heap in a valley as dead, where th^y make a great feast for all the company. the werowance be demand the meaning of ^his sacrifice. those black-boye be make so mad with a kind of drink that they will do^ any mischief at the command of their keeper. answer that the child be not all dead, but that the okee or devil do suck the blood from their left breast. who chance to be his by lot till they be dead, but the rest be keep in the wilderness by the young man till nine month be expire, during which time they must not converse with. his by lot till they be dead, but the rest be keep in the wilderness by the young man till nine month be expire, during which time they must not converse with any, and of these be make their priest and conjurer. this sacrifice they hold to be so necessary that, if they shall omit it, their okee or devil and all their other quiyoughcosughe which be their other god, will let they have no deer, turkey, corn nor fish, and yet beside he will make a great slaughter among they their resurrection. they think that their werowance and priest, which they also esteem quiyoughcosughe, when they be dead, do go beyond the mountain towards the set of the sun and ever remain there in form of their their werowance and priest, which they also esteem, quiyoughcosughe, when they be dead do go beyond the mountain towards the set of the sun and ever remain there in form of their okee, with their head, paint with oil and pocones, fine trim with feather, and shall have bead, hatchet, copper and tobacco, do nothing but dance and sing with all their predecessor. but the common people, they suppose, shall not live after death but rot in their grave like dead dog. to divert they from this blind idolatry, we do our best endeavour, chief, with the werowance of quiyoughcohanock, who devotion, apprehension and good disposition much exceed any in those country, with who, although we can not as yet prevail to forsake his false god. yet this: the werowance of quiyoughcohanock, who devotion, apprehension and good disposition much exceed any in those country with who, although we can not as yet prevail to forsake his false god, yet this he do believe that our god as much exceed they as our gun. do their bow and arrow, and many time do, send to i, to james town, entreat i to pray to my god for rain, for their god will not send they any. and in this lamentable ignorance do these poor soul sacrifice themselves to the devil, not know their creator, and we have not language sufficient so plain to express it as make they understand it. which god grant they may, for religion it be that do distinguish we from their bruit humour. we have not language sufficient so plain to express it as make they understand it. which god grant they may for religion. it be that do distinguish we from their bruit humour. well, we may it know that can, with understanding, argue thus our god be truth, but they can do so of the manner of the virginian government. although the country people be very barbarous, yet have they among they such government as that. their magistrate for good command and their people for due subjection and obey, excel many place that will be count very civil. the form of their commonwealth be a monarchical government, one as emperor rule over many king or governor, their chief ruler be call powhatan and take his name of his principal. civil. the form of their commonwealth be a monarchical government, one as emperor rule over many king or governor. their chief ruler be call powhatan and take his name of his principal place of dwell, call powhatan, but his proper name be wahunsonacock. some country he have which have be his ancestor and come unto he by inheritance as the country call powhatan, arrohateck, appamatuck, pamaunkee, youghtanund and mattapanient. all the rest of his territory express in the map they report have be his several conquest. in all his ancient inheritance he have house build after their manner, like arbour, some 30. some 40. yard long, and at every house provision for his entertainment, according to the time. at werowcomoco on the northside of the river pamaunkee be their manner, like arbour, some 30., some 40. yard long, and at every house provision for his entertainment, according to the time. at werowcomoco, on the northside of the river pamaunkee be his residence. when i be deliver, he prisoner some 14 mile from james town where for the most part he be resident. but at last he take so little pleasure in our near neighbourhood that he retire himself to orapake, in the desert betwixt chickahaman^a and youghtanund. he be of personage, a tall, well proportion man with a sour look, a description of powhatan. his head somewhat gray, his beard so thin that it seem none at all his age, near sixty, of a very able and hardy body to endure any labour about his person. his head somewhat gray, his beard so thin that it seem none at all his age, near sixty, of a very able and hardy body to endure any labour about his person. ordinary attend a guard of 40 or 50 of the tall man his country do afford his attendance and watch every night upon the four quarter of his house be four sentinel each from other a flight shoot and at every half hour one from the corpse guard do hollow, shake his lip with his finger between they unto who every sentinel do answer round from his stand. if any fail they present send forth a officer that beat he extreme a mile from orapake in a thicket of wood. his treasury, he have a house. round from his stand. if any fail, they present send forth a officer that beat he extreme a mile from orapake, in a thicket of wood, his treasury. he have a house in which he keep his kind of treasure as skin, copper, pearl and bead, which he store up against the time of his death and burial. here also be his store of red paint for ointment, bow and arrow, target and club this house be fifty or sixty yard in length, frequent only by priest. at the four corner of this house stand four image as sentinel, one of a dragon, another a bear, the three like a leopard and the four like a giantlike man. all make evil favour according to their best workmanship. his. image as sentinel: one of a dragon, another a bear, the three like a leopard and the four like a giantlike man. all make evil favour, according to their best workmanship, his wife. he have as many woman as he will, whereof, when he lie on his bed, one sit at his head and another at his foot, but when he sit, one sit on his right hand and another on his left. as he be weary of his woman, he bestow they on those that best deserve they at his hand. when he dine or sup one of his woman, before and after meat, bring he water in a wooden platter to wash his hand. another wait with a bunch of feather to wipe they in stead. sup, one of his woman. before and after meat bring he water in a wooden platter to wash his hand. another wait with a bunch of feather to wipe. they in stead of a towel, and the feather, when he have wipe, be dry again. his kingdom descend not to his son nor child, his successor, but first to his brethren, whereof he have 3. namely opitchapan, opechancanough and catataugh, and after their decease to his sister, first to the elder sister, then to the rest, and after they to the heir, male or female, of the elder sister, but never to the heir of the male. he, nor any of his people, understand any letter whereby to write or read, only the law whereby he rule be. the elder sister, but never to the heir of the male. he nor any of his people understand any letter whereby to write or read only the law whereby he rule be custom. yet when he list his will be a law and must be obey their authority not only as a king but as half a god. they esteem he, his inferior king, who they call werowance, be tie to rule by custom and have power of life and death at their command in t^at nature. but this word werowance, which we call and construe for a king, be a common word whereby they call all commander, for they have but few word in their language and but few occasion to use any officer more than one. for a king be a common word whereby they call all commander, for they have but few word in their language and but few occasion to use any officer more than one commander, which common they call werowance, the tenor of their land, or caucorouse, which be captain. they all know their several land and habitation and limit to fish soul or hunt in, but they hold all of their great werowance, powhatan, unto who they pay tribute of skin, bead, copper, pearl, dear turkey, wild beast and corn. what he command they dare not disobey in the least thing. it be strange to see with what great fear and adoration all these people do obey this powhatan, for at his foot they present whatsoever he command and in the least thing. it be strange to see with what great fear and adoration all these people do obey this powhatan, for at his foot they present whatsoever he command, and at the least frown of his brow, their great spirit will tremble with fear and no marvel, for he be very terrible and tyrannous in punish such as offend he, for example, his manner of punishment: he cause certain malefactor to be bind hand and foot, then have of many fire gather great store of burn coal. they rake these coal round in the form of a cockpit and in the midst they cast the offender to broil to death. sometime he cause the head of they that offend he to be lay upon the altar. form of a cockpit and in the midst they cast the offender to broil to death sometime. he cause the head of they that offend he to be lay upon the altar or sacrifice stone, and one with club beat out their brain. when he will punish any notorious enemy or malefactor, he cause he to be tie to a tree and with mussel, shell or reed the executioner cut off his joint, one after another, ever cast what they cut of into the fire. then do he proceed with shell and reed to case the skin from his head and face. then do they rip his belly and so burn he with the tree and all thus themselves report. they execute george cassen. ^ 46.. their ordinary. skin from his head and face. then do they rip his belly and so burn he with the tree and all thus themselves report they execute george cassen ^ 46.. their ordinary correction be to beat they with cudgel. we have see a man kneel on his knee and at powhatans command two man have beat he on the bare skin till he have fall senseless in a sound, and yet never cry nor complain. and he make a woman for play. the whore sit upon a great stone on her bare breech, twenty-foure hour only, with corn and water, every three day till nine day be pass. yet he love she exceed, notwithstanding there be common whore by profession. in the year 1608 he surprise the people. with corn and water every three day, till nine day be pass, yet he love she exceed notwithstanding there be common whore by profession. in the year 1608 he surprise the people of payankatank, his near neighbour and subject. the occasion be to we unknown, but the manner be thus: first he send diverse of his man as to lodge among they that night than the ambuscado environ all their house, and at the hour appoint they all fall to the spoil twenty-foure man. they slay the long hair of the one side of their head with the skin case off with shell or reed they bring away. they surprise also the woman and the child and the werowance. all these they present to powhatan. the werowance woman. with the skin case off with shell or reed they bring away. they surprise also the woman and the child and the werowance. all these they present to powhatan. the werowance woman and child become his prisoner and do he service the lock of hair with their skin. he hang on a line betwixt two tree and thus he make ostentation of his triumph at werowocomoco, where he intend to have do as much to i and my company, and this be as much as my memory can call to mind worthy of note, which i have purposely collect to satisfy my friend of the true worth and quality of virginia. yet some bad nature will not stick to slander the country that will slovenly spit at all. have purposely collect to satisfy my friend of the true worth and quality of virginia. yet some bad nature will not stick to slander the country that will slovenly spit at all thing, especial in company, where they can find none to contradict. they who, though they be scarce, en^r ten mile from james town, or at the most but at the fall, yet hold it a great disgrace that among so much action, their action be nothing, exclaim of all thing, though they never adventure to know any thing, nor ever do any thing, but devour the fruit of other man labour, be for most part of such tender education and small experience in martial accident, because they find not english city nor such fair house, nor devour the fruit of other man labour, be for most part of such tender education and small experience in martial accident. because they find not english city, nor such fair house, nor at their own wish any of their accustom dainty with feather, bed and down, pillow, tavern and alehouse in every breathe place, neither such plenty of gold and silver and dissolute liberty as they expect, have little or no care or any thing but to pamper their belly, to fly away with our pinnace or procure their mean to return for england, for the country, be to they a misery, a ruin, a death, a hell, and their report here and their action there, according some other there be that have yearly stipend to pass to. country. be to they a misery, a ruin, a death, a hell. and their report here and their action there, according some other there be that have yearly stipend to pass to and again for transportation. who to keep the mystery of the business in themselves, though they have neither time nor mean to know much of themselves yet all man, action or relation they so formal tune to the temporize time simplicity as they can make their ignorance seem much more than all the true actor can, by their experience and those with their great word, delude the world with such strange promise as abuse the business much worse than the rest. for the business be build upon the foundation of their feign experience. the planter, the word, delude the world with such strange promise as abuse. the business much worse than the rest. for the business be build upon the foundation of their feign experience. the planter, the money and mean have still miscarry. yet they ever return. and the planter, so far absent, who can contradict their excuse which still, to maintain their vain glory and estimation, from time to time have use such diligence as make they pass for truth, though nothing more false, and that the adventurer may be. thus abuse, let no man wonder. for the wise live be soon abuse by he that have a fair tongue and a dissemble heart. there be many in virginia, mere project verbal and idle contemplator, and those so devote to pure idleness. be soon abuse by he that have a fair tongue and a dissemble heart. there be many in virginia, mere project verbal and idle contemplator, and those so devote to pure idleness that, though they have live two or three year in virginia, lordly necessity itself can not compel they to pass the peninsula or palisado of james town. and those witty spirit, what will they not affirm in the behalf of our transporter to get victual from their ship or obtain their good word in england to get their pass. thus, from the clamour and the ignorance of false informer, be spring those disaster that spring in virginia and our ingenious verbalist be no less plague to we in virginia than the locust to the egyptian. for the ignorance of false informer. be spring, those disaster that spring in virginia and our ingenious verbalist, be no less plague to we in virginia than the locust to the egyptian, for the labour of twenty or thirty of the best only preserve in christianity by their industry, the idle liver of near two hundred of the rest who live near ten month of such natural mean as the country natural of itself afford. notwithstanding all this and the worst fury of the savage, the extremity of sickness, mutiny, faction, ignorance and want of victual, in all that time i lose but seven or eight man. yet subject the savage to our desire, obedience, and receive contribution from thirty five of their king to protect and assist they. all that time i lose, but seven or eight man yet, subject the savage to our desire, obedience, and receive contribution from thirty five of their king to protect and assist they against any that shall assault they, in which order they continue, true and faithful, and as subject to his majesty. so long after, as i do govern there until i leave the country, since how they have revolt, the country lose and again replant, and the business have succeed from time to time. i refer you to the relation of. they return from virginia that have be more diligent in such observation. john smith write this with his own hand. because many do desire to know the manner of their language, i have insert these few that have be more diligent in such observation. john smith write this with his own hand. because many do desire to know the manner of their language, i have insert these few word: ka katorawine, yowo. what call you this? nemarough a man, crenepo, a woman, a boy, yehawkans house, matchcore, skin or garment, mockasin shoe, tussan, bed, pokatawer, fire, attawp a bow, atonce arrow, monacooke sword, aumouhhowgh a target, pawcussack gun, tomahack axe, tockahack pickaxe, pamesack knife, accowpret, sheares, pipe, mattassin, copper, vssawassin, iron, brass, silver or any white mettle, muss, wood, attasskuss, leave, weed or grass, chepsin land, shacquohocan a stone, wepenter a cuckold, suckahanna, water, noughmass fish, copotone, sturgeon, weghshaughe flesh, sawwehone, blood, netoppew, friend marrapough, enemy maskapow, the worst of the enemy, mawchick chammay. or grass, chepsin land, shacquohocan a stone, wepenter a cuckold, suckahanna water, noughmass fish, copotone, sturgeon, weghshaughe flesh, sawwehone blood, netoppew, friend marrapough, enemy maskapow, the worst of the enemy, mawchick chammay, the best of friend. casacunnakack, peya quagh, acquintan uttasantasough. in how many day will there come hither any more english ship? their number: necut, 1. ningh, 2. nuss, 3. yowgh, 4. paranske, 5. comotinch, 6. toppawoss 7. nusswash 8. 9, kaskeke, 10. they count no more but by ten, as follow: case how many? ninghsapooeksku: 20. nussapooeksku: 30. yowghapooeksku 40. parankestassapoocksku 50. comatinchtassapooeksku 60. nussswashtassapooeksku 70. kekataughtassapooeksku 90.. necuttoughtysinough 100. necuttweunquaough 1000. rawcosowgh day, keskowghe sun, toppquough night, nepaww^showghs moon, pawpaxsoughe year, pummahump star, osy, heaven, okee, god, quiyoughcosough petty god and their affinity righcomoughe death. nussswashtassapooeksku, 70.. kekataughtassapooeksku, 90.. necuttoughtysinough, 100. necuttweunquaough, 1000. rawcosowgh day, keskowghe sun, toppquough night, nepaww^showghs moon, pawpaxsoughe year, pummahump star, osy heaven, okee god, quiyoughcosough petty god and their affinity, righcomoughe death. kekughe life. mowchick kaqueremecher, i be very hungry. what shall i eat? tawnor nehiegh powhatan, where dwell powhatan? mache nehiegh yourowgh orapak? now, he dwell a great way hence at orapak, vittapitchewayne, anpechitch nehawper werowacomoco. you lie, he stay ever at werowacomoco. kator nehiegh mattagh near uttapitchewayne, true, he be there, i do not lie. werowance mawmarinough k^katen peyaquaugh. run you then to the king mawmarynough and bid he come hither. vtteke e peya weyack wighwhip, get you. go and come again quick. kekaten pocahontas near mowchick rawrenock audowgh, bid pocahontas bring hither two little basket. king mawmarynough and bid he come hither. vtteke e peya weyack, wighwhip, get you go and come again quick. kekaten, pocahontas, near mowchick, rawrenock, audowgh, bid pocahontas, bring hither two little basket and i will give her white bead to make she a chain. old virginia c s their triumph about he c smith bind to a tree to be shoot to death. 1602. c s how they take he prisoner in the oaze. 1607 cs. c smith bind a savage to his arm, fight with the king of pamaunkee and all his company and slay 3 of they c smith take the king of paspahegh prisoner, ao 1609.. a conjurer, their idol. a priest, their conjuration about c smith. 160^. a description of part of the adventure. 3 of they. c smith, take the king of paspahegh, prisoner ao 1609.. a conjurer, their idol, a priest, their conjuration about c smith, 160^. a description of part of the adventure of cap smith in virginia. a state of 10 leau^es: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 grave, and extract out of the general history of virginia, new england and summer ise by robert vaughan: c smith, take the king of pamaunkee, prisoner 1608. the country we now call virginia, begin at cape henry, aistant from roanoack, 60 mile where be sr walter raleigh psantation. and because the people differ very little from t^em of powhatan in any thing, i have insert those figure in this place because of the conveniency. cs king. sr walter raleigh psantation. and because the people differ very little from t^em of powhatan in any thing, i have insert those figure in this place. because of the conveniency cs. king powhatan command c smith to be slay his daughter pocahontas, beg his life, his thankfulness and how he subject 30 of their king. read ^ history print by james reeve @ the three book, the proceed and accident of the english colony in virginia, extract from the author, follow by william simons, doctor of divinity, chapter i: it may well be think, sir thomas smith, treasurer, a country so fair as virginia be and a people so tractable will long ere this have be quiet, possess to the satisfaction of the adventurer and the eternize of. smith, treasurer, a country so fair as virginia be and a people so tractable will long ere this have be quiet possess, to the satisfaction of the adventurer and the eternize of the memory of those that effect it. but because all the world do see a defailement, this follow treatise shall give satisfaction to all, indifferent reader how the business have be carry, where no doubt they will easy understand and answer to their question how it come to pass. there be no better speed and success in those proceed. the first mover of the action, captain bartholomew gosnoll, one of the first mover of this plantation, have many year, solicit many of his friend but find small assistant at last prevail with some gentleman as captain. action. captain bartholomew gosnoll, one of the first mover of this plantation, have many year solicit many of his friend but find small assistant. at last prevail with some gentleman as captain john smith, mr edward-maria wingfield, mr robert hunt and diverse other who depend a year upon his project but nothing can be effect till by their great charge and industry. it come to be apprehend by certain of the nobility gentry and merchant so that his majesty, by his letter, patent, give commission for, establish counsel to direct here and to govern and to execute there. to effect this be spend another year and by that three ship be provide, one of 100 tun, another of 40. and a pinnace of 20. the transportation of the execute there to effect this be spend another year, and by that three ship be provide, one of 100 tun, another of 40. and a pinnace of 20.. the transportation of the company be commit to captain christopher newport, a mariner well practise for the western part of america. order for government. but their order for government be put in a box not to be open, nor the governor know, until they arrive in virginia on the 19 of december 1606.. we set sail from blackwall but by unprosperous wind be keep six week in the sight of england, all which time mr hunt, our preacher, be so weak and sick that few expect his recovery yet, although he be but twenty mile from his habitation. the time sight of england, all which time mr hunt, our preacher, be so weak and sick that few expect his recovery. yet although he be but twenty mile from his habitation the time we be in the down, and notwithstanding the stormy weather, nor the scandalous imputation of some few, little better than atheist of the great rank among we suggest, against he all this can never force from he so much as a seem desire to leave the business but prefer the service of god in so good a voyage before any affection to contest with his godless foe, who disastrous design can they have prevail have even then overthrow the business. so many discontent do then arise, have he not? with the water of patience and his his godless foe. who disastrous design can they have, prevail have even then overthrow the business. so many discontent do then arise, have he not? with the water of patience and his godly exhortation, but, chief, by his true, devote example, quench those flame of envy and dissension. we water at the canary we trade with the savage at dominica. three week we spend in refresh ourselves among these west-india isle. in gwardalupa we find a bath so hot as in it we boil porck as well as over the fire. and at a little isle call monica monica, a unfrequented isle full of bird. we take from the bush with our hand near two hogsh-head full of bird in three or four hour in mevis mona and call monica monica, a unfrequented isle full of bird. we take from the bush with our hand near two hogsh-head full of bird in three or four hour. in mevis, mona and the virgin isle we spend some time where with a loathsome beast like a crocodil, call a gwayn, tortoise, pelican, parrot and fish. we daily feast. go from thence in search of virginia. the company be not a little discomfort, see the mariner have 3 day pass their reckon and find no land, so that captain ratliffe, captain of the pinnace, rather desire to bear up the helm to return for england, then make further search. but god, the guider of all good action, force they by a extreme storm to hull all night. do drive. bear up the helm to return for england, then make further search. but god, the guider of all good action, force they by a extreme storm to hull all night. do drive they by his providence to their desire. port beyond all their expectation, for never any of they have see that coast. the first land they make they call cape henry, where thirty of they recreate themselves on shore. their first land be assault by five savage who hurt two of the english. very dangerous that night. be the box open and the order read in which bartholomew gosnoll, john smith, edward wingfield, christopher newport, john ratliffe, john martin and george kendal be name to be the council and to choose a precedent among they for a in which bartholomew gosnoll, john smith, edward wingfield, christopher newport, john ratliffe, john martin and george kendal be name to be the council and to choose a precedent among they for a year. who, with the council, shall govern matter of moment? be to be examine by a jury but determine by the mayor. part of the council in which the precedent have two voice. until the 13 of may. they seek a place to plant in matter of government than the council be swear, mr wingfield, be choose precedent and a oration make. why, captain smith be not admit of the council as the rest now fall. every man to work. the council contrive the fort, the rest cut down tree to make place to pitch their. smith be not admit of the council, as the rest now fall. every man to work, the council contrive the fort, the rest cut down tree to make place to pitch their tent, some provide clapbord to relade the ship, some make garden, some net, etc. the savage often visit we kind. the precedent overween jealousy will admit no exercise at arm or fortification, but the bough of tree cast together in the form of a half moon by the extraordinary pain and diligence of captain kendal, newport smith and twenty other. the discovery of the fall and powhatan be send to discover the head of the river by diverse small habitation they pass in six day they arrive at a town call powhatan, consist of some twelve. fall and powhatan be send to discover the head of the river by diverse small habitation. they pass in six day. they arrive at a town call powhatan, consist of some twelve house, pleasant seat on a hill before it, three fertile isle about it, many of their cornefield. the place be very pleasant and strong by nature. of this place the prince be call powhatan and his people powhatans. to this place the river be navigable but high within a mile by reason of the rock and isle there be not passage for a small boat. this they call the fall. the people in all part kind entreat. they till be return within twenty mile of james town. they give just cause of jealousy, but have god. boat. this they call the fall. the people in all part kind entreat. they till be return within twenty mile of james town. they give just cause of jealousy. but have god not bless the discoverer, otherwise then those at the fort. there have then be a end of that plantation. for at the fort where they arrive the next day, the fort assault by the savage. they find 17 man hurt and a boy slay by the savage. and have it not chance a cross bar shoot from the ship, strike down a bough from a tree among they, that cause they to retire. our man have all be slay, be secure, all at work and their arm in dry fat. hereupon the precedent be content the a tree among they that cause they to retire. our man have all be slay, be secure, all at work and their arm in dry fat. hereupon the precedent, be content: the fort shall be pallisadoe the ordnance mount his man arm and exercise. for many be the assault and ambuscado of the savage, and our man, by their disorderly straggle, be often hurt when the savage, by the nimbleness of their heel, well, escape what toil we have with so small a power to guard our workman. adays watch all night, resist our enemy and effect our business to relade the ship, cut down tree and prepare the ground to plant our corn, etc. i refer to the reader consideration. six week be spend in this manner. effect our business, to relade the ship, cut down tree and prepare the ground to plant our corn, etc. i refer to the reader consideration. six week be spend in this manner. captain newport, who be hire only for our transportation, be to return with the ship now. captain smith, who, all this time, from their departure from the canary, be restrain as a prisoner upon the scandalous suggestion of some of the chief envy his repute, who feign he intend to usurp the government, murder the council and make himself king. that his confederate be disperse in all the three ship and that diverse of his confederate that reveal it will affirm it. for this he be commit as a prisoner thirteen week. he remain thus suspect. disperse in all the three ship and that diverse of his confederate that reveal it will affirm it. for this he be commit as a prisoner thirteen week. he remain thus suspect and by that time the ship shall return. they pretend out of their commisseration to refer he to the council in england to receive a check, rather than by particulate his design make he so odious to the world as to touch his life or utter overthrow his reputation. but he so much scorn their charity and public defy the uttermost of their cruelty. he wise prevent their policy, though he can not suppress their envy. yet so well he demean himself in this business as all the company do see his innocency and his adversary. he wise prevent their policy, though he can not suppress their envy. yet so well he demean himself in this business as all the company do see his innocency and his adversary malice. and those suborn to accuse he, accuse his accuser of subornation. many untruth be allege against he, but be so apparent disprove, beget a general hatred in the heart of the company against such unjust commander that the precedent be adjudge to give he 200l so that all he have be seize upon in part of satisfaction which smith present, return to the store for the general use of the colony. many be the mischief that daily spring from their ignorant yet ambitious spirit, but the good doctrine and exhortation of our preacher, mr hunt. store for the general use of the colony. many be the mischief that daily spring from their ignorant yet ambitious spirit. but the good doctrine and exhortation of our preacher, mr hunt, reconcile they and cause captain smith to be admit of the council. the next day, all receive the communion, captain newport return for england. the day follow the savage voluntary desire peace. and captain newport return for england with news: leave in virginia 100, the 15 of june 1607.. by this observe, good man do never their country ruin bring. but when evil man shall injury begin, not care to corrupt and violate the judgements-seat for their own lucr sake. then look, that country can long have peace, though for the present it have rest and shall injury begin. not care to corrupt and violate the judgements-seat for their own lucr sake, then look, that country can long have peace, though for the present it have. rest and ease the name of they that be the first planter, be these: follow: sir thomas smith, treasurer council, mr edward maria wingfield, captain bartholomew gosnoll, captain john smith, captain john ratliffe, captain john martin, captain george kendal, gent mr robert hunt, preacher, mr george percy, anthony gosnoll, george flower, cap gabriel archer, robert fenton, robert ford, william bruster, edward harrington, dru pickhouse, thomas jacob, john brookes, ellis kingston, thomas sands, benjamin beast, jehu robinson, thomas mouton, eustace clovill, stephen halthrop, kellam throgmorton, edward mooris, nathaniel powel, edward browne, robert bebethland, john penington, jeremy alicock, george walker. john brookes, ellis kingston, thomas sands, benjamin beast, jehu robinson, thomas mouton, eustace clovill, stephen halthrop, kellam throgmorton, edward mooris, nathaniel powel, edward browne, robert bebethland, john penington, jeremy alicock, george walker, thomas studley, richard crofts, nicholas houlgrave, thomas webbt, john waller, john short, william tankard, william smethes, francis snarsbrough, richard simons, edward brookes, richard dixon, john martin, roger cook, anthony gosnold, tho wotton chirurg, john stevenson, thomas gore, henry adling, francis midwinter, richard frith carpenter, william laxon, edward pise, thomas emry, robert small labourer, john laydon, william cassen, george cassen, thomas cassen, william rhodes, william white old. edward henry tavin, george goulding, john dod, william johnson, william unger- iam read blacksmith. jonas profit sailer, tho cowper barber. will garret bricklayer, edward brinto, mason, william love, taylor, nic. white old, edward henry tavin, george goulding, john dod, william johnson, william unger. iam read blacksmith jonas profit sailer, tho cowper, barber, will garret bricklayer, edward brinto, mason, william love taylor, nic scot drum, wil wilkinson, chirurg samuel collier boy, nat peacock boy, james brumfield boy, richard mutton boy, with diverse other to the number of 100. chap 2: what happen till the first supply, the occasion of sickness be thus leave to our fortune it fortune that within ten day, scarce ten among we can either go or well stand. such extreme weakness and sickness oppress we, and thereat none need marvel if they consider the cause and reason. which be this: while the ship stay, our allowance be somewhat better. the sailor abuse by a daily. oppress we, and thereat none need marvel if they consider the cause and reason which be this. while the ship stay, our allowance be somewhat better. the sailor abuse by a daily proportion of biscuit which the sailor will pilfer to sell, give or exchange with we for money, saxefras, fur or love. but when they depart there remain neither tavern, beer house nor place of relief. but the common kettell have. we be as free from all sin as gluttony and drunkenness. we may have be canonize for saint, but our precedent will never have be admit for engross to his private oatmeal sack, oil, aquavitae, beef egg or what not, but the kettell that indeed he allow equal to be distribute, and that be half a. be admit for engross to his private oatmeal sack oil, aquavitae, beef egg or what not, but the kettell that indeed he allow equal to be distribute, and that be half a pint of wheat and as much barley boil with water for a man a day, and this have fry some 26.. week in the ship hold, contain as many worm as grain, so that we may true call it rather so much bran than corn. our drink be water, our lodging castle in the air with this lodging and diet, our extreme toil in bear and plant palisado. so strain and bruise we and our continual labour in the extremity of the heat have so weaken we as be cause sufficient to have make we as bear and plant palisado. so strain and bruise we and our continual labour in the extremity of the heat have so weaken we as be cause sufficient to have make we as miserable in our native country or any other place in the world. from may to september, those that escape live upon sturgeon- a bad precedent- and sea-crab fifty in this time. we bury the rest. see the precedent, project to escape these misery in our pinnace by flight who all this time have neither feel want nor sickness. so move our dead spirit as we depose he and establish ratcliff in his place. gosnoll be dead. kendal. depose smith new, recover martin and ratcliff be by his care, preserve and relieve and the most of the. we depose he and establish ratcliff in his place. gosnoll be dead, kendal. depose smith new. recover martin and ratcliff, be by his care, preserve and relieve and the most of the soldier recover with the skilful diligence of mr thomas wotton, our chirurgeon general. but now be all our provision, spend the sturgeon, go all help, abandon each hour, expect the fury of the savage, when god, the patron of all good, endeavour in that desperate extremity so change the heart of the savage. plenty unexpected that they bring such plenty of their fruit and provision as no man want. and now, where some affirm it be ill, do of the council to send forth man so bad provide, this incontradictable reason will show they plain, they. provision as no man want. and now, where some affirm it be ill do of the council to send forth man, so bad provide, this incontradictable reason will show. they plain they be too ill advise to nourish such ill conceit. first, the fault of our go be our own. what can be think fit or necessary, we have. but what we shall find or want, or where we shall be, we be all ignorant and suppose to make our passage in two month, with victual to live and the advantage of the spring to work, we be at sea five month where we both spend our victual and lose the opportunity of the time and season to plant by the unskilful presumption of our ignorant transporter. that we be at sea five month where we both spend our victual and lose the opportunity of the time and season to plant, by the unskilful presumption of our ignorant transporter that understand not at all what they undertake. such action have ever since the world beginning be subject to such accident and every thing of worth be find full of difficulty, but nothing so difficult as to establish a commonwealth so far remote from man and mean and where man mind be so untoward as neither do well themselves nor suffer other, but to proceed. the new precedent and martin be little belove of weak judgement in danger and less industry in peace. commit the manage of all thing abroad to captain smith who, by his own the new precedent and martin, be little belove of weak judgement in danger and less industry in peace. commit the manage of all thing abroad to captain smith who, by his own example, good word and fair promise, set some to mow, other to bind thatch, some to build house, other to thatch they. the building of james town himself always bear the great task for his own share so that in short time he provide most of they lodging neglect any for himself. this do see the savage superfluity begin to decrease, with some of his workman ship himself in the shallop to search the country for trade. the want of the language knowledge to manage his boat without sail, the want of a sufficient power know his workman, ship himself in the shallop to search the country for trade. the want of the language knowledge to manage his boat without sail, the want of a sufficient power, know the multitude of the savage apparel for his man and other necessary be infinite impediment. yet no discouragement. be but six or seven in company, he go down the river to kecoughtan, where at first they scorn he as a famish man and will in derision offer he a handful of corn, the beginning of trade abroad, a piece of bread for their sword and musket and such like proportion also for their apparel. but see, by trade and courtesy there be nothing to be. have he make bold to try such conclusion as necessity enforce. and musket and such like proportion also for their apparel. but see, by trade and courtesy there be nothing to be. have he make bold to try such conclusion as necessity. enforce though contrary to his commission. let fly his musket, run his boat on shore, whereat they all flee into the wood. so march towards their house. they may see great heap of corn. much ado he have to restrain his hungry soldier from present take of it, expect, as it happen, that the savage will assault they as, not long after they do, with a most hideous noise. sixty or seventy of they, some black, some red, some white, some particoloured, come in a square order, sing and dance out of the wood with their okee. a most hideous noise. sixty or seventy of they, some black, some red, some white, some particoloured, come in a square order, sing and dance out of the wood with their okee, which be a idol, make of skin stuff with moss, all paint and hang with chain and copper. bear before they, and in this manner be well arm with club target, bow and arrow. they charge the english that so kind. receive they with their musket, load with pistol, shoot that down, fall their god and diverse lie sprawl on the ground. the rest flee again to the wood and ere long send one of their quiyoughkasoucks to offer peace and redeem their okee. smith, tell they, if only six of they will come unarm and flee again to the wood and ere long send one of their quiyoughkasoucks to offer peace and redeem their okee. smith, tell they, if only six of they will come, unarm and load his boat, he will not only be their friend, but restore they their okee and give they bead, copper and hatchet beside which, on both side, be to their content perform. and then they bring he venison, turkey, wildfowl, bread and what they have. sing and dance in sign of friendship till they depart. in his return he discover the town and country of warraskoyack. thus, god, unboundlesse by his power, make they thus kind, will we devour smith, perceive, notwithstanding their late misery, not any regard, but from hand to mouth the company be. of warraskoyack. thus, god, unboundlesse by his power, make they thus kind. will we devour smith, perceive, notwithstanding their late misery, not any regard. but from hand to mouth the company be well, recover, cause the pinnace to be, provide with thing fit to get provision for the year. follow a savage his best friend, slay for love we. but in the interim he make 3. or 4. journey and discover the people of chickahamania. yet what he careful provide, the rest careless spend. wingfield and kendal live in disgrace. the discovery of chickahamine see all thing at random in the absence of smith. the company dislike of their precedent weakness and their small love to martin never mend sickness. strengthen themselves with the sailor and other confederate. thing at random. in the absence of smith, the company dislike of their precedent weakness and their small love to martin never mend sickness. strengthen themselves with the sailor and other confederate to regain their former credit and authority, or at least such mean aboard the pinnace be fit to sail as smith have appoint for trade to alter her course and to go for england. smith unexpected return, have the plot, discover to he much trouble. he have to prevent it till with store of sakre and musket. shoot he force they stay or sink in the river which action cost the life of captain kendal. these brawl be so disgustful as some will say they be better forget. yet all man of good judgement will conclude. in the river, which action cost the life of captain kendal. these brawl be so disgustful as some will say, they be better forget. yet all man of good judgement will conclude it be better their baseness shall be manifest to the world than the business. bear the scorn and shame of their excuse. disorder the precedent, and captain archer, not long after, intend also to have abandon the country. which project also be curb. another project to abandon the country and suppress by smith the spaniard. never more greedy desire gold then, he victual, nor his soldier, more to abandon the country than he to keep it. but find plenty of corn in the river of chickahamania, where hundred of savage in diverse place stand with basket. his soldier more to abandon the country than he to keep it. but find plenty of corn in the river of chickahamania, where hundred of savage in diverse place stand with basket, expect his come. and now the winter approach, the river become so cover with swan goose, duck and crane that we daily feast with good bread, virginia pease, pumpion and putchamin, fish, foul and diverse sort of wild beast as fat as we can eat they so that none of our tuftasfaty humorist desire to go for england. but our comaedy never endure long without a tragedy. some idle exception be mutter against captain smith for not discover the head of chickahamania river and tax by the council to be too slow in so worthy a. without a tragedy. some idle exception be mutter against captain smith for not discover the head of chickahamania river and tax by the council to be too slow in so worthy a attempt. the next voyage he proceed so far that with much labour, by cut of tree in sunder, he make his passage. but when his barge can pass no far he leave she in a broad bay out of danger of shot command. none shall go a shore till his return, himself with two english and two savage go up high in a canowe. but he be not long absent, but his man go a shore. who want of government, give both occasion and opportunity to the savage to surprise one, george cassen, who they slay. but he be not long absent. but his man go a shore who want of government, give both occasion and opportunity to the savage to surprise one, george cassen, who they slay and much fail not to have. cut of the boat and all the rest, smith, little dream of that accident be. get to the marsh at the river head, twenty mile in the desert, have his * * jehu robinson and thomas emry slay. two man slay as be suppose, sleep by the canowe whilst himself by fowl seek they victual who find he be beset with 200.. savage, two of they he slay, still defend himself with the aid of a savage, his guide, who he bind to his arm with his garter and use. be beset with 200.. savage, two of they. he slay, still defend himself with the aid of a savage, his guide, who he bind to his arm with his garter and use he as a buckler. yet he be shoot in his thigh a little and have many arrow that stick in his clothes, but no great hurt till at last they take he prisoner. when this news come to james town, much be their sorrow for his loss, few expect what ensue. six or seven week those barbarian keep he prisoner. many strange triumph and conjuration they make of he. yet he so demean himself among they as he not only divert they from surprise the fort but procure his own liberty and get himself and his conjuration they make of he. yet he so demean himself among they as he not only divert they from surprise the fort but procure his own liberty and get himself and his company such estimation among they that those savage admire he more than their own quiyouckosuck, the manner how they use and deliver he be as: follow captain smith, take prisoner the savage. have draw from george cassen. whether captain smith be go prosecute that opportunity. they follow he with 300.. bowman, conduct by the king of pamaunkee who in division search the turn of the river, find robinson and emry by the fire side. those they shoot full of arrow and slay then find the captain as be. say that use the savage, that be his. the river, find robinson and emry by the fire side. those they shoot full of arrow and slay. then find the captain as be say that use the savage that be his guide as his shield. three of they be slay and diverse other so gall. all the rest will not come near. he think thus to have return to his boat, regard they as he march more than his way, slip up to the middle in a oasie creek and his savage with he. yet dare they not come to he till be near dead with cold. he throw away his arm. then, according to their composition, they draw he forth and lead he to the fire, where his man be slay, diligent, they chafe his benumb. with cold he throw away his arm. then, according to their composition, they draw he forth and lead he to the fire where his man be slay diligent. they chafe his benumb limb. he demand for their captain. they show he opechankanough, king of pamaunkee, to who he give a round ivory double compass dial. much they marvel at the play of the fly and needle, which they can see so plain and yet not touch it because of the glass that cover they. but when he demonstrate, by that globe-like jewel, the roundness of the earth and sky, the sphere of the sun, moon and star, and how the sun do chase the night round about the world, continual the greatness of the land and sea, the earth and sky, the sphere of the sun, moon and star, and how the sun do chase the night round about the world, continual the greatness of the land and sea, the diversity of nation, variety of complexion and how we be to they, antipode and many other such like matter. they all stand as amaze with admiration notwithstanding. within a hour after they tie he to a tree and as many as can stand about he, prepare to shoot he but the king hold up the compass in his hand, they all lay down their bow and arrow and, in a triumphant manner, lead he to orapak where he be after their manner, kind feast and well, use their order in conduct he be thus draw themselves. bow and arrow and in a triumphant manner lead he to orapak, where he be after their manner, kind, feast and well, use their order in conduct. he be thus draw themselves all in file the order they observe in, then triumph the king in the midst, have all their piece and sword. bear before he captain smith, be lead after he by three great savage. hold he fast by each arm and on each side six. go in file with their arrow nocked, but arrive at the town which be but only thirty or forty, hunt house, make of mat which they remove as they please, as we our tent, all the woman and child stare to behold. he, the soldier nr all in file, perform the hunt house, make of mat which they remove as they please, as we our tent. all the woman and child stare to behold. he, the soldier nr all in file, perform the form of a bissom, so well as can be, and on each flank, officer as sergeant, to see they keep their order. a good time they continue this exercise and then cast themselves in a ring, dance in such several posture and sing and yell out such hellish note and screech. be strange. paint every one his quiver of arrow and at his back a club, on his arm a fox or a otter skin or some such matter for his vantbrace. their head and shoulder paint red with oil, and pocones mingle together which scarlet-like. a club on his arm, a fox or a otter skin or some such matter for his vantbrace. their head and shoulder paint red with oil and pocones mingle together which scarlet-like colour make a exceed handsome show his bow in his hand and the skin of a bird with her wing abroad dry. tie on his head a piece of copper, a white shell, a long feather with a small rattle. grow at the tail of their snack, tie to it or some such like toy. all this while smith and the king stand in the midst guard as before be say, and after three dance, they all depart, smith, they conduct to a long house where thirty or forty tall fellow do guard, he and ere. the midst guard, as before be say, and after three dance they all depart, smith. they conduct to a long house where thirty or forty tall fellow do guard he and ere long more bread and venison be bring. he then will have serve twenty man. i think his stomach at that time be not very good. what he leave, they put in basket and tie over his head. about midnight they set the meat again before he all. this time not one of they will eat a bit with he till the next morning. they bring he as much more and then do they eat all the old and reserve the new as they have do the other, which make he think they will fat he to. bring he as much more and then do they eat all the old and reserve the new, as they have, do the other which make he think they will fat he to eat he. yet in this desperate estate to defend he from the cold, one maocassater bring he his gown in requital of some bead and toy smith have give he at his first arrival in virginia. two day after a man will have slay he but that the guard prevent it for the death of his son, how he shall have be slay at orapack to who they conduct he to recover the poor man then breathe his last smith tell they that at james town he have a water. will do it if they will. orapack to who they conduct. he to recover the poor man, then breathe his last. smith. tell they that at james town he have a water, will do it, if they will let he fetch it. but they will not permit that. but make all the preparation they can to assault james town, crave his advice and for recompense he shall have life, liberty, land and woman. in part of a table book he write his mind to they at the fort, what be intend, how they shall follow that direction. to affright the messenger and without fail, send he such thing as he write for and a inventory with they. the difficulty and danger he tell the savage of the mine, great gun and other engine exceed. without fail, send he such thing as he write for and a inventory with they. the difficulty and danger he tell the savage of the mine, great gun and other engine exceed affright they. yet, according to his request, they go to james town in as bitter weather as can be of fro^t and snow and within three day return with a answer. how he save james town from be surprise. but when they come to jame town see man sally out, as he have tell they they will, they flee. yet in the night they come again to the same place where he have tell they they shall receive a answer and such thing as he have promise they, which they find according and with which they come again to the same place where he have tell they they shall receive a answer and such thing as he have promise they, which they find according and with which they return with no small expedition, to the wonder of they all that hear it, that he can either divine or the paper can speak. then they lead he to the youthtanund, the mattapanicut, the payankatank, the nantaughtacund and onawmanient, upon the river of rapahanock and patawomek, over all those river and back again by diverse, other, several nation. how they do conjure he at pamaunkee, to the king habitation at pamaunkee, where they entertain he with most strange and fearful conjuration, as if near lead to hell among the devil to dwell not long after early. pamaunkee to the king habitation at pamaunkee, where they entertain he with most strange and fearful conjuration, as if near lead to hell among the devil to dwell. not long after, early in a morning, a great fire be make in a long house and a mat spread on the one side as on the other, on the one. they cause he to sit and all the guard go out of the house and present come skip in a great grim fellow all paint over with coal, mingle with oil, and many snake and wesel skin stuff with moss and all their tail tie together so as they meet on the crown of his head in a tassel and round about the tassel be as a coronet of. stuff with moss and all their tail tie together so as they meet on the crown of his head in a tassel and round about the tassel be as a coronet of feather. the skin hang round about his head, back and shoulder and in a manner cover his face with a hellish voice and a rattle in his hand. with most strange gesture and passion, he begin his invocation and environ the fire with a circle of meal, which do three more. such like devil come rush in with the like antique trick, paint half black, half red, but all their eye be paint white and some red stroke like mutchato along their cheek round about he. those fiend dance a pretty while and then come in. black, half red, but all their eye be paint white and some red stroke like mutchato along their cheek round about he. those fiend dance a pretty while and then come in three more as ugly as the rest, with red eye and white stroke over their black face. at last they all sit down right against he. three of they on the one hand of the chief priest and three on the other- then, all with their rattle, begin a song which end. the chief priest lay down five wheat corn, then strain his arm and hand with such violence that he sweat and his vein swell. he begin a short oration. at the conclusion they all give a short groan and then lay down three grain. and hand with such violence that he sweat and his vein swell. he begin a short oration. at the conclusion they all give a short groan and then lay down three grain more. after that, begin their song again and then another oration, ever lay down so many corn as before till they have twice incircule the fire that do. they take a bunch of little stick, prepare for that purpose, continue still their devotion, and at the end of every song and oration they lay down a slick betwixt, the division of corne. till night neither he nor they do either eat or drink, and then they feast merry with the best provision they can make. three day they use this ceremony, the meaning whereof they tell. neither he nor they do either eat or drink, and then they feast merry with the best provision they can make: three day. they use this ceremony, the meaning whereof they tell he be, to know if he intend they well or no. the circle of meal signify their country, the circle of corn the bound of the sea and the stick his country. they imagine the world to be flat and round like a trencher, and they in the midst. after this, they bring he a bag of gunpowder which they careful preserve till the next spring to plant as they do their corn, because they will be acquaint with the nature of that seed. the king brother invite he to his house where, with as many, next spring to plant as they do their corn, because they will be acquaint with the nature of that seed. the king brother invite he to his house where with as many platter of bread, soul and wild beast as do environ he, he bid. he welcome, but not any of they will eat a bit with he, but put up all the remainder in basket. at his return to opechancanoughs, all the king woman and their child flock about he for their part, as a due by custom to be merry with such fragment. but his wake mind, in hideous dream, do oft see wondrous shape of body, strange and huge in growth and of stupendous make. at last they bring he to meronocomoco. how powhatan entertain. his wake mind in hideous dream, do oft see wondrous shape of body, strange and huge in growth and of stupendous make. at last they bring he to meronocomoco. how powhatan entertain he. where be powhatan, their emperor? here, more than two hundred of those grim courtier stand wonder at he, as he have be a monster till powhatan and his train have put themselves in their great bravery before a fire. upon a seat, like a bedstead he sit, cover with a great robe make of skin and all the tail hang by. on either hand do sit a young wench of 16 or 18 year and along on each side the house, two row of man and behind they as many woman with all their head. hand do sit a young wench of 16 or 18 year and along on each side the house, two row of man and behind they as many woman with all their head and shoulder paint red. many of their head bedeck with the white down of bird, but every one with something and a great chain of white bead about their neck. at his entrance, before the king, all the people give a great shout: the queen of appamatuck be appoint to bring he water to wash his hand, and another bring he a bunch of feather in stead of a towel to dry. they have feast he after their best, barbarous manner. they can a long consultation be hold, but the conclusion be two great stone be. feather in stead of a towel to dry. they have feast he after their best, barbarous manner. they can a long consultation be hold, but the conclusion be two great stone be bring before powhatan, then as many as can lay hand on he, drag he to they and thereon lay his head and be ready with their club to beat out his brain. pocahontas the king, dear daughter, when no entreaty can prevail, get his head in her arm and lay she own upon he to save he from death, whereat the emperor be content, he shall live to make he hatchet and her bell bead and copper. how, pocahontas, save his life, for they think he aswell of all occupation as themselves for the king himself. he shall live to make, he hatchet and her bell, bead and copper. how pocahontas save his life, for they think he aswell of all occupation as themselves. for the king himself will make his own robe, shoe, bow, arrow, pot, plant, hunt or do any thing, so well as the rest. they say he bear a pleasant show, but sure his heart be sad. for who can pleasant be and rest that live in fear and dread and have life suspect, do it still suspect lead. two day after powhatan have disguise himself in the most fearful manner, he can cause capt smith to be bring forth to a great house in the wood and there upon a mat by the fire to be, leave alone not. most fearful manner he can cause capt smith to be, bring forth to a great house in the wood and there, upon a mat by the fire, to be, leave alone not long after, from behind a mat that divide the house, be, make the most doleful noise he ever hear. then powhatan, more like a devil than a man with some two hundred more as black as himself, come unto he and tell he now they be friend, how powhatan, send he to james town and present he shall go to james town to send he two great gun and a gryndstone, for which he will give he the country of capahowosick and for ever esteem he as his son nantaquoud. so to james town with 12. he two great gun and a gryndstone for which he will give he the country of capahowosick, and for ever esteem he as his son nantaquoud. so to james town with 12 guide powhatan, send he. that night they quarter in the wood. he still expect, as he have do all this long time of his imprisonment, every hour to be put to one death or other for all their feast. but almighty god, by his divine providence, have mollify the heart of those stern barbarian with compassion. the next morning betimes they come to the fort where smith have use the savage. with what kindness he can he show rawhunt powhatans trusty servant. two demi-culvering and a millstone to carry powhatan. they find they somewhat too heavy. fort where smith have use the savage with what kindness he can. he show rawhunt, powhatans trusty servant, two demi-culvering and a millstone to carry powhatan. they find they somewhat too heavy, but when they do see he discharge they be load with stone among the bough of a great tree, load with isickles. the you and branch come so tumble down that the poor savage run away half dead with fear. but at last we regain some conference with they and give they such toy and send to powhatan his woman and child such present as give they in general full content. now in james town they be all in combustion. the strong prepare once more to run away with the pinnace which, with the hazard of as give they in general full content. now in james town they be all in combustion. the strong prepare once more to run away with the pinnace which, with the hazard of his life, with sakre, falcon and musket, shoot the three project to abandon the country. smith force now the three time to stay or sink. some, no better than they shall be, have plot with the precedent the next day to have put he to death by the levitical law for the life of robinson and emry, pretend the fault be his that have lead they to their end. but he quick take such order with such lawyer that he lay they by the heel till he send some of they prisoner for england. now ever. lead they to their end. but he quick take such order with such lawyer that he lay they by the heel till he send some of they prisoner for england. now, ever once, in four or five day, pocahontas with her attendant, bring he so much provision that save many of their life that else, for all this, have starve with hunger. thus, from numb death, our good god send relief, the sweet asswager of all other grief, a true proof of god love to the action, his relation of the plenty he have see, especial at warawocomoco, and of the state and bounty of powhatan, which till that time be unknown. so revive their dead spirit, especial the love of pocahontas, as all man fear be abandon. at warawocomoco and of the state and bounty of powhatan, which till that time be unknown. so revive their dead spirit, especial the love of pocahontas, as all man fear be abandon. thus you may see what difficulty still cross any good endeavour and the good success of the business be thus oft bring to the very period of destruction. yet you see by what strange mean god have still deliver it. as for the insufficiency of, they admit in commission that error can not be prevent by the elector, there be no other choice, and all stranger to each other, education, quality or disposition. and if any deem it a shame to our nation to have any mention make of those inormity, let they peruse the history. all stranger to each other, education, quality or disposition. and if any deem it a shame to our nation to have any mention make of those inormity, let they peruse the history of the spaniard discovery and plantation, where they may see how many mutiny, disorder and dissension have accompany they and cross their attempt, which be know to be particular man offence. do take away the general scorn and contempt which malice presumption, covetousness or ignorance may produce to the scandal and reproach of those who action and valiant resolution deserve a more worthy respect. now, whether it have be better for captain smith to have conclude with any of those several project to have abandon the country with some ten or twelve of they who be. now whether it have be better for captain smith to have conclude with any of those several project, to have abandon the country with some ten or twelve of they who be call the better sort, and have leave mr hunt, our preacher, master anthony gosnoll, a most honest, worthy and industrious gentleman, master thomas wotton, and some 27 other of his countryman, to the fury of the savage famine of two evil the less be choose, and all manner of mischief and inconvenience for they be but forty in all, to keep possession of this large country or starve himself with they for company, for want of lodging, or but adventure abroad to make they provision, or by his opposition to preserve the action and save all. large country or starve himself with they for company, for want of lodging or but adventure abroad to make they provision, or by his opposition to preserve the action and save all their life. i leave to the censure of all honest man to consider. but we man imagine in our jollity that it be all one, or good or bad to be. but then, anon, we alter this again if happy we feel the sense of pain, for then we be turn into a mourn vain. write by thomas studley, the first cape merchant in virginia, robert fenton, edward harrington and i s chap 3. the arrival of the first supply with their proceed and the ship return. all this time, our care be not so much. virginia, robert fenton, edward harrington and i s chap 3, the arrival of the first supply with their proceed and the ship return. all this time our care be not so much to abandon the country but the treasurer and council in england be as diligent and careful to supply we two good ship they send we with near a hundred man, well furnish with all thing can be imagine necessary both for they and we. the one command by captain newport, the other by captain francis nelson, a honest man and a expert mariner. but such be the lewardnesse of his ship that though he be within the sight of cape henry by stormy contrary wind, be he force so far to sea that the west indies. such be the lewardnesse of his ship that, though he be within the sight of cape henry by stormy contrary wind, be he force so far to sea that the west indies be the next land for the repair of his mast and relief of wood and water. the phoenix, from cape henry force to the west indies, but newport, get in and arrive at james town not long after the redemption of captain smith, to who the savage as be say every other day repair with such provision that sufficient do serve they from hand to mouth. part always they bring, he as present, from their king or pocahontas, the rest, he as their market clarke, set the price himself how they shall sell. so he have. to mouth part. always they bring he as present from their king or pocahontas. the rest, he, as their market clarke, set the price himself how they shall sell. so he have enchant these poor soul, be their prisoner. and now newport, who he call his father, arrive near as direct as he foretell. they esteem he as a oracle and have they at that submission. he may command they what he list, that god that create all thing they know he adore for his god. they will also, in their discourse, term the god of captain smith, thus the almighty, be the bringer on their opinion of our god, the guide, path, term, all which be god alone, but the precedent and council so much envy his. captain smith. thus the almighty be the bringer on their opinion of our god, the guide, path, term, all which be god alone. but the precedent and council so much envy his estimation among the savage- though we all, in general equal, participate with he of the good thereof- that they wrought it into the savage understand, by their great bounty in give four time more for their commodity. then, smith appoint that their greatness and authority as much exceed he as their bounty and liberality. now, the arrival of this first supply, so overjoy we that we can not devise too much to please the mariner. we give they liberty to truck or trade at their pleasure, but in a short time it follow. that can not. that we can not devise too much to please the mariner, we give they liberty to truck or trade at their pleasure, but in a short time it follow that can not be have for a pound of copper which before be sell we for a ounce. thus ambition and sufferance cut the throat of our trade but confirm their opinion of the greatness of capt newport, wherewith smith have possess powhatan especial by the great present newport often send he before he can prepare the pinnace to go and he so that this great, savage desire also to see he a great coil there be to set he forward. when he go he be accompany with captain smith and mr scrivener, a very wise, understanding gentleman. new. desire also to see he, a great coil there be to set he forward. when he go he be accompany with captain smith and mr scrivener, a very wise, understanding gentleman. new arrive and admit of the council, with thirty or forty choisen man for their guard. arrive at werowocomoco, newport, conceit of this great, savage breed, many doubt and suspicion of treachery. smith revisit bowhatan, which smith to make appear be needless, with twenty man well appoint, undertake to encounter the worst that can happen. know all be but one and selfsame hand. that thus both one while scourge and that help we. nathaniel powel, gent robert behethland, gent mitchell ^hittiplace, gent william ^hittiplace, gent anthony gosnoll, gent richard wyssin, gent john taverner, gent william dyer, gent. both one while scourge. and that, help we: nathaniel powel, gent robert behethland, gent mitchell ^hittiplace, gent william ^hittiplace, gent anthony gosnoll, gent richard wyssin, gent john taverner, gent william dyer, gent thomas coe, gent thomas hope, gent anas todkill, gent these with nine other who name i have forget, come ashore land among a many of creek over which they be to pass such poor bridge, powhatan, his entertainment only make of a few cratche thrust in the ose and three or four pole lay on they and at the end of they the like tie together only with bark of tree that it make they much suspect those bridge be but trap which cause smith to make diverse savage go over. first keep some of the tie together only with bark of tree, that it make, they much suspect, those bridge be but trap which cause smith to make diverse savage go over. first keep some of the chief as hostage till half, his man be pass to make a guard for himself and the rest, but find all thing well by two or three hundred savage. they be kind. conduct to their town where powhatan strain himself to the utmost of his greatness to entertain they with great shout of joy, oration of protestation and with the most plenty of victual he can provide to feast. they sit upon his bed of mat, his pillow of leather embroider after their rude manner, with pearl and white bead, his attire, a fair robe of. he can provide to feast. they sit upon his bed of mat, his pillow of leather, embroider, after their rude manner, with pearl and white bead. his attire: a fair robe of skin as large as a irish mantel. at his head and foot a handsome young woman. on each side his house sit twenty of his concubine, their head and shoulder paint red with a great chain of white bead about each of their neck. before those sit his chief man, in like order in his arbour-like house, and more than forty platter of fine bread stand as a guard in two file on each side the door. four or five hundred people make a guard behind they for our passage and proclamation be make none upon. bread stand as a guard in two file on each side the door. four or five hundred people make a guard behind they for our passage and proclamation be make none upon pain of death to presume to do we any wrong or discourtesy. with many pretty discourse to renew their old acquaintance, this great king and our captain spend the time till the ebb, leave our barge aground, then renew their feast with fear, dance and sing and such like. we quarter that night with powhatan. the next day, newport, come a shore and receive as much content as those people can. give he a boy name, thomas savage. be then give unto powhatan, who newport call his son the exchange of a christian for a savage. as much content as those people can. give he a boy name, thomas savage be, then. give unto powhatan, who newport call his son, the exchange of a christian for a savage. for who powhatan, give he namontack, his trusty servant and one of a shrewd, subtle capacity. three or four day more we spend in feast dance and trade, wherein powhatan carry himself so proud yet discreet in his savage manner as make we all admire his natural gift, consider his education as scorn, to trade as his subject. do he bespeak newport in this manner, powhatant speech. captain newport, it be not agreeable to my greatness, in this peddle manner, to trade for trifte, and i esteem you also. a great werowance, therefore, lay i down. manner, powhatant speech. captain newport, it be not agreeable to my greatness, in this peddle manner, to trade for trifte, and i esteem you also a great werowance. therefore lay i down all your commodity together. what i like i will take and in recompense give you what i think fit their value. captain smith, be our interpreter. regard newport as his father know best the disposition of powhatan, can we his intent be, but only to cheat we. yet captain newport think to out brave this savage in ostentation of greatness. and so to bewitch he with his bounty as to have what he list. it so happen that powhatan have his desire, value his corn at such a rate that i think it better cheap in. he with his bounty as to have what he list. it so happen that powhatan have his desire, value his corn at such a rate that i think it better cheap in spain, for we have not four bushel, for that we expect to have twenty hogshead. difference of opinion, this breed some unkindness between our two. captain newport, seek to please the unsatiable desire of the savage smith. to cause the savage to please he but smother his distaste. to avoid the saluage suspicion glance in the eye of powhatan. many trifle who fix his humour upon a few blue bead. a long time he importunate desire. they but smith, seem so much the more to affect they as be compose of a most rare substance of. humour upon a few blue bead. a long time he importunate desire they but smith, seem so much the more to affect they as be compose of a most rare substance of the colour of the sky and not to be wear but by the great king in the world. this make he half mad to be the owner of such strange jewel, so that ere we depart for a pound or two of blue bead, be bring over my king for 2. or 300.. bushel of corn yet part, good friend, the like entertainment we find of opechankanough, king of pamaunkee, who also, he, in like manner, fit at the like rate with blue bead which grow by this mean of that estimation that none dare wear. find of opechankanough, king of pamaunkee, who also, he, in like manner, fit at the like rate with blue bead which grow by this mean of that estimation that none dare wear any of they, but their great king, their wife and child. and so we return, all well, to james town. james town burn, where this new supply be lodge with the rest, accidental fire their quarter, and so the town which be but thatch with reed. the fire be so fierce as it burn their palisado, though eight or ten yard distant, with their arm, bedding, apparel and much private provision. good, master, hunt our preacher lose all his library and all he have but the clothes on his back. yet none never hear he repine. arm, bedding, apparel and much private provision. good master hunt our preacher, lose all his library and all he have but the clothes on his back. yet none never hear he repine at his loss. this happen in the winter, in that extreme frost 1607.. now though we have victual sufficient, i mean only of oatmeal. a ship i de loiter 14. week meal and corn. yet the ship stay 14. week when she may as well have be go in 14. day, spend a great part of that and near all the rest that be send to be land when they depart. what there discretion can spare, we to make a little poor meal or two we call feast, to relish our mouth of each somewhat. they send to be land when they depart. what there discretion can spare we to make a little poor meal or two, we call feast to relish our mouth of each somewhat, they leave we. yet i must confess, those that have either money, spare clothes, credit to give bill of payment, gold, ring, fur or any such commodity, be ever welcome to this. remove tavern. such be our patience to obey such vile commander and buy our own provision at 15. time the value suffer. they feast. we bear the charge. yet must not repine, but fast, lest we shall incur the censure of factious and seditious person and then leakage, ship-rat and other casuallty occasion. they loss but the vessel and remnant for total we be glad. fast, lest we shall incur the censure of factious and seditious person and then leakage, ship-rat and other casuallty occasion. they loss but the vessel and remnant for total we be glad to receive with all our heart to make up the account high commend their providence for preserve that lest they shall discourage any more to come to we now for all this plenty, our ordinary be but meal and water, so that this great charge little relieve our want whereby, with the extremity of the bitter cold frost and those defect, more than half of we die, i can deny. but both smith and skrivener do their best to amend what be amiss. but with the precedent go the mayor part that there horn be to. of we die, i can deny. but both smith and skrivener do their best to amend what be amiss. but with the precedent go the mayor part that there horn be to short the effect of mere verbalist. but the worst be our guild refiner with their golden promise, make all man their slave in hope of recompense. there be no talk, no hope, no work, but dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold. such a bruit of gold that one mad fellow desire to be bury in the sand lest they shall by there be make gold of his bone. little need there be, and less reason. the ship shall stay there, wage run on our victual consume 14. week, that the mariner may say they be make gold of his bone. little need there be and less reason the ship shall stay there. wage run on our victual consume. 14. week, that the mariner may say they do help to build such a golden church that we can say the rain wash near to nothing in 14. day, a needless charge. be it that captain smith will not applaud all those golden invention because they admit he not to the sight of their trial, nor golden consultation. i know not, but i have hear he oft question with captain martin and tell he, except he can show he a more substantial trial, he be not enamour with their dirty skill. breathe out these and many other passion, never any thing. do more torment. tell he, except he can show he a more substantial trial. he be not enamour with their dirty skill. breathe out these and many other passion, never any thing. do more torment he then to see all necessary business, neglect to fraught such a drunken ship with so much guild dirt till than we never account captain newport, a refiner who be ready to set sail for england and we not have any use of parliament play a return to england. petition: admiral recorder, interpreter, chronologer, court of plea, nor justice of peace. send master wingfield and captain archer home with he that have engross all those title to seek some better place of employment. oh, curse gold, those hunger-starve mover. to what misfortune lead thou all those? and captain archer, home with he that have engross all those title to seek some better place of employment. oh, curse gold, those hunger-starve mover. to what misfortune lead thou all those lover for all the china wealth nor indies can suffice the mind of a av'ritious man. chap 4: the arrival of the phoenix, her return and other accident. the authority now consist in captain martin. the rebuild james town and the still sickly precedent, the sale of the store commodity, maintain his estate as a inheritable revenue. the spring approach and the ship depart. mr scrivener and captain smith divide betwixt. they the rebuild james town, the repair our pallizadoe, the cut down tree, prepare our field, plant our corn and to rebuild our church and mr scrivener and captain smith divide betwixt. they the rebuild james town, the repair our pallizadoe, the cut down tree, prepare our field, plant our corn, and to rebuild our church and recover our store house. all man thus busy at their several labour, master nelson arrive with his lose phoenix lose, i say, for that we all deem he lose land safe. all his man so well he have manage his ill hap cause the indian isle to feed his company that his victual, to that we have get, as be say before, be near after our allowance sufficient for half a year. he have not any thing, but he free impart it which honest deal be a mariner cause. we admire he, we will not have. after our allowance sufficient for half a year. he have not any thing, but he free, impart it which honest deal be a mariner cause. we admire he. we will not have wish more than he do for we now to relade this ship with some good tiding. the precedent not hold it, stand with the dignity of his place to leave the fort. give order to captain smith to discover and search the commodity of the monacan country beyond the fall. sixty appoint to discover the monacan. sixty able man be allot they the which, within six day, smith have so well train to their arm and order that they little fear with who they shall encounter. yet so unseasonable be the time and so opposite be. within six day. smith have so well train to their arm and order that they little fear with who they shall encounter. yet so unseasonable be the time and so opposite be captain martin to any thing, but only to fraught this ship also with his fantastical gold, as captain smith rather desire. ^o relade she with cedar, which be a present dispatch then, either with dirt or the hope and report of a uncertain discovery which he will perform when they have less charge and more leisure. but the god of heaven, he easy, can immortalize a mortal man with glory and with fame. the same god, even as easy, may afflict a mortal man, i say with sorrow and with shame, whilst the conclusion be a. immortalize a mortal man with glory and with fame. the same god, even as easy, may afflict a mortal man. i say with sorrow and with shame, whilst the conclusion be a resolve. this happen, powhatan, to express his love to newport. when he depart, present he with twenty, turkey, a ill example to sell sword to savage, conditional to return he twenty ^ which immediate be send he now, after his departure, he present captain smith with the like luggage, but not find his humour, obey in not send such weapon as he desire. he cause his people with twenty device to obtain they at last, by ambuscado, at our very port. they will take, they perforce, surprise we at work, or any way which be so. cause his people with twenty device to obtain they at last, by ambuscado at our very port. they will take, they perforce, surprise we at work or any way, which be so long permit they become so insolent, there be no rule. the command from england be so straight not to offend. they the precedent. weakness as our authoritie-bearer keep their house will rather be any thing than peace-breaker. this charitable humour prevail till well it chance. they meddle with captain smith who, without far deliberation, give they such a encounter as some he so hunt up and down the isle smith attempt to suppress the savage insolence some he so terrify with whip beat and imprisonment. as for revenge, they surprise two of our forage disorderly soldier. up and down the isle, smith attempt to suppress the savage insolence some he so terrify with whip, beat and imprisonment. as for revenge, they surprise two of our forage disorderly soldier and have assemble their force, bold, threaten at our port to force smith to redeliver seven savage which, for their villainy he detain prisoner or we be all but dead man. but to try their fury, he sally out among they and in less than a hour he so hamper their insolence, they bring they his two man desire peace without any further composition for their prisoner. those he examine and cause, they all believe, by several volley of shot, one of their companion be shoot to death because they will not confess their intent. and for their prisoner, those he examine and cause, they all believe, by several volley of shot, one of their companion be shoot to death because they will not confess their intent and plotter of those villainy. and thus they all agree in one point: they be direct only by powhatan to obtain he our weapon to cut our own throat with the manner, where, how and when powhatans excuse which we plain find most true and apparent. yet he send his messenger and his dear daughter pocahontas, with present to excuse he of the injury do by some rash untoward captain. his subject desire their liberty for this time, with the assurance of his love for ever. after smith have, give the prisoner what correction he think fit. by some rash, untoward captain his subject desire their liberty, for this time, with the assurance of his love for ever. after smith have, give the prisoner what correction he think fit, use they well a day or two after, and then deliver they pocahontas. for who sake only he feign to have save their life and give they liberty. the patient council that nothing will move to war with the savage will glad have wrangle with captain smith for his cruelty. yet none be slay to any man knowledge. but it bring they in such fear and obedience as his very name will sufficient affright. they where before. we have sometime peace and war twice in a day and very seldom a week. but we have some. fear and obedience as his very name will sufficient affright they where before. we have sometime peace and war twice in a day and very seldom a week, but we have some treacherous villainy or other. the fraught of this ship be conclude to be cedar by the diligence of the master. a ship fraught with cedar and captain smith, she be quick, relade, master scrivener, be neither idle nor slow to follow all thing at the fort. the ship be ready to set sail. captain martin be always very sickly and unserviceable and desirous to enjoy the credit of his- suppose- art of find the golden mine. be most willing, admit to return for england, for he have not fill his lap that still do hold it. enjoy the credit of his suppose art of find the golden mine, be most willing admit to return for england, for he have not fill his lap. that still do hold it. oap from the write of thomas studley and anas t^dkill- their name, that be land in this supply. sir thomas smith, treasurer matthew scrivener, appoint to be one of the council gent michael phittiplace, william phittiplace, ralph morton, richard wyff, john taverner, william cantrell, robert barnes, richard fetherstone, george hill, george pretty, nathaniel causy, peter pory, robert gutler, michael sicklemore, william bentley, thomas coe, doctor russell, jeffrey abbot, edward gurgana, richard worley, timothy leeds, richard killingbeck, william spence, richard ^rodger, richard pot, richard mullinax, william bayley, francis perkins, john harper, george forest, john nichols, william grivell. doctor russell, jeffrey abbot, edward gurgana, richard worley, timothy leeds, richard killingbeck, william spence, richard ^rodger, richard pot, richard mullinax, william bayley, francis perkins, john harper, george forest, john nichols, william grivell, labourer raymond goodison, william simons, john spearman, richard bristol, william perce, james watkins, john bouth, christopher rods, richard burket, james burr, nicholas ven, francis perkins, richard gradon, rawland nelstrop, richard savage, thomas savage, richard milmer, william may vere, michael bishop, wiles tailor, thomas hope, william ward, john powel, william yong, william beckwith, larence apothecary. thomas field, john harford, dani stallings, jeweller, will dawson, a refiner. abram ransack, a refiner. wil johnson, a goldsmith. peter keffer, a gunsmith. rob alberton, a perfumer. richard belfuld, a goldsmith, a chirurg. john lewes, a cooper. robert cotton, a tobacco-pipe-maker. richard. refiner, abram ransack, a refiner, wil johnson, a goldsmith, peter keffer, a gunsmith, rob alberton, a perfumer, richard belfuld, a goldsmith, a chirurg, john lewes, a cooper, robert cotton, a tobacco-pipe-maker, richard dole, a blacksmith, and diverse other to the number of 120.. chapter v: the accident that happen in the discovery of the bay of chisapeack. the prodigality of the precedent state go so deep into our small store that smith and scrivener tie he and his parasite to the rule of proportion. but now smith be to depart, the precedent authority so oversway the discretion of mr scrivener that our store, our time, our strength and labour be idle consume to fulfil his fantasy the second of june 1608.. smith leave the fort to perform his discretion of mr scrivener that our store, our time, our strength and labour be idle consume to fulfil his fantasy. the second of june 1608.. smith leave the fort to perform his discovery with this company: walter russell, doctor of physic gentleman, ralph murton, thomas momford, william cantrill, richard fetherston, james burne, michael sicklemore, soldier jonas profit, anas todkill, robert small, james watkins, john powel, james read, richard keale. these be in a open barge near three tun burden. leave the phoenix a^ cape henry. they cross the bay to the eastern shore and fall with the isle, call smith isle after our captain name. the first people we see be two grim and stout savage upon cape charles with long pole like laveling head with bone. they the isle call smith isle after our captain name. the first people we see be two grim and stout savage upon cape charles, with long pole, like laveling head with bone. they bold demand what we be and what we will, but after many circumstance they seem very kind and direct we to accomack the habitation of their werowance where we be kind, entreat this king be the comely, proper civil savage we encounter. his country be a pleasant, fertile clay ^oyle, some small creek, good harbour for small bark but not for ship. he tell we of a strange accident. late happen he and it be two child be dead. some extreme passion, a strange mortality of savage or dream, vision, fantasy or affection move their parent. we of a strange accident. late happen he and it be two child be dead. some extreme passion, a strange mortality of savage or dream vision, fantasy or affection move their parent again to revisit their dead carcase who benumb body reflect to the eye of the beholder such delightful countenance, as though they have regain their vital spirit. this, as a miracle, draw many to behold they all, which be a great part of his people, not long after die and but few escape. they speak the language of powhatan, wherein they make such description of the bay, isle and river that often do we exceed pleasure. pass along the coast, search every inlet and bay fit for harbour and habitation, see many isle in the midst. of the bay, isle and river that often do we exceed pleasure. pass along the coast, search every inlet and bay fit for harbour and habitation, see many isle in the midst of the bay. we bear up for they, but ere we can obtain they such a extreme gust of wind, rain, thunder and lighten happen that with great danger we escape the unmerciful rage of that ocean-like water. the high land on the main, yet it be but low russel isle we call keales hill, and these uninhabited isle, russel isles. the next day search they for fresh water. we can find none. the defect whereof force we to follow the next eastern channel, wighcocomoco, which bring we to the river of wighcocomoco, the people at search, they, for fresh water, we can find none. the defect whereof force we to follow the next eastern channel, wighcocomoco, which bring we to the river of wighcocomoco. the people, at first with great fury, seem to assault we, yet at last, with song and dance and much mirth, become very tractable but search their habitation for water. we can fill but three barricoe, and that such puddle that never till then we ever know the want of good water. we dig and search in many place, but before two day be expire a extreme want of fresh water, we will have refuse two barricoe of gold for one of that puddle water of wighcocomoco. be past these isle, which be many in number, but all naught. want of fresh water we will have refuse two barricoe of gold for one of that puddle water of wighcocomoco. be past these isle, which be many in number but all naught for habitation, fall with a high land. upon the main we find a great pond of fresh water, but so exceed hot, we suppose it some bath. that place we call point ployer in honour of that most honourable house of mousay in britain that in a extreme extremity once relieve our captain. from wighcocomoco to this place all the coast be low break isle of morap grow a mile or two in breadth and ten or twelve in length. good to cut for hay in summer and to catch fish and foul in winter. but isle of morap grow a mile or two in breadth and ten or twelve in length. good to cut for hay in summer and to catch fish and foul in winter. but the land beyond they be all cover over with wood, as be the rest of the country. be thus refresh in. cross over from the main to other isle, we discover the wind and water so much increase with thunder, lightning and rain, that our mast and sail blow overbord and such mighty wave over-rack. we in that small barge that with great labour we keep she from sink by free out the water, their barge near sink in a gust two day we be enforce to inhabit these uninhabited isle which, for the extremity of we keep she from sink by free out the water. their barge near sink in a gust. two day we be enforce to inhabit these uninhabited isle which, for the extremity of gust, thunder, rain, storm and ill wether, we call limbo, repair our sail with our shirt. we set sail for the main and fell with a pretty convenient river on the east call cuskarawaok, cuskarawaock. the people run as amaze, in troop from place to place and diverse get into the top of tree. they be not spare of their arrow, nor the great passion they can express of their anger. long they shoot. we still ride at a anchor without there reach. make all the sign of friendship we can the next day they come. passion they can express of their anger. long they shoot. we still ride at a anchor without there reach, make all the sign of friendship we can. the next day they come unarm, with every one a basket, dance in a ring to draw, we on shore, but see there be nothing in they but villainy. we discharge a volley of musket, charge with pistol, shoot whereat they all lay, tumble on the ground, creep some one way, some another, into a great cluster of reed, hard by where there company lay in ambuscado. towards the evening we weigh and approach the shore, discharge five or six, shot among the reed. we land where there lie a many of basket and much blood, but see not a savage evening we weigh and approach the shore, discharge five or six shot among the reed. we land where there lie a many of basket and much blood, but see not a savage. a smoke appear on the other side the river. we row thither where we find two or three little house in each a fire. there we leave some piece of copper bead bell and look glass and then go into the bay. but when it be dark we come back again early in the morning four savage come to we in their canow, who we use with such courtesy, not know what we be, nor have. do have be in the bay a fish bad^. we stay and ere long they will return, which they do. we use with such courtesy, not know what we be, nor have. do have be in the bay a fish bad^. we stay, and ere long they will return, which they do, and some twenty more with they, with who? after a little conference, two or three thousand man, woman and child come cluster about we, every one present we with something which a little bead will so well require that we become such friend. they will contend: who shall fetch we water? stay with we for hostage, conduct our man any whither and give we the best content. here do inhabit the people of sarapinagh, nause, arseek and nantaquak, the best merchant of all other savage, the first notice o^ the massawomek. they much extol a great. the best content. here do inhabit the people of sarapinagh, nause, arseek and nantaquak, the best merchant of all other savage, the first notice o^ the massawomek, they much extol. a great nation call massawomeke, in search of who? we ret^^^ed by limbo this river, but only at the ^nt^ance be very narrow and the people of small stature as they of wightcocomoco, the land but low, yet it may prove very commodious because it be but a ridge of land betwixt the bay and the main ocean, find this eastern shore shallow, break, isle and for most part without fresh water. we pass by the strait of limbo for the western shore, so broad be the bay, here we can scarce perceive the great high cliff on for most part without fresh water. we pass by the strait of limbo for the western shore, so broad be the bay here we can scarce perceive the great high cliff on the other side. by they we anchor that night and call they r^ccards clift^s 30. league. we sail more northwards, not find any inhabitant, leave all the eastern shore low island, but overgrow with wood as all the coast beyond they. so far as we can see the western shore by which we sail, we find all along well water, but very mountainous and barren, the valley very fertile but extreme thick of small wood so well as tree and much frequent with wolf, bear, dear and other wild beast. we pass many shallow creek but barren the valley very fertile but extreme thick of small wood so well as tree and much frequent with wolf, bear, dear and other wild beast. we pass many shallow creek but the first we find navigable for a ship we call bolus for that. the clay in many place under the cliff by the high water mark do grow up in red and white knot as gum out of tree and in some place so participate together as though they be all of one nature, except the colour. the rest of the earth on both side be hard, sandy, gravel bolus river which make we think it bole-armoniack. and when we first set sail some of our gallant doubt nothing but that our captain will make too. side be hard, sandy, gravel, bolus river, which make we think it bole-armoniack. and when we first set sail, some of our gallant doubt nothing but that our captain will make too much. have home, but have lie in this small barge not above 12. or 14. day, oft tire at the oar, our bread spoil with wet, so much that it be rot. yet so good be their stomach that they can digest it they do with continual complaint. so importune he now to return as cause he bespeak they in this manner, gentleman, if you will remember the memorable history of sir ralph layne smith^ speech to his soldier, how his company importune he to proceed in the discovery of moratico, allege they have yet a. you will remember the memorable history of sir ralph layne smith^ speech to his soldier, how his company importune he to proceed in the discovery of moratico. allege they have yet a dog that be boil with saxafras leave. will rich feed they in their return? then what a shame will it be for you that have be so suspicious of my tenderness to force. i return with so much provision as we have and scarce able to say where we have be, nor yet hear of that we be send to seek, you can say. but i have share with you in the worst which be past and for what be to come, of lodging diet or whatsoever. i be content you allot the worst part to. but i have share with you in the worst, which be past, and for what be to come of lodging diet or whatsoever, i be content you allot the worst part to myself. as for your fear that i will lose myself in these unknown large water or be swallow up in some stormy gust, abandon these childish fear, for wor^e then to past? ^s not likely to happen and there be as much danger to return as to proceed. regain, therefore, your old spirit for return. i will not, if god please, till i have (@) the massawomek, find patawomek. the discovery of patawomek or the head of this water you conceit to be endless, two or 3. day: we expect wind and wether. who adverse extremity. (@) the massawomek, find patawomek. the discovery of patawomek, or the head of this water you conceit to be endless, two or 3. day we expect wind and wether. who adverse extremity add such discouragement that three or four fell sick. who pitiful complaint cause we to to return, leave the bay some nine mile broad at nine and ten fathom water. the 16. of june we fall with the river patowomek. fear be go ambuscado of savage and our man recover. we be all content to take some pain to know the name of that seven mile broad river. for thirty mile sail we can see no inhabitant. then we be conduct by two savage up a little bay creek towards onawmanient, where all the wood be. seven mile broad river for thirty mile sail. we can see no inhabitant. then we be conduct by two savage up a little bay creek towards onawmanient, where all the wood be lay with ambuscado to the number of three or four thousand. savage, so strange paint, grime and disguise, shout, yell and cry as so many spirit from hell can not have. show more terrible, many brauado they make, but to appeal their fury. our captain prepare with as seem a willingness as they to encounter they but the graze of our bullet upon the water, many be shoot on purpose. they may see they with the echo of the of the wood, so amaze they as down go their bow and arrow and exchange hostage james. water. many be shoot on purpose. they may see they with the echo of the of the wood, so amaze they as down, go their bow and arrow and exchange hostage james watkins be send six mile up the wood to their king habitation. we be kind use of those savage of who we understand. they be command to betray we by the direction of powhatan and he so direct from the discontent at james town because our captain do cause they stay in their country against their w^lls. a treacherous project. the like encounter we find at patowomek, cecocawonee and diverse other place. but at moyaones, nacotchtant and toegs the people do their best to content. we have go so high as we can with the boat. find at patowomek, cecocawonee and diverse other place. but at moyaones, nacotchtant and toegs the people do their best to content. we have go so high as we can with the boat. we meet diverse saluage in canowes, well load with the flesh of bear, ^eere and other beast whereof we have part. here we find mighty rock grow in some place above the ground as high as the shrubby tree and diverse other solid quarry of diverse tincture and diverse place. where the water have fall from the high mountain they have leave a tinctured spangle scurf that make many bare place seem as guild dig. the grow above in the high cliff of rock we see it be a clay sand, so mingle with yellow spangle. spangle scurf that make many bare place seem as guild dig the grow above in the high cliff of rock, we see it be a clay sand, so mingle with yellow spangle, as if it have be half pin-dust. in our return, inquire still for this matchqueon, the king of patawomeke give we guide to conduct, we up a little river, call quiyough up, which we row so high as we can leave the boat. with six shot and diverse savage, he march seven or eight mile before they come to the, i lead his hostage in a small chain. they be to have for their pain. be proud so rich to be. adorn the mine be a great rocky mountain, like antimony, a my like antimony, wherein in a small chain they be to have for their pain, be proud so rich to be. adorn the mine be a great rocky mountain like antimony, a my like antimony, wherein they dig a great hole with shell and hatchet and hard by it run a fair brook of christallike water where they wash a way the dross and keep the remainder, which they put in little bag and sell it all over the country to paint there body, face or idol, which make they look like blackmore dust over with silver. with so much as we can carry, we return to our boat. kind requite, this kind king and all his kind people. the cause of this discovery be to search this mine of which newport. as we can carry. we return to our boat. kind requite, this kind king and all his kind people, the cause of this discovery be to search this mine, of which newport do assure we that those small bag we have give he in england he have try to hold half silver but all we get prove of no value. also, to search what fur the best whereof be at cuscarawaoke, where be make so much rawranoke or white bead that occasion as much dissension among the the savage as gold and silver among christian and what other mineral, river, rock, nation, wood, fish, fruit, victual and what other commodity the land afford, and whether the bay be endless or how far it extend, of mine we be. what other mineral, river, rock, nation, wood, fish, fruit, victual and what other commodity the land afford, and whether the bay be endless or how far it extend. of mine, we be all ignorant. but a few, bever, otter, bear, martin and mink we find, and in diverse place that abundance of fish lie so thick with their head above the water. as for want of net, our barge drive among they. we attempt to catch they with a fry pan, but we find it a bad instrument to catch fish. with a abundant plenty of fish, neither better fish, more pl^nty, nor more variety for small fish have any of we ever see in any place. so swim in the water, but they be not to be. fish. neither better fish, more pl^nty, nor more variety for small fish have any of we ever see in any place. so swim in the water but they be not to be catch with fry pan. some small cod also we do see swim close by the shore, by smith isle and some as high as riccard cliff and some we have find dead upon the shore. to express all our quarrel, treachery and encounter among those savage, i shall be too tedious how to deal with the savage, but in brief, at all time we so encounter they and curb their insolence that they conclude with present to purchase peace. yet we lose not a man at our first meeting out captain ever observe this order to so encounter they and curb their insolence, that they conclude with present to purchase peace. yet we lose not a man at our first meeting out captain, ever observe this order to demand their bow and arrow, sword, mantel and fur with some child or two for hostage, whereby we can quick perceive when they intend any villainy have. finish this discovery, though our victual be near spend. he intend to see his imprisonment-acquaintance upon the river of rapahanock by many call toppahanock, but our boat, by reason of the ebb, captain smith near kill with a stingray chanse to ground upon a many shovel lie in the entrance. we spy many fish lurk in the reed. our captain spot himself by nail they to the ground with. a stingray chanse to ground upon a many shovel lie in the entrance. we spy many fish lurk in the reed. our captain spot himself by nail they to the ground with his sword. set we all a fish in that manner. thus we take more in own hour than we can eat in a day. but it chanse, our captain take a fish from his sword. not know her condition, be much of the fashion of a thornback, but a long tail like a ride rod, whereon the midst be a most poison sting of two or three inch long beard like a see on each side, which she strike into the wrist of his arm near a inch and a half. no blood, nor wound be. two or three inch long beard like a see on each side, which she strike into the wrist of his arm near a inch and a half. no blood nor wound be see, but a little blue spot. but the torment be instant, so extreme that in four hour have so swell his hand, arm and shoulder. we all, with much sorrow, conclude his funeral and prepare his grave in a island by, as himself direct, yet it please god, by a precious oil. doctor russell at the first, apply to it when he sound it with pro^e ere night, his torment pain be so well. assuage that he eat of the fish to his supper which give no less joy and content to. we then ease to. with pro^e ere night. his torment pain be so well assuage that he eat of the fish to his supper, which give no less joy and content to we then ease to himself, for which we call the island stingray isle after the name of the fish. have neither chirurgeon nor chirurgery the savage affright with their own suspicion but that preservative oil we present, set sail for james town, pass the mouth of the river of payankatank and pamaunkee. the next day we, safe, arrive at kecougtan, the simple savage see. our captain hurt and a other bloody by break his shin. our number of bow, arrow, sword, mantle and fur will needs imagine we have be at war. the truth of these accident will not satisfy. a other bloody by break his shin. our number of bow, arrow, sword, mantle and fur will needs imagine we have be at war. the truth of these accident will not satisfy they. but impatient importune we to know with who find their aptness to believe we fail not as a great secret to tell they any thing that may affright they. what spoil we have get and make of the massawomek this rumour go fast up the river than our barge that arrive at waraskoyack the 20 of july, where trim she with paint, streamer and such devise as we can, we make they at james town, jealous of a spanish frigate where we all, god be thank safe, arrive the 21 of july. there we find. and such devise as we can, we make they at james town jealous of a spanish frigate where we all, god be thank, safe, arrive the 21 of july. there we find the last supply. be all sick, the rest some lame, some bruise, needless misery at james town, all unable to do any thing but complain of the pride and unreasonable, needless cruelty of the silly precedent that have, riotous, consume the store and to fulfil his folly about, build he a unnecessary build for his pleasure in the wood have bring they all to that misery. that have we not arrive they have as strange torment, he with revenge, but the good news of our discovery and the good hope we have by the savage relation. that misery that have we not arrive. they have as strange torment, he with revenge. but the good news of our discovery and the good hope we have by the savage relation that our bay have stretch into the south sea, or somewhat near it, appease their fury, but conditional that ratliffe shall be depose and that captain smith will take upon he, the government, as by course it do belong. their request be effect. he substitute mr scrivener, his dear friend in the presidency, equal. distribute those private provision the other have engross, appoint more honest officer to assist master scrivener, who then lie exceed sick of a calenture and in regard of the weakness of the company and heat of the year, they be unable to. honest officer to assist master scrivener, who then lie exceed sick of a calenture and, in regard of the weakness of the company and heat of the year, they be unable to work. he leave they to live at ease to recover their health, but embark himself to finish his discovery. write by walter russell, anas todkill and thomas momford. chap 5: the government surrender to master scrivener. what happen? the second voyage in discover the bay. the 24 of july, captain smith set forward to finish the discovery with twelve man. their name be gentleman: nathaniel powel, thomas momford, richard fetherston, michael sicklemore, james bourne, anthony bagnall, chir soldier, jonas profit, anas todkill, edward pise, richard keale, james watkins, william ward. the wind be contrary, cause our. nathaniel powel, thomas momford, richard fetherston, michael sicklemore, james bourne, anthony bagnall, chir soldier, jonas profit, anas todkill, edward pise, richard keale, james watkins, william ward. the wind be contrary, cause our stay two or three day at kecoughtan the king feast we with much mirth. his people be persuade. we go purposely to be revenge of the massawomek the savage admire firework. in the evening we fire a few racket which fly in the air so terrify the poor savage. they suppose nothing unpossible. we attempt and desire to assist. we, the first night we anchor at stingray isle. the next day cross patawomek river and haste to the river bolus. we go not much further before we may see the bay to divide in two head. anchor at stingray isle the next day, cross patawomek river and haste to the river bolus. we go not much further before we may see the bay to divide in two head and arrive there we find it divide in four all which we search so far as we can sail they. two of they we find inhabit. but in cross the bay we encounter 7 or 8 canowes full of massawomek. a encounter with the massawomek at the head of the bay we see they prepare to assault. we leave our oar and make way with our sail to encounter they. yet be we but five with our captain. that can stand for within 2 day after we leave kecoughtan. the rest be all of the last. with our sail to encounter they. yet be we but five with our captain, that can stand for within 2 day after we leave kecoughtan. the rest be all of the last supply be sick almost ^o death, until they be season to the country. have shut they under our tarpawling, we put their hat upon stick by the barge side and betwixt, two hat a man with two piece to make we seem many, and so we think the indian suppose those hat to be man, for they flee with all possible speed to the shore and there stay, stare at the sail of our barge till we anchor right against they. long it be ere we can draw they to come unto we at last they. shore and there stay, stare at the sail of our barge till we anchor right against they. long it be ere we can draw they to come unto we at last. they send two of their company, unarm in a canow, the rest all follow to second. they, if need, require these two be but each present with a bell, bring aboard all their fellow present, our captain, with venison, bear flesh, fish, bow, arrow, club target and beares-skinne. we understand they nothing at all, but by sign whereby they signify unto we they have be at war with the tockwoghe, the which they confirm by show we their green wound. but the night part, we, we imagine they appoint the next morning to meet, but after that. at war with the tockwoghe, the, which they confirm by show we their green wound. but the night part we, we imagine they appoint the next morning to meet, but after that we never see. they a encounter with the tockwhoghs, enter the river of tockwogh, the savage, all arm, in a fleet of boat after their barbarous manner round environ we, so it chance one of they can speak the language of powhatan who persuade the rest to a friendly parley. but when they see we furnish with the massawomek weapon and we feign the invention of kecoughtan to have, take, they perforce. they conduct we to their pallizado^d town mantel, with the bark of tree, with scaffold, like mount, breast about with breast very formal, their invention of kecoughtan to have, take, they perforce, they conduct we to their pallizado^d town, mantel with the bark of tree, with scaffold, like mount, breast about with breast, very formal, their man, woman and child, with dance, song, fruit, fur and what they have, kind welcome. we spread mat^ for we to sit on, stretch their best ability to express their love. hatchet from the sasquesahanock, many hatchet knife, piece of iron and brass. we see among they, which they report to have from the sasquesahanock, a mighty people and mortal enemy with the massawomek. the sasquesahanock inhabit upon the chief spring of these four, branch of the bay head, two day journey high than our barge can pass for rock. yet we prevail with the interpreter. the sasquesahanock inhabit upon the chief spring of these four branch of the bay head. two day journey high than our barge can pass for rock. yet we prevail with the interpreter to take with he another interpreter to persuade the sasquesahanock to come visit we, for their language be different. three or four day we expect their return than sixty of those giantlike people come down with present of venison, tobacco pipe three foot in length, basket target bow and arrow five of their chief werowance. come bold aboard we to cross the bay for tockwhogh, leave their man and canowes the wind be so high they dare not pass. our order. be daily to have prayer with a psalm at which solemnity the poor savage much. tockwhogh, leave their man and canowes the wind be so high they dare not pass our order. be daily to have prayer with a psalm, at which solemnity the poor savage much wonder our prayer be. do a while they be busy with a consultation till they have contrive their business. then they begin in a most passionate manner to hold up their hand to the sun with a most fearful song, the sasquesahanock offer to the english. then embrace our captain, they begin to adore he in like manner, though he rebuke they. yet they proceed till their song be finish, which do, with a most strange, furious action and a hellish voice, begin a oration of their love that end with a great paint bear skin. proceed till their song be finish, which do, with a most strange, furious action and a hellish voice, begin a oration of their love. that end with a great paint bear skin they cover. he, then one ready with a great chain of white bead weigh at least six or seven pound. hang it about his neck. the other have 18 mantle, make of diverse sort of skin. sow together all these with many other toy. they lay at his foot, stroke their ceremonious hand about his neck for his creation to be their governor and protector, promise their aid, victual or what they have to be his if he will stay with they to defend, and revenge they of the massawomeck. but we leave they at tockwhogh. protector, promise their aid, victual or what they have to be his if he will stay with they to defend and revenge they of the massawomeck. but we leave they at tockwhogh sorrow for our departure. yet we promise the next year again to visit they. many description and discourse they make, we of atquanachuck, massawomek and other people signify they inhabit upon a great water, beyond the mountain which we understand to be some great lake or the river of canada and from the french to have their hatchet and commodity by trade. these know no more of the territory of powhatan than his name and he as little of they. but the atquanachuk be on the ocean sea, the high mountain we see, northward we call. no more of the territory of powhatan than his name and he as little of they. but the atquanachuk be on the ocean sea, the high mountain we see northward we call perigrine mount and a rocky river where the massawomek go up willowbyes river, in honour of the town, our captain be bear in and that honourable house, the lord willowby, his most honour good friend. the sasquesahanock river we call smith fall, the next point to tockwhogh, pising point the next it point, bourne powel isle and smals point be by the river bolus and the little bay at the head. profit pool, watkins, read and momfords point be on each side, limbo, ward, cantrell and sicklemore, betwixt, patawomek and pamaunk^e after the name of the. and the little bay at the head profit pool, watkins read and momfords point be on each side limbo, ward, cantrell and sicklemore, betwixt, patawomek and pamaunk^e, after the name of the discoverer. in all those place and the further we come up the river, we cut in tree so many cross as we will and in many place make hole in tree wherein we write note and in some place cross of brass to signify to any englishman: have be there. thus have seek all the inlet and river worth note. we return to discover the river of these people. we find very tractable r and more civil than any. we promise they, as also the patawomek, to revenge they of the massawomek. but our purpose be. the river of these people we find very tractable r and more civil than any. we promise they, as also the patawomek, to revenge they of the massawomek. but our purpose be cross in the discovery of this river. some call rapathanock rapahanock r. we be kind entertain by the people of moraughtacund. here we encounter our old friend moscow, a lusty savage of wighcocomoco upon the river of patawomek. we suppose he some french man son, because he have a thick black bush beard and the savage seldom have any at all of which he be not a little proud. the exceed love of the savage moscow to see so many of his countryman wood and water he will fetch we guide we any, whether nay cause. be not a little proud. the exceed love of the savage moscow to see so many of his countryman. wood and water, he will fetch we guide we any whether nay cause diverse, of his countryman. help we tow against wind or tide from place to place till we come to patawomek. there he rest till we return from the head of the river and occasion our conduct to the mine. we suppose antimony. and in the place he fail not to do we all the good, he can persuade we in any case not to go to the rapahanock, for they will kill we, for be friend with the moraughtacund that but late have steal three of the king woman. this we do think be but that. go to the rapahanock, for they will kill we, for be friend with the moraughtacund that but late have steal three of the king woman. this we do think be, but that his friend may only have our trade. so we cross the river to the rapahanock. our fight with the rapahanock- there some 12 or 16 stand on the shore- direct we a little creek. where be good land and commodity for we in three or four canowes we see lie there. but according to our custom we demand to exchange a man in sign of love which after they have a little consult four or five, come up to the middle to fetch our man and leave we one of. they show we need not fear. of love which, after they have a little consult, four or five come up to the middle to fetch our man and leave we one of. they show we need not fear they, for they have neither club bow nor arrow. notwithstanding anas, todkill be send on shore to see if he can discover any ambuscado or what they have. desire to go over the plain to fetch some wood, but they be unwilling, except we will come into the creek where the boat may come close ashore. todkill, by degree have get some two stone throw up the plain, perceive two or three hundred man, as he think, behind the tree, so that offer to return to the boat, the savage assay to carry he away perforce. throw up the plain perceive, two or three hundred man, as he think, behind the tree, so that offer to return to the boat, the savage assay to carry he away, perforce that he call to we, we be betray. and by that he have speak the word: our hostage be overboard. but watkins, his keeper, slay, he in the water, immediate. we let fly among they so that they flee and todkill escape. yet they shoot so fast that he fall flat on the ground ere he can recover the boat. here, the massawomek target, stand we in good stead for upon mosco word we have set they about the forepart of our boat like a forecastle from whence we secure beat the savage from off the. stand we in good stead for upon mosco word, we have set they about the forepart of our boat like a forecastle, from whence we secure, beat the savage from off the plain without any hurt. yet they shoot more than a thousand arrow, and then flee into the wood, arm ourselves with these light target, which be make of little small stick, weave betwixt, string of their hemp and silk grass, as be our cloth, but so firm that no arrow can possible pierce they. we rescue todkill, who be all bloody by some of they, who be shoot by we that hold he, but as god please, he have no hurt, and follow they up to the wood. we find some slay, and in diverse place, they who be shoot by we, that hold he, but as god please, he have no hurt. and follow they up to the wood. we find some slay and, in diverse place, much blood. it seem all their arrow be spend for we hear no more of they. their canoe we take, the arrow we find we break save they we keep for moscow, to who we give the canowes for his kindness that entertain we in the best triumph manner and warlike order in arm of conquest he can procure of the moraughtacund the savage disguise like bush fight. the rest of the day we spend in accommodate our boat in stead of thoule we make stick like bedstaff, to which we fasten so many of our disguise like bush fight. the rest of the day we spend in accommodate our boat in stead of thoule we make stick like bedstaff to which we fasten so many of our massawomek target that environ she as waste clothes. the next morning we go up the river and our friend moscow follow we along the shore and at last desire to go with we in our boat. but as we pass by pisacack, matchopeak and mecuppom, three town situate upon high white clay cliff, the other side, all a low plain, marish and the river there but narrow, thirty or forty of the rapahanock have so accommodate themselves with branch as we take they for little bush, grow among the sedge, still see their arrow strike the. there but narrow. thirty or forty of the rapahanock have so accommodate themselves with branch as we take they for little bush, grow among the sedge, still see their arrow, strike the target and drop in the river where-at moscow, fall flat in the boat on his face, cry the rapahanock which present we espy to be the bush which, at our first volley, fall down in the sedge, when we be never half a mile from they, they show themselves, dance and sing very merry. the king of pissassack, nandtaughtacund and cuttatawoman use we kind and all their people neglect not any thing to moscow to bring we to they. betwixt, secobeck and massawteck be a small isle or two which cause the river to be broad. and all their people neglect not any thing to moscow to bring, we to. they betwixt, secobeck and massawteck be a small isle or two which cause the river to be broad than ordinary there. it please god to take one of our company, call mr fetherstone, that all the time he have be in this country have behave himself honest, valiant and industrious. where in a little bay we call fetherstone bay, we bury he with a volley of shot. the rest, notwithstanding their ill diet and bad lodging crowd in so small a barge, in so many danger, never rest but always toss to and again have all well recover their health the next day. we sail so high as our boat will float there set. in so many danger, never rest but always toss to and again have all well recover their health the next day. we sail so high as our boat will float there, set up cross and grave our name in the tree. our sentinel see a arrow fall by he though. we have range up and down more than a hour in dig in the earth, look of stone, herb and spring not see where a savage can well hide himself. our fight with the manahaacks upon the alarm. by that we have recover our arm. there be about a hundred nimble indian skip from tree to tree. let fly their arrow so fast as they can. the tree here serve we for baricadoe as well as they. but be about a hundred nimble indian. skip from tree to tree, let fly their arrow so fast as they can. the tree here serve we for baricadoe as well as they. but moscow do we more service than we expect for have shoot away his quiver of arrow, he run to the boat for more the arrow of moscow at the first. make they pause upon the matter, think by his bruit and skip. there be many savage. about half a hour this continue. a savage shot and take prisoner than they all vanish as sudden as they approach moscow, follow they so far as he can see we till they be out of sight. as we return there lay a savage as dead shoot in the knee. as they approach moscow, follow they so far as he can see we till they be out of sight. as we return, there lay a savage as dead, shoot in the knee, but take he up. we find he have life which moscow see never be. dog more furious against a bear than moscow be to have beat out his brain. so we have he to our boat where our chirurgeon who go with we to cure our captain hurt of the stingray. so dress this savage that within a hour after he look somewhat cheerful and do eat and speak. in the mean time we content moscow in help he to gather up their arrow, which be a armful whereof he glory, not a little. then we and do eat and speak. in the mean time, we content moscow in help he to gather up their arrow, which be a armful whereof he glory not a little. then we desire moscow to know what he be and what country be beyond the mountain. the poor, savage, mild answer: he, and all with he be of hasinninga, where there be three king more like unto they, namely the king of stegora, the king of tauxuntania and the king of shakahonea. that be come to moha^kahod, which be only a hunt town, and the bound betwixt, the kingdom of the mannahock and the nandtaughtacund, but hard by where we be. we demand why they come in that manner to betray we that come to they in peace. betwixt, the kingdom of the mannahock and the nandtaughtacund, but hard by where we be. we demand why they come in that manner to betray we that come to they in peace and to seek their love. he answer they hear we be a people come from under the world to take their world from they. we ask he how many world he do know? he reply he know no more but that which be under the sky that cover he, which be the powhatans with the monacan and the massawomek that be high up in the mountain. then we ask he what be beyond the mountain, his relation of their country, he answer the sun, but of any thing else he know nothing. * *. they can. the mountain. then we ask he what be beyond the mountain, his relation of their country? he answer the sun, but of any thing else he know nothing. *. *. they can travel, but where the wood be burn, because the wood be not burn. these and many such question we demand concern the massawomek, the monacan, their own country, and where be the king of stegora, tauxsintania and the rest, the monacan, he say, be their neighbour and friend and do dwell as they in the hilly country by small river, live upon root and fruit, but chief by hunt. the massawomeks do dwell upon a great water and have many boat and so many man that they make war with all the world for their king. fruit but chief by hunt. the massawomeks do dwell upon a great water and have many boat and so many man that they make war with all the world for their king. they be go every one a several way with their man on hunt, but those with he come thither a fish till they see we notwithstanding, they will be altogether at night at mahaskahod for his relation. we give he many toy with persuasion to go with we, and he as earnest desire we to stay the come of those king that for his good usage shall be friend with we, for he be brother to hasinninga. but moscow advise we present to be go for they be all naught. yet we tell he we will. good usage shall be friend with we, for he be brother to hasinninga. but moscow advise we present to be go for they be all naught. yet we tell he we will not till it be night. all thing we make ready to entertain what come. and moscow be as diligent in trim his arrow. the night be come. we all embark for the river. be so narrow, have it be light, the land on the one side be so high they may have. do we exceed much mischief? all this while the k of hasinninga be seek the rest and have consultation a good time what to do, but by their espy see we be go. it be not long before we hear their arrow drop on. be, seek the rest and have consultation, a good time what to do. but by their espy, see we be, go it be not long before we hear their arrow drop on every side the boat. we cause^ our savage to call unto they. but such a yell and hallow they make that they hear nothing, but now and then a piece. aim so near as we can where we hear the most voice. more than 12 mile they follow we in this manner. then the day appear, we find ourselves in a broad bay out of danger of their shot, where we come to a anchor and fall to breakfast, not so much as speak to they till the sun be rise, be well refresh we untie. of danger of their shot, where we come to a anchor and fall to breakfast, not so much as speak to they till the sun be rise, be well refresh. we untie our target, that cover we as a deck, and all show ourselves with those shield on our arm and sword in our hand, and also our prisoner amoroleck. a long discourse there be betwixt his countryman and he. how good we be, how well we use he, how we have a patawomek with we love we as his life that will have slay he have we not preserve he and that he shall have his liberty will they be but friend, how we conclude peace with the four king of monahoke. and to do we any? have we not preserve he, and that he shall have. his liberty will they be but friend. how we conclude peace with the four king of monahoke, and to do we any hurt, it be impossible. upon this, they all hang their bow and quiver upon the tree, and one come, swim aboard, we, with a bow tie on his head, and another with a quiver of arrow which they deliver our captain as a present. the captain have use they so kind as he can tell they. the other three king shall do the like, and then the great king of our world shall be their friend. who man we be, it be no soon demand, but perform so upon a low, moorish point of land, we and then the great king of our world shall be their friend. who man we be, it be no soon demand but perform so upon a low, moorish point of land. we go to the shore where those four king come and receive amoroleck. nothing they have but bow, arrow, tobacco-bag and pipe. what we desire, none refuse to give. we wonder at every thing we have and hear we have. do our pistol they take for pipe, which they much desire, but we do, content they with other commodity. and so we leave four or five hundred of our merry mannahock sing, dance and make merry and set sail for moraughtacund. in our return we visit all our friend, how we become friend with the rapahanock that. five hundred of our merry mannahock sing, dance and make merry and set sail for moraughtacund. in our return we visit all our friend, how we become friend with the rapahanock that rejoice much at our victory against the mannahock who many time have war also with they. but now they be friend and desire. we will be friend with the rapahanock as we be with the mannahock. our captain tell they they have twice assault he that come only in love to do they good and therefore he will now burn all their house, destroy their corn and for ever hold they his enemy till they make he satisfaction. they desire to know what that shall be. he tell they they shall present he the king bow. their corn and for ever hold they his enemy till they make he satisfaction. they desire to know what that shall be. he tell they they shall present he, the king, bow and arrow and not offer to come arm where he be, that they shall be friend with the moraughtacund, his friend, and give he their king son in pledge to perform it, and then all king james, his man, shall be their friend. upon this they present, send to the rapahanock to meet he at the place where they first fight. where will be the king of nantautacund and pissassac which, according to their promise, be there so soon as we, where rapahanock present his bow and arrow and confirm all we desire except his son. the king of nantautacund and pissassac, which, according to their promise, be there so soon as we, where rapahanock present his bow and arrow and confirm all we desire except his son, have no more but he, he can not live without he, but in stead of his son he will give, he the three woman, moraughtacund have stol^e, this be accept. and so in three or four canowes, so many as can go with we to moraughtacund, where moscow make they such relation and give to his friend so many bow and arrow that they no less love he then admire we the 3 woman be, bring our captain to each he give a chain of bead and then cause moraughtacund, moscow and rapahanock stand before he. no less love. he then admire we, the 3 woman be, bring our captain to each. he give a chain of bead and then cause moraughtacund, moscow and rapahanock stand before. he bid rapahanock take she he love best and moraughtacund choose next. and to moscow he give the three upon this away, go their canowes over the water to fetch their venison and all the provision they can and they that want boat, swim over the river, the dark, command we then to rest the next day. there be of man, woman and child, as we conjecture, six or seven hundred dance and sing, and not a bow nor arrow. see among they. moscow change his name v^tasantascugh, which we interpret stranger, for so they call we. we conjecture, six or seven hundred dance and sing and not a bow nor arrow. see among they moscow change his name v^tasantascugh, which we interpret stranger, for so they call. we all promise ever to be our friend and to plant corn purposely for we and we to provide hatchet, bead and copper for they. we depart, give they a volley of shot and they, we, as loud shout and cry as their strength can utter the discovery of payankatank. that night we anchor in the river of payankatank and discover it so high as it be navigable, but the people be most a hunt, save a few: old man, woman and child that be tend their corn, of which they promise we part when we will. it be navigable, but the people be most a hunt, save a few old man, woman and child that be tend their corn, of which they promise we part when we will fetch it, as have do all the nation where ever we have yet be in a fair, calm row towards point comfort. we anchor in gosnolls bay, but such a sudden gust surprise we in the night, with thunder and rain, that we never think more to have see james town yet run before the wind. we sometime see the land by the flash of fire from heaven, by which light only we keep from the split shore until it please god, in that black darkness to preserve we, by that light to find point comfort. of fire from heaven, by which light only we keep from the split shore until it please god. in that black darkness to preserve we by that light to find point comfort there, refresh ourselves, because we have only but hear of the chisapeack and nandsamunds. we think it as fit to know all our neighbour near home as so many nation abroad. so set sail for the southern shore, a notable treachery of the nandsamunds. we sail up a narrow river, up the country of chisapeack. it have a good channel but many shovel about the entrance. by that we have sail six or seven mile. we see two or three little garden plot with their house, the shore overgrow with the great pine and fir tree. the entrance. by that we have sail six or seven mile. we see two or three little garden plot with their house, the shore overgrow with the great pine and fir tree we ever see in the country but not see nor hear any people, and the river very narrow. we return to the great river to see if we can find any of they. coast the shore towards nandsamund which be most oyster-banke. at the mouth of that river we espy six or seven savage make their wire, who present, flee ashore we go, and where they wrought we throw diverse toy and so depart. far we be, not go ere they come again and begin to sing and dance and recall we, and thus we begin. where they wrought we throw diverse toy and so depart far we be, not go ere they come again and begin to sing and dance and recall we, and thus we begin our first acquaintance at last. one of they desire we to go to his house up that river. into our boat, voluntary he come, the rest run after we by the shore with all show of love that can be seven or eight mile. we sail up this narrow river at last. on the western shore we see large cornefields, in the midst a little isle, and in it be abundance of corn. the people he tell we be all a hunt, but in the isle be his house, to which he invite we with much. little isle and in it be abundance of corn. the people, he tell we be all a hunt, but in the isle be his house, to which he invite we with much kindness. to he, his wife and child, we give such thing, as they seem much content, they the other be come, desire we also to go, but a little high, to see their house. here our host, leave we the rest row by, we in a canow till we be so far past the isle. the river become very narrow. here we desire some of they to come aboard. we whereat pause a little. they tell we they will but fetch their bow and arrow and go all with we, but be ashore and thus arm of they to come aboard. we whereat pause a little. they tell we they will but fetch their bow and arrow and go all with we, but be ashore and thus arm. they persuade we to go forward, but we can neither persuade they into their canow nor into our boat. this give we cause to provide for the worst. far we go not ere seven or eight canowes full of man arm appear, follow we stay to see the conclusion, the fight, with the chisapeack and nandsamund^ present from each side. the river come arrow so fast as two or three hundred can shoot. they whereat we return to get the open. they in the canowes let fly also as fast, but among they we bestow. so so fast as two or three hundred can shoot they whereat we return to get the open. they in the canowes let fly also as fast. but among they we bestow so many shot the most of. they leap overboard and swim ashore, but two or three escape by row. be against their plain. our musket, they find shoot further than their bow, for we make not twenty shot ^re. they all retire behind the next tree be thus get out of their trap. we seize on all their canowes and moor they in the midst of the open. more than a hundred arrow stick in our target and about the boat. yet none hurt. only anthony bagnall be shoot in his hat and another in his sleeve. of the open. more than a hundred arrow stick in our target and about the boat, yet none hurt. only anthony bagnall be shoot in his hat and another in his sleeve. but see their multitude and suspect as it be that both the nandsamunds and the chisapeack be together, we think it best to ride by their canowes a while to bethink if it be better to burn all in the isle or draw they to composition till we be provide to take all they have which be sufficient to feed all our colony, but to burn the isle at night. it be conclude. in the interim we begin to cut in piece their canowes and they present to lay down their bow. how they become friend. to burn the isle at night. it be conclude. in the interim. we begin to cut in piece their canowes and they present to lay down their bow. how they become friend, make sign of peace. peace, we tell they. we will accept. will they bring we their king bow and arrow with a chain of pearl and when we come again, give we four hundred basket full of corn, otherwise we will break all their boat and burn their house and corn and all they have to perform all this. they allege only the want of a canow, so we put one a drift and bid they swim to fetch she and till they perform their promise we will, but only break their canowes they cry to. of a canow, so we put one a drift and bid they swim to fetch she, and till they perform their promise, we will but only break their canowes. they cry to we to do no more. all shall be as we will, which present they perform away. go their bow and arrow and tag and rag come with their basket. so much as we can carry, we take and so depart, good friend, we return to james town, where we safe arrive the 7. of september, the proceed at james town 1608.. there we find mr scrivener and divers other well recover, many dead, some sick, the late precedent prisoner for mutiny by the honest diligence of master scrivener, the harvest gather, but the provision in the mr scrivener and divers other well recover, many dead, some sick, the late precedent prisoner for mutiny by the honest diligence of master scrivener. the harvest gather, but the provision in the store, much spoil with rain. thus be that summer when little want consume and spend and nothing do, such be the government of captain ratliffe, but only this discovery wherein, to express all the danger, accident and encounter, this small number pass in that small barge by the scale of proportion, about three thousand mile, with such watery diet in those great water and barbarous country, till then to any christian utter unknown. i rather refer their merit to the censure of the courteous and experience reader than i will be tedious or partial. be a. barbarous country till then to any christian utter unknown. i rather refer their merit to the censure of the courteous and experience reader than i will be tedious or partial, be a party. but to this place to come, who will adventure with judgement, guide and reason how to enter? find in this world broad sea with wind and tide there be safe sail than any where beside. but because to wanton novice it be a province full of fearfulness, i wis into the great, vast deep to venture out those shallow river. let they coast about and by a small boat learn there first and mark how they may come to make a great bark. write by anthony bagnall, nathanael powel and anas todkill. chapter 7, the. about, and by a small boat. learn there first and mark how they may come to make a great bark. write by anthony bagnall, nathanael powel and anas todkill. chapter 7: the presidency, surrender to captain smith, the arrival and return of the second supply. and what happen? the ten of september, by the election of the council and request of the company, captain smith receive the letter patent which till then by no mean he will accept, though he be often importune thereunto. now, the build of ratliffes palace stay as a thing needless. the church be repair the storehouse, recover building, prepare for the supply we expect the fort reduce to a five-square form, the order of the watch, renew the squadron, each set of the church be repair the storehouse, recover building, prepare for the supply. we expect the fort, reduce to a five-square form, the order of the watch, renew the squadron, each set of the watch, train the whole company. every saturday, exercise in the plain by the west bulwark. prepare for that purpose we call smithfield, where sometime more than a hundred savage will stand in a amazement to behold how a file will batter a tree, where he will make they a mark to shoot at the boat trim for trade which be send out with lieutenant percy in their journey. encounter the second supply that bring they back to discover the country of monacan. how, or why, captain newport, obtain such a private commission as not to return? percy in their journey encounter the second supply that bring they back to discover the country of monacan. how or why captain newport obtain such a private commission as not to return without a lump of gold, a certainty of the south sea, or one of the lose company send out by sir water raleigh? i know not, nor why he bring such a five piece barge not to bear we to that south sea till we have bear she over the mountain which, how far they extend, be yet unknown, powhatans scorn when his courtesy be most deserve. as for the coronation of powhatan and his present of basin and ewer bed, bedstead clothes and such costly novelty, they have be much better. well spare then. so. be most deserve. as for the coronation of powhatan and his present of basin and ewer bed, bedstead clothes and such costly novelty, they have be much better. well, spare then. so ill spend, for we have his favour. much better. only for a plain piece of copper till this stately kind of solicit, make he so much overvalue himself that he respect we as much as nothing at all. as for the hire of the pole and dutchman to make pitch tar, glass, milles and soap ash, when the country be replenish with people and necessary, will have do well, but to send they and seventy more without victual to work, be not so well advise nor consider of as it shall have be. yet this can. necessary will have do well, but to send they and seventy more, without victual to work, be not so well advise nor consider of as it shall have be. yet this can not have hurt. we have they be 200.. though then we be 130 that want for ourselves, for we have the savage in that decorum, their harvest be new gather that we fear not to get victual for 500. no better way to overthrow the business then by our instructor. now be there. no way to make we miserable but to neglect that time to make provision whilst it be to be, have the which be do by the direction from england to perform this strange discovery, but a more strange coronation to loose that time. to make provision, whilst it be to be, have the which be do by the direction from england to perform this strange discovery, but a more strange coronation: to loose that time, spend that victual we have, tire and starve our man. have no mean to carry victual munition the hurt or sick, but on their own back, how or by who they be invent, i know not. but captain newport, we only account the author who to effect these project have. so guild man hope, with great promise, that both company and council conclude his resolution. for the most part, god do know they little know what they do, nor understand their own estate. to conclude his conclusion, against all the inconvenience, the foresee precedent: allege of resolution for the most part, god do know they little know what they do, nor understand their own estate. to conclude, his conclusion: against all the inconvenience, the foresee precedent allege of this supply there be add to the council a consultation where all the council be against the precedent. one, captain richard waldo and captain wynne, two ancient soldier and valiant gentleman but yet ignorant of the business, be but new arrive ratliffe be also permit to have his voice, and mr scrivener desirous to see strange country, so that although smith be precedent, yet the mayor part of the council have the authority and rule it as they list. as for clear smith objection, how pitch and tar, wainscot, clapbord glass and soap ash can be. the mayor part of the council have the authority and rule it as they list. as for clear smith objection, how pitch and tar, wainscot, clapbord glass and soap ash can be provide to relade the ship or provision get to live withal when none be in the country and that we have spend before the ship depart to effect these project, the answer be captain newport undertake to fraught the pinnace of twenty ton with corn in go and return in his discovery and to refraught she again, from werowocomoco of powhatan, also promise a great proportion of victual from the ship. infer that smith proposition be only device to hinder his journey to effect it himself and that the cruelty he have use to the savage. great proportion of victual from the ship infer that smith proposition be only device to hinder his journey to effect it himself, and that the cruelty he have use to the savage may well be the occasion to hinder these design and seek revenge on he for which taxation all work be leave and 120 choose man be appoint for newport guard in this discovery. but captain smith, to make clear all those seem suspicion that the savage be not so desperate as be pretend by captain newport, and how willing, since by their authority they will have it, so he be to assist they what he can because the coronation will consume much time. he undertake himself their message to powhatan to entreat he to come to. will have it. so he be to assist they what he can because the coronation will consume much time. he undertake himself their message to powhatan to entreat he to come to james town to receive his present and where newport dare not go with less than 120.. he only take with he captain waldo, mr andrew buckler, edward brinton and samuel collier. with these four he go over land to werowocomoco some 12 mile. capt smith go with 4.. to powhatan, when newport fear with 120.. there he pass the river of pamaunkee in a savage canow. powhatan be 30 mile of be present send for. in the mean time pocahontas and her woman entertain captain smith in this manner, in a fair, plain field. they make. savage canow, powhatan be 30 mile of, be present send for, in the mean time, pocahontas and her woman entertain captain smith in this manner: in a fair, plain field, they make a fire, before which he sit upon a mat. sudden among the wood be hear such a hideous noise and shriek that the english betake themselves to their arm and seize on two or three old man by. they suppose powhatan with all his power be come to surprise they but present pocahontas come, will he to kill she, if any hurt, be intend a virginia mask and the beholder, which be man, woman and child, satisfy the captain. there be no such matter then present they be present with this antic thirty young woman come. a virginia mask and the beholder, which be man, woman and child, satisfy the captain. there be no such matter. then present they be. present with this antic. thirty young woman come naked out of the wood, only cover behind and before with a few green leaf. their body all paint, some of one colour, some of another, but all differ. their leader have a fair pair of buck horn on her head and a otter skin at her girdle and another at her arm, a quiver of arrow at her back, a bow and arrow in her hand. the next have in her hand a sword, another a club, another a potstick, all horn alike. the rest, every one with their several devise, these fiend with most. in her hand. the next have in her hand a sword, another a club, another a potstick, all horn alike. the rest, every one with their several devise, these fiend, with most hellish shout and cry, rush from among the tree, cast themselves in a ring about the fire, sing and dance with most excellent ill variety, oft fall into their infernal passion and solemn again to sing and dance, have spend near a hour in this mascarado. as they enter in like manner, they depart, have reaccommodate themselves. they solemn invite. he to their lodging, the woman, entertainment where he be. no soon within the house. but all these nymph, more torment he then ever with crowd press and hang about. he most tedious cry, love you. the woman entertainment where he be no soon within the house. but all these nymph, more torment he then ever with crowd press and hang about he most tedious cry: love you, not i, love you not i. this salutation end the feast be set consist of all the savage dainty they can devise. some attend other, sing and dance about they which mirth be end with firebrand in stead of torch. they conduct he to his lodging. thus do they show their feat of arm and other art in dance. some other use there oaten pipe and other voice. chant captain smith message. the next day come powhatan smith. deliver his message of the present, send he and redeliver he namontack he have send for england desire. pipe and other voice chant captain smith message. the next day come powhatan smith, deliver his message of the present. send he and redeliver he namontack he have send for england. desire he to come to his father, newport, to accept those present and conclude their revenge against the monacan? whereunto this subtle savage thus reply: if your king have send i present, i also be a king and this be my land. eight day i will stay to receive they. powhatans, answer your father be to come to i, not i to he, nor yet to your fort. neither will i bite at such a bait. as for the monacan, i can revenge my own injury. and as for atquanachuk, where you say your brother be slay. to your fort, neither will i bite at such a bait. as for the monacan, i can revenge my own injury. and as for atquanachuk, where you say your brother be slay, it be a contrary way. from those part you suppose it. but for any salt water beyond the mountain, the relation you have have from my people be false. whereupon he begin to draw plot upon the ground, according to his discourse of all those region, many other discourse they have yet both content to give each other content in complemental courtesy. and so, captain smith return with this answer, powhatans coronation upon this: the present be send by water which be near a hundred mile, and the captain go by land with fifty good shot. captain smith return with this answer. powhatans coronation. upon this, the present be send by water which be near a hundred mile and the captain go by land with fifty good shot. all be meet at werowocomoco the next day. be appoint for his coronation than the present be. bring he his basin and ewer, bed and furniture, set up his scarlet cloak and apparel with much ado, put on he. be persuade by namontack. they will not hurt he, but a soul. trouble there be to make he kneel to receive his crown. he neither know the majesty nor meaning of a crown nor bend of the knee, endure so many persuasion, example and instruction as tire they all at last by lean hard on his shoulder. know the majesty nor meaning of a crown nor bend of the knee, endure so many persuasion, example and instruction as tire they all. at last by lean hard on his shoulder, he a little stoop, and three have the crown in their hand, put it on his head when, by the warn of a pistol, the boat be prepare with such a volley of shot that the king start up in a horrible fear till he see all be well, then remember himself to congratulate their kindness. he give his old shoe and his mantel to captain newport, but perceive his purpose be to discover the monacan. he labour to divert his resolution, refuse to lend he either man or guide more than namontack. and so after to captain newport but perceive his purpose be to discover the monacan, he labour to divert his resolution, refuse to lend he either man or guide more than namontack. and so, after some small compliment, all kindness on both side, in requital of his present, he present newport with a heap of wheat ear that may contain some 7 or 8 bushel and as much more we buy in the town, wherewith we return to the fort. the discovery of monacan. the ship have disburden herself of 70 person, with the first gentlewoman and woman-seruant that arrive in our colony, captain newport, with 120 choose man, lead by captain waldo, lieutenant percy, captain winne, mr west and mr scrivener, set forward for the discovery of monacan, leave the arrive in our colony, captain newport, with 120 choose man, lead by captain waldo, lieutenant percy, captain winne, mr west and mr scrivener set forward for the discovery of monacan, leave the precedent at the fort with about 80. or 90. such as they be, to relade the ship arrive at the fall. we march by land some forty mile in two day and a half and so return down the same path. we go two town we discover of the monacan call massinacak and mowhemenchouch. the people neither use we well nor ill, yet for our security we take one of their petty king and lead he bind to conduct we the way. and in our return search many place- we suppose mine about- which we spend. our security. we take one of their petty king and lead he bind to conduct we the way. and in our return search many place- we suppose mine, about which we spend some time in refine- have one william gallicut, a refyner fit for that purpose. from that crust of earth we dig, he persuade we to believe. he extract some small quantity of silver, and not unlikely better stuff may be have for the dig. with this poor trial, be content to leave this fair, fertile, well water country and come to the fall. the savage feign. there be diverse ship come into the bay. how the savage delude cap newport to kill they at james town. trade they will not. and find their corn we can. savage feign there be. diverse ship come into the bay how the savage delude cap newport to kill they at james town. trade they will not, and find their corn we can not, for they have hide it in the wood and be thus delude. we arrive at james town half sick. all complain and tire with toil, famine and discontent, to have only but discover our guild hope and such fruitless certainty as captain smith foretell. we but those that hunger seek to slake, which thus abound wealth will rake. not all the gem of ister shore, nor all the gold of lydia store can fill their greedy appetite. it be a thing so infinite. no, soon be we land, but the precedent disperse so many as. ister shore, nor all the gold of lydia store can fill their greedy appetite. it be a thing so infinite? no soon be we land but the precedent. disperse so many as be able, some for glass, other for tar, pitch and soap-ash. leave they with the fort to the counsel oversight. but 30 of we he conduct down the river some 5 mile from james town to learn to make clapbord, cut down tree and lie in wood. among the rest he have choose gabriel beadle and john russell, the only two gallant of this last supply and both proper gentleman. strange be these pleasure to their condition, yet lodging, eat and drink, work or play they, but do as the precedent do himself all these thing. last supply, and both proper gentleman. strange be these pleasure to their condition. yet lodging, eat and drink, work or play, they but do, as the precedent do himself. all these thing be carry so pleasant as within a week they become master, make it their delight to hear the tree thunder as they fall, but the axe so oft blister their tender finger that many time every three blow have a loud oath to drown, the echo for remedy of which sin. the precedent devise how to have every man oath number, a punishment for swear, and at night, for every oath to have a cann of water pour down his sleeve with which every offender be so wash himself. and all that a man shall scarce. swear, and at night for every oath to have a cann of water pour down his sleeve with which every offender be so wash himself, and all that. a man shall scarce hear a oath in a week for he who scorn and make but jest of curse, and his oath he do contemn not man but god, nor god nor man, but both. by this let no man think that the precedent and these gentleman spend their time as common wood-haggers, at fell of tree or such other like labour, or that they be press to it as hireling or common slave for what they do after they be, but once a little enure, it seem, and some conceit it only as a pleasure and recreation. yet to it as hireling or common slave for what they do after they be but once a little enure it seem, and some conceit it only as a pleasure and recreation. yet 30 or 40 of such voluntary gentleman will do more in a day than 100 of the rest. that must be press to it by compulsion. 3. man better than 100, but twenty good workman have be better than they all. master scrivener, captain waldo and captain win at the fort, every one in like manner, careful, regard their charge, the precedent, return from among the wood, see the time consume and no provision get. and the ship lie idle at a great charge and do nothing present. embark himself in the discovery barge, give order. among the wood, see the time consume and no provision get and the ship lie idle at a great charge and do nothing present. embark himself in the discovery barge, give order to the council to send lieutenant percy after he, with the next barge that arrive at the fort, two barge he have himself and 18 man, but arrive at chickahamania, the chickahamania force, to contribution that dogged nation. be too well acquaint with our want. refuse to trade with as much scorn and insolency as they can express the precedent, perceive it be powhatans policy to starve. we tell they he come not so much for their corn as to revenge. his imprisonment and the death of his man, murder by they and so land his. policy to starve. we tell they he come not so much for their corn as to revenge his imprisonment and the death of his man, murder by they. and so land his man and ready to charge they, they immediate flee and present after send their ambassador with corn, fish, foul and what they have to make their peace. their corn be that year, but bad, they complain, extreme of their own want. yet fraught our boat with a hundred bushel of corn and in like manner, lieutenant percy, that not long after arrive and have do the best they can to content we, we part good friend and return to james town though this much content the company, a bad reward for well-doing, that fear, nothing more. do the best they can to content we. we part good friend and return to james town. though this much content the company a bad reward for well-doing that fear nothing more than starve. yet some so envy his good success that they rather desire to hazard a starve than his pain shall prove so much more effectual than they. some project there be invent by newport and ratliffe, not only to have depose he but to have keep he out of the fort. for that be precedent. he will leave his place and the fort without their consent, but their horn be so much too short to effect it as they themselves, more narrow, escape a great mischief all this time our old tavern make as much. without their consent but their horn be so much too short to effect it as they themselves, more narrow, escape a great mischief. all this time our old tavern make as much of all they that have either money or ware as can be desire a good tavern in virginia. by this time they be become so perfect on all side- i mean the soldier, sailor and savage- as there be ten time more care to maintain their damnabl^ and private trade then to provide for the colony thing that be necessary, neither be it a small policy in newport and the mariner to report in england. we have such plenty a bad trade of the master and sailor, and bring we so many man without victual when. small policy in newport and the mariner to report. in england we have such plenty a bad trade of the master and sailor and bring we so many man without victual when they have so many private factor in the fort that within six or seven week of two or three hundred axe chissel, hows and pickax scarce twenty can be find, and for pike-head shot powder or any thing they can steal from their f^llowes be vendible. they know as well and as secret how to convey they to trade with the savage for fur, basket, mussaneek, young beast or such like commodity. as exchange they with the sailor for butter, cheese, beef, pork, beer, biscuit, oatmeal and oil, and then fain all be send they from. basket mussaneek, young beast or such like commodity as exchange they with the sailor for butter, cheese, beef, pork, beer, biscuit, oatmeal and oil, and then fain all be send they from their friend. and though virginia afford no fur for the store, yet one master in one voyage have get so many by this indirect mean, as he confess to have sell in england for 30l. those be the saint-seeming worthy of virginia that have, notwithstanding all this, meat, drink and wage, but now they begin to grow weary. their trade be both perceive and prevent. none have be in virginia that have observe any thing which know not this to be true. and yet the loss, the scorn, the misery and shame be the poor officer. prevent. none have be in virginia that have observe any thing which know not this to be true. and yet the loss, the scorn, the misery and shame be the poor officer, gentleman and careless governor who be all thus buy and sell the adventurer cozen and the action overthrow by their false excuse, information and direction. by this, let all man judge how this business can prosper. be thus abuse ^y such pilfer occasion and have not, captain newport, cry the precedent will have, discharge the ship and cause he to have stay one year in virginia to learn to speak of his own experience. master scrivener voyage to werowocomoco. master scrivener be send with the barge and pinnace to werowocomoco where he find the savage more. in virginia to learn to speak of his own experience. master scrivener voyage to werowocomoco. master scrivener be send with the barge and pinnace to werowocomoco, where he find the savage more ready to fight, then trade. but his vigilancy be such as prevent their project and by the mean of namontack, get three or four hogshead of corn and as much pocones which be a red root which then be esteem a excellent dye. captain newport be dispatch with the trial of pitch tar, glass, frankincense soap ash, with that clapboord and wainscot that can be provide. meet with mr scrivener at point comfort and so return for england. we remain be about two hundred, the copy of a letter send to the treasurer and council of be provide, meet with mr scrivener at point comfort and so return for england. we remain be about two hundred the copy of a letter send to the treasurer and council of virginia from captain smith than precedent in virginia, right honourable, etc. i receive your letter wherein you write that our mind be so set upon faction and idle conceit in divide the country without your consent, and that we feed you but with if and and hope and some few proof, as if we will keep the mystery of the business to ourselves and that we must express, follow your instruction send by captain newport. the charge of who voyage amount to near two thousand pound, the which, if we can defray by the ship, return. that we must express follow your instruction send by captain newport. the charge of who voyage amount to near two thousand pound, the which, if we can defray by the ship return, we be like to r^main as banish man to these particular. i humble entreat your pardon if i offend you with my rude answer for our faction. unless you will have i run away and leave the country, i ca^not prevent they because i do make many stay that will else fly any. whether for the i^le letter send to my lord of salisbury by the precedent and his confederates for divide the country, etc. what it be, i know not, for you see no hand of i to it, nor ever dream i of any. by the precedent and his confederates for divide the country etc. what it be, i know not, for you see no hand of i to it, nor ever dream i of any such matter that we feed you with hope etc. though i be no scholar, i be pass a school boy and i desire but to know what either you and these here do know, but that i have learned to tell you by the continual hazard of my life. i have not conceal from you any thing i know, but i fear some cause you to believe much more than be true express to follow your direstion by captain newport. though they be perform, i be direct against it. but according to our commission i be you to believe much more than be true, express to follow your direstion by captain newport, though they be perform. i be direct against it. but according to our commission, i be content to be overrule by the mayor, part of the council, i fear, to the hazard of we all, which now be general, confess when it be too late, only captain winne and captain waldo. i have swear of the council and crown powhatan, according to you instruction, for th^ charge of this voyage of two or three thousand pound- we have not receive the value of a hundred pound- and for the quarter boat to be bear by th^ soldier over the fall, newport have 120 of the best man he can choose if he. the value of a hundred pound, and for the quarter boat to be bear by th^ soldier over the fall, newport, have 120 of the best man he can choose. if he have burn she to ash, one may have carry she in a bag, but as she be five hundred cann^t to a navigable place above the fall. and for he at that time to find in the south sea a mine of gold, or any of they send by sir walter raleigh. at our consultation i tell they be as likely as the rest. but during this great discovery of thirty mile, which may as well have be do by one man and much more, for the value of a pound of copper at a seasonable. but during this great discovery of thirty mile, which may as well have be do by one man and much more, for the value of a pound of copper at a seasonable time, they have the pinnace and all the boat with th^m, but one that remain with i to serve the fort. in their absence, i follow the new begin work of pitch and tar, glass, soap-ash and clapboord, whereof some small quantity we have send you. but if you right, consider what a infinite toil it be in russia and swethland, where the wood be proper for naught else, and though there be the help both of man and beast in those ancient commonwealth which many a hundred year have use it. yet thousand of those. be proper, for naught else. and though there be the help both of man and beast in those ancient commonwealth which many a hundred year have use it, yet thousand of those poor people can scarce g^t necessary to live. but from h^nd to mouth, and though your factor there can buy as much in a week as will fraught you a ship, or as much as you please, you must not expect from we any such matter, which be but a many of ignorant, miserable soul that be scarce, able to get wherewith to live and defend ourselves against the inconstant, savage find. but here and there a tree fit for the purpose and want all thing else the russian have for the coronation of p^whatan by and defend ourselves against the inconstant, savage find. but here and there a tree fit for the purpose and want all thing else the russian have for the coronation of p^whatan. by who, advice you, send he such present? i know not. but this give i leave to tell you, i fear th^y will be the confusion of we all ere we hear from you again, at your ship arrival the savage harvest be new gather and we go to buy it our own not be half sufficient for so great a number. as for the two ship load of corn n^wport pr^mised to provide we from powhatan, he bring we but fourteen bushel, and from the monacan nothing but the most of the man sick and near. two ship load of corn, n^wport pr^mised to provide we from powhatan, he bring we but fourteen bushel, and from the monacan nothing but the most of the man sick and near famish. from your ship we have not provision in victual worth twenty pound, and we be more than two hundred to live upon this, the one half sick, the other little. better. for the sailor, i confess, they daily make good cheer, but our diet be a little meal and water, and not sufficient of that. though there be fish in the sea, fowl in the air and beast in the wood, their bound be so large, they so wild and we so weak and ignorant. we can much trouble they, captain newport, we much suspect. in the air and beast in the wood. their bound be so large, they so wild, and we so weak and ignorant, we can much trouble they. captain newport, we much suspect to be the author of those invention. now that you shall know, i have make you as great a discovery as he, for less charge than he spend you every meal, i have send you this map of the bay and rivers, with a annex relation of the country and nation that inhabit they, as you may see at large, also two barrel of stone and such as i take to be good iron over, at the least so divide, as by their note you may see in what place i find they, the soldier, say: stone and such as i take to be good, iron over at the least. so divide, as by their note you may see in what place i find. they, the soldier, say many of your officer maintain their family out of that you send, we, and that newport have a hundred pound a year for carry. news for every master you have yet send can find the way as well as he, so that a hundred pound may be spare, which be more than we have all th^t help to pay he wage. cap ratliffe be now call sickl^more a poor counterfeit imposture. i have send you he home, lest the company shall cut his throat what he be now, every one can tell you if he and now call sickl^more a poor counterfeit imposture. i have send you he home, lest the company shall cut his throat. what he be now, every one can tell you. if he and archer return again, they be sufficient to keep we always in faction. when you send again, i entreat you, rather send but thirty ca^penters, husbandman, gardiner, fisher man, blacksmith, mason and digger up of tree root. well, provide then a thousand of such as we have, for except we be able both to lodge they and feed they, the most will consume with want of necessary, before they can be make good for any thing. thus, if you please to consider this account and of the unnecessary wage to captain newport or his ship, so long. of necessary before they can be make good for any thing. thus, if you please to consider this account and of the unnecessary wage to captain newport or his ship, so long linger and stay here, for, notwithstanding his boast to leave, we victual for 12 mon^ths- though we have 89 by this discovery- lame and sick, and but a pint of corn a day for a man. we be constrain to give he three hogshead of that to victual he homeward, or yet to send into germany or poleland for glasseman and the rest till we be able to sustain ourselves and relieve they when they come. it be better to give five hundred pound a tun for those gross commodity in denmark, then send for they. we be able to sustain ourselves and relieve they when they come. it be better to give five hundred pound a tun for those gross commodity in denmark, then send for they hither till more necessary thing be provide for in overtoyling our weak and unskilful body to satisfy this desire of present profit. we can scarce ever recover ourselves from one supply to another, and i humble entreat you hereafter: let we know what we shall receive and not stand to the sailor courtesy to leave we what they please, else you may charge we with what you will, but we not you with any thing. these be the cause that have keep we in virginia from lay such a foundation that ^re this may have give. with what you will, but we, not you with any thing. these be the cause that have keep we in virginia from lay such a foundation that ^re this may have give much better content and satisfaction, but as yet you must not look for any profitable return. so i humble rest the name of those in this supply. be these with their proceed and accident: captain peter winne, captain richard waldo be appoint to be of the council. master francis west, brother to the lord war, gent thomas grave, raleigh chroshaw, gabriel beadle, john beadle, john russell, william russell, john cuderington, william sambage, henry leigh, henry philpot, harmon harrison, daniel tucker, henry collins, hugh wolleston, john hoult, thomas norton, george yarington, george burton, thomas abbey, william dowman. john russell. william russell, john cuderington, william sambage, henry leigh, henry philpot, harmon harrison, daniel tucker, henry collins, hugh wolleston, john hoult, thomas norton, george yarington, george burton, thomas abbey, william dowman, thomas maxes, michael lowick, master hunt, thomas f^rr^st, john dauxe, tradesman, thomas ph^lps, john prat, john clarke, jeffrey shortridge, oconor hugh winne, david ap, hugh, thomas bradley, john burra^, thomas l^vander, henry bell, master powel, david ellis, thomas gibson, labourer, thomas dawse, thomas mallard, william tailor, thomas fox, nicholas hancock, walker, williams flood, morley, rose, scot hardwyn, boy, milman hilliard, mistress forrest and anne burras, her maid, eight dutch man and pole, with some other, to the number of seventy person, etc. these poor conclusion, so affright we all, with famine nandsamund, force to contribution that burras, her maid, eight dutch man and pole with some other, to the number of seventy person, etc. these poor conclusion, so affright we all with famine nandsamund, force to contribution that the precedent provide for n^ndsamund and take with he captain winne and mr scrivener then return from captain newport. these people also long deny he not only the 400 basket of corn th^y promise, but any trade at all. excuse themselves, they have ^pent most they have and be command by powhatan to keep that they have and not to let we come into their river till we be constrain. to begin with, they perforce upon the discharge of our musket. they all flee and shoot not a arrow. the first house we come to we their river till we be constrain. to begin with they perforce upon the discharge of our musket. they all flee and shoot not a arrow. the first house we come to we set on fire which, when they perceive they desire we will make no more spoil and they will give we half they have. how they collect it, i know not, but before night they load our three boat and so we return to our quarter, some four mile down the river, which be only the open wood under the lay of a hill where all the ground be cover with snow and hard freeze. the snow we dig away and make a great fire in the place. when the ground be well dry, we turn away. all the ground be cover with snow and hard freeze the snow, we dig away and make a great fire in the place. when the ground be well dry we turn away the fire and cover the place with a mat. there we lie very warm to keep we from the wind. we make a shade of another mat. as the wind turn we turn our shade and when the ground grow cold we remove the fire. and thus many a cold winter night have we lie in this miserable manner. yet those that most common go upon all those occasion be always in health, lusty and sit for spare they. this year, the n^xt year, they promise to plant purposely for we, and so we return to go upon all those occasion, be always in health, lusty and sit for spare they. this year, the n^xt year, they promise to plant purposely for we, and so we return to james town about this time there be a marriage betwixt john laydon and anne burras, the first marriage in virginia, which be the first marriage we have in virginia. long he stay not but fit himself and captain waldo, with two barge from chawopoweanock and all part thereabouts. all the people be flee as be jealous of our intent till we discover the river and people of apamatuck, where we find not much that they have. we equal divide apamatuck discover, but give they copper and such thing as content. they in consideration, master, scrivener and and people of apamatuck where we find not much that they have. we equal divide apamatuck discover, but give they copper and such thing as content. they in consideration, master scrivener and lieutenant percy go also abroad but can find nothing. the precedent see the procrastinate of time be no course to live, resolve with captain waldo who he know to be sure in time of need to surprise powhatan and all his provision. but the unwillingness of captain winne and master scrivener for some private respect plot in england to ruin captain smith, do their best to hinder their project. but the precedent, who no persuasion can persuade to starve, be invite by powhatan to come unto he and if he will send he but man to. best to hinder their project. but the precedent, who no persuasion can persuade to starve, be invite by powhatan to come unto he. and if he will send he but man to build he a house, give he a gryndstone, fifty sword, some piece a cock and a hen with much copper and bead. he will lo^d his ship with corne. the precedent, not ignorant of his devise and subtlety, yet unwilling to neglect any opportunity present, send three dutchman and two english. have so small allowance, few be able to do any thing to purpose. know there need no better a castle to effect this project. take order with captain waldo to second he. if need require scrivener, he leave his substitute and set forth with th^. know there need no better a castle to effect this project. take order with captain waldo to second he, if need require, scrivener. he leave his substitute and set forth with th^ pinnace, two barge and fortie-six man, which only be such as voluntary, offer themselves for his journey, the which, by reason of mr scrivener ill success, be censure very desperate. they all know smith will not return empty. if it be to be have howsoever, it cause many of those that he have appoint to find excuse to stay behind. chap 8: captain smith journey to pamaunkee. the twentie-nine of december he set forward for werowocomoco. his company, be these in the discovery barge himself: gent robert behethland, nathanael grave, john russell, raleigh chrashow, michael sicklemore. journey to pamaunkee the twentie-nine of december he set forward for werowocomoco, his company. be these in the discovery barge himself: gent robert behethland, nathanael grave, john russell, raleigh chrashow, michael sicklemore, richard worley, soldier anas todkill, william loue, william bentley, jeffrey shortridge, edward pise, william ward in the pinnace, lieutenant percy, brother to the earl of northumberland, master francis west, brother to the lord war, william phittiplace, captain of the pinnace, gent michael phittiplace, jeffrey abbot, sergeant william tankard, george yarington, james browne, edward brinton, george burton, thomas coe, jonas profit, master robert ford, clarke of the council, john dod, soldier henry powel, soldier thomas gipson, david ellis, nathanael peacock, sailor john prat, george acrig, james read, nicholas hancock, james watkins, thomas lambert, four dutchman and richard. of the council, john dod, soldier, henry powel soldier, thomas gipson, david ellis, nathanael peacock, sailor john prat, george acrig, james read, nicholas hancock, james watkins, thomas lambert, four dutchman and richard savage be send by land before to build the house for powhatan. against our arrival, this company be victual, but for three or four day, lodge the first night at warraskoyack, where the precedent take sufficient provision. this kind king do his best to divert he from see powhatan, but perceive he can not prevail. he advise in this manner the good counsel of warraskoyack, captain smith, you shall find powhatan to use you kind, but trust he not and be sure he have no opportunity to seize on your arm, for he have send for. warraskoyack. captain smith, you shall find powhatan to use you kind, but trust he not, and be sure he have no opportunity to seize on your arm, for he have send for you only to cut your throat. the captain, thank he for his good counsel. yet the better to try his love desire guide to chawwonock, for he will send a present to that king to bind he, his friend, to perform this journey. be send mr sicklemore, a very valiant, honest and a painful soldier, with he two guide and direction, how to seek for the lose company of sir walter raleighs and silk grass. then we depart. thence the precedent. assure the king perpetual love and leave with he samu^l collier his page to learn. for the lose company of sir walter raleighs and silk grass. then we depart thence the precedent, assure the king perpetual love and leave with he samu^l collier his page to learn the language. so this king deed by sacred oath, adiur more wary, prove and circumspect by odds. fear at least his double forfeiture to offend his friend and sin against his god. the next night be lodge at kecoughtan, six or seven day. the extreme wind, plenty of victual rain, frost and snow cause we to keep christmas among the savage, where we be never more merry nor feed on more. plenty of good oyster fish, flesh, wild-soule and good bread, nor never have better fire in england then in the dry, smoky house of kecoughtan. never more merry, nor feed on more. plenty of good oyster fish, flesh, wild-soule and good bread, nor never have better fire in england then in the dry, smoky house of kecoughtan, but depart thence when we find no house. we be not curious in any weather to lie three or four night together under the tree by a fire. 148 fowl kill at three shoot, as former be say a hundred forty eight fowl. the precedent: anthony bagnall and sergeant pise do kill at three shoot at kiskiack. the frost and contrary wind force we three or four day also to suppress the insolency of those proud savage to quarter in their house yet guard our barge and cause they. give we what we want, though we. three or four day also to suppress the insolency of those proud savage to quarter in their house yet guard our barge and cause they. give we what we want, though we be but twelve and himself. yet we never want shelter where we find any house. the 12 of january we arrive at werowocomoco, where the river be freeze near half a mile from the shore. but to neglect no time the precedent with his barge so far have approach by break the ice as the ebb leave he among those oasie shovel. yet rather than to lie there freeze to death. by his own example, he teach they to march near middle deep a flight shoot through this muddy freeze oase. when the barge float he than to lie there freeze to death. by his own example he teach they to march near middle deep a flight, shoot through this muddy freeze oase. when the barge float, he appoint two or three to return. she aboard the pinnace where, for want of water, in melt the ice they make fresh water for the river. there be salt. but in this march mr russell, who none can persuade to stay behind, be somewhat ill and exceed heavy, so overtoyl himself as the rest have much ado ere he get ashore to regain life into his dead benumb spirit quarter. in the next house we find we send to powhatan for provision, who send we plenty of bread, turkey and venison. the next day have feast. into his dead benumb spirit quarter in the next house we find we send to powhatan for provision, who send we plenty of bread, turkey and venison. the next day have feast we. after his ordinary manner he begin to ask u^ when we will be go feign. he send not for we. neither have he any corn and his people much less. yet for forty sword he will procure we forty basket. the precedent show he the man there present that bring he the message and condition. ask powhatan how it chance he become so forgetful thereat. the king conclude the matter with a merry laughter. ask for our commodity, but none he like without gun and sword. value a basket of corn more precious than a? forgetful thereat the king conclude the matter with a merry laughter. ask for our commodity, but none he like without gun and sword. value a basket of corn more precious than a basket of copper, say. he can rate his corn, but not the copper. captain smith, see the intent of this subtle savage. begin to deal with he after this manner, powhatan, though i have many course to have make my provision, cap smith discourse to powhatan. yet believe your promise to supply my want. i neglect all to satisfy your desire and to testify my love, i send you my man for your build, neglect my own. what your people have, you have engross. forbid they our trade. and now you think by consume the time. my love, i send you my man for your build, neglect my own. what your people have you have engross, forbid they our trade. and now you think, by consume the time we shall consume for want not have to fulfil your strange demand. as for sword and gun, i tell you long ago: i have none to spare and you must know those i have can keep i from want yet steal or wrong you i will not, nor dissolve that friendship. we have mutual promise, except you constrain i by our bad usage. the king have attentive listen to this discourse. promise that both he and his country will spare he what he can, the which, within two day they shall receive powhatans reply and flattery. king have attentive listen to this discourse, promise that both he and his country will spare he what he can, the which within two day they shall receive powhatans reply and flattery. yet, captain smith, say the king, some doubt i have of your come hither. that make i not so kind. seek to relieve you as i will, for many do. inform i, your come hither be not for trade but to invade my people and possess my country. who dare not come to bring you corn. see you thus arm with your man to free we of this fear. leave aboard your weapon, for here they be ne^alesse. we be all friend, and for ever powhatans. with many such discourse they spend the day quarter that. free we of this fear. leave aboard your weapon, for here they be, ne^alesse, we be all friend, and for ever. powhatans, with many such discourse, they spend the day, quarter that night, in the king house. the next day he renew his building which he little intend shall proceed for the dutchman. find his plenty and know our want and perceive his preparation to surprise. we little think we can escape both he and famine to obtain his favour. reveal to he so much as they know of our estate and project and how to prevent they, one of they, be of so great a spirit, judgement and resolution and a hireling that be certain of his wage for his labour and ever well use both he. prevent they one of they be of so great a spirit, judgement and resolution and a hireling that be certain of his wage for his labour and ever well use both he and his countryman that the precedent know not who better to trust and not know any fit for that employment have, send he as a spy to discover powhatans intent, then little doubt his honesty, nor can ever be certain of his villainy. till near half a year after, whilst we expect the come in of the country, we wrangle out of the king: ten quarter of corn for a copper kettell, the which the precedent perceive he much to affect, value it at a much great rate, but in regard of his scarcity he will. ten quarter of corn for a copper kettell, the which the precedent perceive he much to affect, value it at a much great rate, but in regard of his scarcity he will accept it provide we shall have as much more the next year, or else the country of monacan, wherewith each seem well content. and powhatan begin to expostulate the difference of peace and war after this manner, captain smith, you may understand that i have see the death of all my people thrice powhatan discourse of peace and war, and not any one live of those three generation but myself. i know the difference of peace and war better than any in my country. but now i be old and ere long must die my brethren. of those three generation. but myself, i know the difference of peace and war better than any in my country. but now i be old and ere long must die my brethren, namely opitchapam, opechancanough and kekataugh, my two sister and their two daughter be distinct, each other successor. i wish their experience no less than i and your love to they no less than i to you. but this bruit from nandsamund that you be come to destroy my country so much affright all my people as they dare not visit you. what will it avail you to take that by force you may quick have by love, or to destroy they that provide you food? what can you get by war when we can hide our avail you to take that by force you may quick have by love, or to destroy they that provide you food. what can you get by war, when we can hide our provision and fly to the wood whereby you must famish by wrong? we your friend, and why be you thus jealous of our love? see we unarm and both do and be willing still to feed you with that you can get, but by our labour. think you i be so simple not to know it be better to eat good meat, lie well and sleep quiet with my woman and child. laugh and be merry with you, have copper hatchet or what i want. be your friend then, be force to fly from all to and sleep quiet with my woman and child, laugh and be merry with you, have copper hatchet or what i want. be your friend, then be force to fly from all, to lie cold in the wood, feed upon acorn root and such trash, and be so hunt by you that i can neither rest, eat nor sle^pe. but my tire man m^st watch, and if a twig but break, every one cry: there come, captain smith, then must i fly. i know not whether. and thus, with miserable fear, end my miserable life. leave my pleasure to such youth as you which, through your rash unadvisedness, may quick as miserable end, for want of that, you never know where to find. let this therefore assur^ you of. pleasure to such youth as you which through your rash unadvisedness may quick as miserable end. for want of that, you never know where to find. let this therefore assur^ you of our love, and every year our friendly trade shall furnish you with corn, and now also, if you will come in friendly manner to see we, and not thus with your gun and sword as to invade your foe. to this subtle discourse, the precedent thus reply. capt smith reply: see, you will not right conceive of our word. we strive to make you know our thought by our deed. the vow i make you of my love, both myself and my man have keep. as for your promise, i find it every day violate by know our thought by our deed. the vow i make you of my love, both myself and my man have keep. as for your promise, i find it every day violate by some of your subject. yet we find your love and kindness, our custom, be so far from be ungrateful that for your sake only we have curb our thirst desire of revenge, else h^d. they know as well the cruelty we use to our enemy as our true love and courtesy to our friend. and i think your judgement sufficient to conceive as well by the adventure we have undertake as by the advantage we have by our arm of you that have we intend you any hurt, long ere this we can have effect it. by the adventure we have undertake as by the advantage we have by our arm of you that have we intend you any hurt? long ere this we can have, effect it. your people come to james town, be entertain with their bow and arrow, without any exception. we esteem it with you as it be with we to wear our arm as our apparel. as for the danger of our enemy, in such war consist our chief pleasure. for your riches we have no use. as for the hide, your provision, or by your fly to the wood, we shall not so unadvised starve as you conclude. your friendly care in that behalf be needless, for we have a rule to find, beyond your knowledge, many other. to the wood. we shall not so unadvised starve as you conclude. your friendly care in that behalf be needless, for we have a rule to find beyond your knowledge. many other discourse they have, till at last they begin to trade. but the king see, his will will not be admit as a law our guard disperse, nor our man disarm. powhatans importunity to have we unarm, to betray we, he sigh, breathe his mind once more in this manner. captain smith, i never use any werowance so kind as yourself. yet from you i receive the least kindness of any captain newport. give i sword, copper clothes, a bed towel or what i desire ever. take what i offer he and will send away his gun. receive the least kindness of any captain newport. give i sword, copper clothes, a bed towel or what i desire ever. take what i offer he and will send away his gun when i entreat he. none do deny to lie at my foot or refuse to do what i desire, but only you, of who i can have? nothing but what you regard not, and yet you will have whatsoever you demand. captain newport, you call father and so you call i. but i see, for all we both, you will do what you list, and we must both seek to content you. but if you intend so friendly, as you say, send hence your arm, that i may believe you, for you see the love i and we must both seek to content you. but if you intend so friendly as you say, send hence your arm that i may believe you, for you see the love i bear. you do cause i, thus naked, to forget myself. smith, see this savage, but trifle the time to cut his throat. procure the savage to break the ice that his boat may come to fetch his corn and he and give order for more man to come on shore to surprise the king with who also he, but trifle the time till his man be land cap. smith. discourse to delay time till he find opportunity to surprise the king and to keep he from suspicion. entertain the time with this reply, powhatan, you must. man be land. cap smith discourse to delay time till he find opportunity to surprise the king and to keep he from suspicion, entertain the time with this reply. powhatan, you must know, as i have but one god i honour, but one king, and i live not here as your subject but as your friend, to pleasure you with what i can. by the gift you bestow on i, you gain more than by trade. yet will you visit i as i do you. you shall know it be not our custom to sell our courtesy as a vendible commodity. bring all your country with you for your guard. i will not dislike it as be over jealous, but to content you tomorrow i will leave my courtesy as a vendible commodity. bring all your country with you for your guard. i will not dislike it as be over jealous, but to content you, tomorrow i will leave my arm and trust to your promise. i call you father, indeed, and as a father you shall see, i will love you. but the small care you have of such a child cause my man persuade m^ to look to myself. powhatans plot to have murder smith. by this time powhatan have knowledge. his m^n be ready whilst the ice be a break with his luggage. woman and child flee. yet to avoid suspicion, leave two or three of the woman talk with the captain while he secret run away and his man, that secret beset. his luggage, woman and child flee. yet to avoid suspicion, leave two or three of the woman talk with the captain, while he secret run away and his man, that secret beset the house which be present, discover to captain smith with his pistol, sword and target. he make such a passage among these naked devil that at his first shoot they next, he rumble one over another and the rest quick flee some one way, some another, so that without any hurt only accompany with john russell, he obtain the c^rps guard when they perceive he so well, escape, and with his eighteen man, for he have no more with he, a s^^re to the uttermost of their skill, they seek excuse to dissemble the matter and he so well escape, and with his eighteen man, for he have no more with he a s^^re. to the uttermost of their skill, they seek excuse to dissemble the matter and powhatan to excuse his flight and the sudden com^ing of this multitude. send our captain a great bracelet and a chain of pearl. a chain of pearl. send the captain for a present by a ancient orator that bespeak we to this purpose, perceive even then from our pinnace a barge and man. depart and come unto we. captain, smith our werowance be flee, fear your gun and know when the ice be break, there will come more man. send these number, but to guard his corn from steal, that may happen without your knowledge now. fear your gun and know when the ice be break there will come more man. send these number, but to guard his corn from steal. that may happen without your knowledge. now, though, some be hurt by your misprision. yet powhatan be your friend and so will for ever continue. now, since the ice be open, he will have you send away your corn, and if you will have his company send away also your gun, which so affright his people that they dare not come to you, as he promise, they shall then have. provide basket for our man to carry our corn to the boat. pretend to kill our man, load with basket we cause they do it themselves. they kind offer their service to guard. basket for our man to carry our corn to the boat. pretend to kill our man. load with basket we cause they do it themselves. they kind offer their service to guard our arm. that none shall steal. they a great many. they be of goodly well proportion, fellow as grim as devil. yet the very sight of cock our match and be to let fly a few word cause they to leave their bow and arrow to our guard and bear down our corn on their back. we need not importune they to make dispatch, but our barge be leave on the oase by the ebb, cause we stay till the next high-water. ^o that we return again to our old quarter, powhatan and his dutchman burst. but our barge be leave on the oase by the ebb, cause we stay till the next high-water. ^o that we return again to our old quarter. powhatan and his dutchman burst with desire to have the head of captain smith. for if they can but kill he, they think all be, they neglect not any opportunity to effect his purpose. the indian, with all the merry sport they can devise, spend the time till night. then they all return to powhatan who all this time be make ready his force to surprise the house and he, at supper, notwithstanding the eternal all-seeing god, do prevent h^^. and by a strange mean for pocahontas, his dear jewel, and daughter pocahontas betray her father, deceit to kill. we in. he at supper. notwithstanding the eternal all-seeing god, do prevent h^^. and by a strange mean for pocahontas, his dear jewel and daughter, pocahontas betray her father, deceit to kill we in that dark night. come through the irksome wood and tell our captain, great cheer shall be, send we by and by, but powhatan and all the power he can make will after come k^ll we all. if they that bring it can not kill we with our own weapon when we be at supper. therefore, if we will live, she wish we present to be. go such thing as she delight in he will have, give she. but with the tear run down her cheek she say she dare not be see to have any for. be go such thing as she delight in he will have give she. but with the tear run down her cheek she say she dare not be see to have any, for if powhatan shall know it she be but dead. and so she run away by herself as she come. within less than a hour come eight or ten lusty fellow with great platter of venison and other victual, very importunate to have we put out our match who smoke, make they sick and sit down to our victual. but the captain make they taste every dish which do. he send some of they back to powhatan to bid he make haste for he be prepare for his come. as for they, he know they come to. every dish which do. he send some of they back to powhatan to bid he make haste for he be, prepare for his come. as for they, he know they come to betray he at his supper, but he will prevent. they and all their other intend villainy so that they may be go not long after come more messenger to see what news, not long after they other. thus we spend the night as vigilant as they till it be high-water, yet seem to the saluage, as friendly as they to we, and that we be so desirous to give powhatan content, as he request, we do. leave he edward brynton to kill. he foul an^ the dutchman to finish his house. think at our return from be so desirous to give powhatan content, as he request. we do. leave he edward brynton to kill. he foul an^ the dutchman to finish his house. think at our return from pamaunkee the frost will be go and then we may find a better opportunity, if necessity do. occasion it. little dream yet of the dutchman treachery who humour well suit this verse: be any free that may not live as free as he list. let we live. so then we be as free and brutish as the best. chap 9, how we escape surprise at pamaunkee, the dutch man deceive cap winne. we have no soon set sail but powhatan return and send adam and francis, two stout dutchman, to james town who feign to captain. at pamaunkee, the dutch man deceive cap winne. we have no soon set sail but powhatan return and send adam and francis, two stout dutchman, to james town who feign to captain winne that all thing be well and that captain smith have use of their arm, wherefore they request new the which be give they. they tell he their come be for some extraordinary tool and shift of apparel, by which colourable excuse they obtain six or seven more to their confederacy, such expert thief that present, furnish they with a great many sword, pike-head piece, shot powder and such like saluage they have at hand to carry it away. and the next day they return unsuspected, leave their confederate to follow and in the interim, to piece shot powder and such like saluage they have at hand to carry it away and the next day they return unsuspected, leave their confederate to follow and in the interim to convey they such thing as they can, for which service they shall live, with powhatan as his chief affect, free from those misery that will happen. the colony samuel, their other consort, powhatan, keep for their pledge. who diligence have, provide they three hundred of their kind of hatchet, the rest fifty sword, eight piece and eight pike. brynton and richard savage see the dutchman so diligent to accommodate the saluage with weapon, attempt to have get to james town, but they be apprehend and expect ever when to be put to death the dutch man. dutchman, so diligent to accommodate the saluage with weapon, attempt to have get to james town, but they be apprehend and expect ever when to be put to death. the dutch man furnish the saluage with arm. within two or three day we arrive at pamaunkee. the king, as many day, entertain we with feast and much mirth and the day appoint to begin our trade. the precedent: lieutenant percy, mr west, mr russell, mr behethland, mr crashaw, mr powel, mr ford and some other, to the number of fifteen, go up to opechancanoughs house, a quarter of a mile from the river, where we find nothing but a lame fellow and a boy and all the house round about. of all thing abandon. not long we stay. quarter of a mile from the river, where we find nothing but a lame fellow and a boy and all the house round about. of all thing, abandon not long. we stay ere the king arrive, and after he come, diverse of his people, load with bow and arrow. but such pinch commodity and those esteem at such a value as our captain. begin with the king after this manner: smith speech to opechancanough. opechancanough, the great love you profess with your tongue seem mere deceit by your action. last year you kind fraught out ship, but now you have invite i to starve with hunger. you know my want and i your plenty, of which, by some mean i must have part, remember it be fit for. but now you have invite i to starve with hunger. you know my want and i your plenty, of which by some mean i must have part. remember it be fit for king to keep their promise. here be my commodity, whereof take your choice, the rest i will proportion fit bargain for your pe^ple. the king seem kind to accept his offer, and the better to colour his project. sell we what they have to our own content. promise the next day more company. better provide the barge and pinnace be commit to the charge of mr phetiplace. the precedent with his old fifteen march up to the king house where we find four or five man. new arrive, each with a great basket not long after. of mr phetiplace the precedent with his old. fifteen march up to the king house where we find four or five man. new arrive, each with a great basket. not long after come the king 700. saluage beset the english be but 16.. who, with a strain cheerfulness, hold we with discourse. what pain he have take to keep his promise till mr russell bring we in news that we be all betray for at least seven hundred saluage. well, arm have environ the house and beset the field. the king conjecture what russell relate. we can well perceive how the extremity of his fear bewray his intent. whereat some of our company seem dismay with the thought of such a multitude, the captain encourage we to this. can well perceive how the extremity of his fear bewray his intent. whereat some of our company seem dismay with the thought of such a multitude, the captain encourage we to this effect, worthy countryman smith, speech to his company. be the mischief of my seem friend, no more than the danger of these enemy, i little care, be they as many more if you dare do, but as i. but this be my torment that if i escape, they, our malicious council with their open mouth minion, will make i such a peace breaker in their opinion in england, as will break my neck. i can wish those here that make these seem saint and i a oppressor, but this be the worst of all, wherein i their opinion in england as will break my neck. i can wish those here that make these seem saint and i a oppressor, but this be the worst of all, wherein i pray you, aid i with your opinion. shall we begin with they and surprise the king? we can keep he and defend well ourselves. if we shall each kill our man and so proceed with all in the house, the rest will all fly. then shall we get no more than the body that be slay and so starve for victual. as for their fury, it be the least danger, for well you know, be alone assault with two or three hundred of they. i make they, by the help of god, compound to save my fury, it be the least danger, for, well you know, be alone, assault with two or three hundred of they. i make they, by the help of god, compound to save my life, and we be sixteen and they but seven hundred at the most. and assure yourselves, god will so assist we that if you dare stand, but to discharge your piece, the very smoke will be sufficient to affright they. yet howsoever, let we fight like man and not die like sheep, for by that mean you know, god have oft deliver i, and so i trust will now, but first i will deal with they to bring it to pass. we may fight for something and draw they to it, by condition, if you like. so i trust will now, but first i will deal with they to bring it to pass. we may fight for something and draw they to it by condition: if you like this motion, promise i you will be valiant the time, not permit any argument. all vow to execute whatsoever. he attempt or die. whereupon the captain, in plain term, tell the king this: i see, opechancanough, your plot to murder i, but i fear it. not, smith, offer to opechancanough: as yet your man and i have do no harm, but by our direction, take therefore your arm. you see i, my body shall be as naked as you. the isle in your river be a fit place, if you be content, and the conqueror of. take, therefore, your arm. you see, i, my body, shall be as naked as you. the isle in your river be a fit place if you be content, and the conqueror of we two shall be lord and master over all our man. if you have not enough, take time to fetch more and bring what number you will. so, every one, bring a basket of corn against all, which i will stake the value in copper. you see, i have but fifteen and our game shall be the conqueror. take all. the king, be guard with forty or fifty of his chief man, opecahncanoughs, devic^ to betray smith. seem kind to appease smith. suspicion of unkindness by a great present at the door. they entreat he to. with forty or fifty of his chief man, opecahncanoughs, devic^ to betray smith, seem kind to appease smith, suspicion of unkindness by a great present at the door. they entreat he to receive this be. to draw he out of the door where the bait be guard with at least two hundred man and thirty lie under a great tree, that lie thwart as a barricado, each his arrow nocked, ready to shoot the precedent command one to go see what, what kind of deceit this be, and to receive the present, but he refuse to do it. yet the gentleman and all the rest be importunate to go, but he will not permit. they be vex at that coward and command lieutenant percy, master west and the do it. yet the gentleman and all the rest be importunate to go, but he will not permit. they be vex at that coward and command. lieutenant percy, master west and the rest. to make good the house, master powel and master behethland, he command to guard the door and in such a rage, snatch the king by his long lock in the midst of his man smith, take the king prisoner with his pistol ready, bend against his breast. thus he lead the tremble king near dead with fear among all his people who deliver the captain his vantbrace bow and arrow. all his man be easy. entreat to cast down their arm. little dream any dare in that manner have use their king who then to the captain, his vantbrace, bow and arrow, all his man, be easy entreat to cast down their arm. little dream any dare in that manner have. use their king who then, to escape himself, bestow his present in good sadness and cause a great many of they. come before he unarm. hold the king by the hair as be say he speak to they to this effect: i see you, pamaunkee. the great desire you have to kill i and my long suffering, your injury, have embolden you to this presumption. the cause i have forbear your insolence. smith discourse to the pamaunkee. be the promise i make you before the god i serve to be your friend till you give i just cause to be your enemy. your insolence. smith discourse to the pamaunkee. be the promise i make you before the god: i serve to be your friend till you give i just cause to be your enemy. if i keep this vow, my god will keep i. you can hurt i. if i break it, he will destroy i. but if you shoot but one arrow to shed one drop of blood of any of my man, or steal the least of these bead or copper i spurn here before you with my foot, you shall see, i will not cease revenge if once i begin, so long as i can hear where to find one of your nation that will not deny the name of pamaunk. i be n^t now at rassaweak. revenge if, once i begin, so long as i can hear where to find one of your nation that will not deny the name of pamaunk, i be n^t now at rassaweak, half drown with mire, where you take i prisoner. yet then, for keep your promise and your good usage and save my life. i so affect you that your denial of your treachery do half persuade i to mistake myself. but if i be the mark you aim at, here i stand, shoot he that dare you promise to fraught my ship ere i depart, and so you shall, or i mean to load she with your dead carcase. yet if, as friend, you will come and trade, i once more promise not to trouble you. depart, and so you shall, or i mean to load she with your dead carcase. yet if, as friend, you will come and trade, i once more promise not to trouble you, except you, give i the first occasion and your king shall be free and be my friend, for i be not come to hurt he or any of you upon this. away, go their bow and arrow and man, woman and child bring in their commodity. the savage dissemble their intent two or three hour. they so throng about the precedent and so overweary, he as he retire himself to rest, leave mr behethland and mr powel to receive their present. but some savage perceive he fast asleep and the guard, somewhat careless, disperse forty or he, as he retire himself to rest, leave mr behethland and mr powel to receive their present. but some savage perceive he fast asleep and the guard somewhat careless, disperse forty or (@) of their choi^e man, each with a club or a english sword in his hand, begin to enter the house with two or three hundred oth^rs that press to second they the noise and have they make in, do so, shake the house. they awake he from his sleep and be half amaze with this sudden sight, betake he straight to his sword and target mr chrashaw and some other charge in like manner, whereat they quick throng, fast back than before, forward the house, thus cleanse the king and some of his ancient we. and target mr chrashaw and some other charge in like manner, whereat they quick throng fast back than before forward. the house thus cleanse the king and some of his ancient we keep, yet with he their excuse and reconcilement. who, with a long oration, excuse this intrusion? the rest of the day be spend with much kindness. the company again renew their present with their best provision and whatsoever he give they, they seem therewith well content. now, in the mean while, since our departure, this happen at our fort- master scrivener have receive letter from england to make himself either caesar or nothing. he begin to decline in his affection to captain smith that ever regard he as himself and be willing to cross the surprise. from england to make himself either caesar or nothing. he begin to decline in his affection to captain smith that ever regard he as himself and be willing to cross the surprise of powhatan. some certain day, after the precedent departure, he will needs go visit the isle of hog and take with he captain waldo, though the precedent have appoint he to be ready to second his occasion with mr anthony gosnoll and eight other. but so violent be the wind, that extreme freeze, time that the boat sink, but where or how, none do know. the loss of mr scrivener and other with a skiff. the skiff be much over load and will scarce have live in that extreme tempest. have she be empty, but by know the loss of mr scrivener and other with a skiff. the skiff be much over load and will scarce have live in that extreme tempest, have she be empty. but by no persuasion he can be divert though both waldo and a hundred other doubt as it happen, the savage be the first that round their body, which so much the more encourage they to effect their project to advertise the precedent of this heavy news. none can be find will undertake it, but the journey be often refuse of all in the fort until master richard wyffin undertake alone the performance thereof. in this journey he be encounter with many danger and difficulty in all part as he pass master wyffins desperate journey. as for that, master richard wyffin undertake alone the performance thereof. in this journey he be encounter with many danger and difficulty in all part as he pass master wyffins desperate journey. as for that night he lodge with powhatan, perceive such preparation for war, not find the precedent there, he do assure himself some mischief. be intend pocahontas, hide he for a time and send they who pursue he the clean contrary way, to seek he. but by her mean and extraordinary bribe and much trouble in three day travel at length, he find we in the midst of these turmoil. this unhappy news, the precedent, swear he to conceal from the company and so dissemble his sorrow with the best countenance he can, when the night approach, go safe. of these turmoil, this unhappy news, the precedent, swear he to conceal from the company. and so dissemble his sorrow with the best countenance he can. when the night approach, go safe aboard with all his soldier, leave opechancanough at liberty, according to his promise. the better to have powhatan in his return. powhatan constrain his man to be treacherous. now so extreme powhatan have, threaten the death of his man if they do not by some mean kill captain smith that the next day they appoint all the country shall come to trade, unarm yet unwilling to be treacherous, but that they be constrain, hate, fight with he almost as ill as hang, such fear they have of bad success the next morning. the sun have not. unwilling to be treacherous, but that they be constrain, hate, fight with. he almost as ill as hang, such fear they have of bad success. the next morning, the sun have not long appear, but the field appear, cover with people and basket to tempt we on shore. but nothing be to be have without his presence. nor they will not endure the sight of a gun. when the precedent see, they begin to depart, the three attempt to betray. we be unwilling to loose such a booty. he so well conceive the pinnace and his barge with ambuscado, as only with lieutenant percy, mr west and mr russell with their arm go on shore, other he appoint unarm to receive what be. bring the savage flock before. barge with ambuscado, as only with lieutenant percy, mr west and mr russell with their arm go on shore. other he appoint unarm to receive what be bring the savage flock before he in heap and the bank serve as a trench for a retreat. he draw they fair open to his ambuscado for he not be to be persuade to go visit their king. the king know the most of they. unarm come to visit he with two or three hundred man in the form of two half moon and with some twenty man and many woman load with paint basket. but when they approach somewhat near we, their woman and child ^led, for when they have environ and beset the field in this manner, they think many woman load with paint basket. but when they approach somewhat near we, their woman and child ^led. for when they have environ and beset the field in this manner, they think their purpose sure, yet so tremble with fear as they be scarce able to ^^ck their arrow. smith stand with his three man ready, bend, behold they till. they be within danger of our ambuscado who, upon the word, di^cou^r^d themselves and he retire to the barge which the savage no soon perceive. then away they flee, esteem their heel for their best advantage. that night we send mr chr^shaw and mr ford to james town, to cap winne. in the way between wer^wocomoco and the fort, they meet four or five of the dutchman confederate. that night we send mr chr^shaw and mr ford to james town, to cap winne. in the way between wer^wocomoco and the fort they meet four or five of the dutchman confederate go to powhatan, the which, to excuse those gentleman, suspicion of their run to the savage, return to the fort and there continue the savage hear. our barge go down the river in the night, be so terrible, afraid that we sen^ for more man we have to much, threaten their ruin, a chain of pearl send to obtain peace, and the rase of th^ir house boat and wire that the next day the king send our captain a chain of pearl to alter his purpose and stay his man, promise though they want themselves to. th^ir house boat and wire that the next day the king send our captain a chain of pearl to alter his purpose and stay his man. promise though, they want themselves to fraught our ship and bring it aboard to avoid suspicion, so that five or six day after, from all part of the country within ten or twelve mile in the extreme frost and snow, they bring we provision on their naked back. yet notwithstanding this, kindness and trade, have their art and poison be sufficient. the precedent with mr west and some other have be poison, the precedent, poison the offend^r, punish it, make they sick but expel itself. wecuttanow, a stout young fellow, know he be suspect for bring this present of poison with forty. be. poison the precedent. poison the offend^r, punish it, make they sick but expel itself. wecuttanow, a stout young fellow, know he be suspect for bring this present of poison with forty or fifty of his chief companion- see the precedent- but with a few man at potauneak, so proud, brave it as though he expect to encounter a revenge which the precedent perceive in the midst of hi^ company. do not only beat but spurn he like a dog as scorn to do h^m any worse mischief, whereupon all of they flee into the wood, think they have do a great matter to have so well escape and the townsman remain present. fraught our barge to be rid of our company. frame many ^^c^ses to excuse wecuttanow. think they have do a great matter to have so well escape- and the townsman remain present- fraught our barge to be rid of our company. frame many ^^c^ses to excuse wecuttanow, be son to their chief king. but po^hatan, and tell we if we will show they he that bring the poison. they will deliver he to we to punish as we please. man may think it strange there shall be such a stir for a little corn, but have it be gold with more ease we may have get it and have it, want the whole colony have starve. we may be think very patient to endure all those injury, yet only with fear they we get what they have, whereas if we have take revenge. the whole colony have starve. we may be think very patient to endure all those injury, yet only with fear they we get what they have, whereas if we have take revenge, then by their loss we shall have lose ourselves. we search also the country of youghtanund and mattapanient, the savage want and poverty where the people impart that little they have, with such complaint and tear from the eye of woman and child as he have be too cruel to have. be a christian that will not have be satisfy and move with compassion. but have this happen in october, november and december, when that unhappy discovery of monacan be make, we may have fraught a ship of forty tun and twice as much may have. but have this happen in october, november and december, when that unhappy discovery of monacan be make, we may have fraught a ship of forty tun and twice as much may have be have from the river of rapahanock, patawomek and pawtuaunt. the main occasion of our thus temporize with they be to part friend as we do, to give the less cause of suspicion to powhatan to fly by who we now return with a purpose to have: surprise, he and his provision for effect whereof, when we come against the town the precedent, send mr wyffin and mr coe ashore to discover and make way for his intend project. but they find that those damn dutchman have cause powhatan to abandon his new house and werowocomoco. mr wyffin and mr coe ashore to discover and make way for his intend project. but they find that those damn dutchman have cause powhatan to abandon his new house and werowocomoco the dutchman do much hurt and to carry away all his corn and provision, and the people they find so ill affect that they be in great doubt how to escape with their life. so the precedent find his intent frustrate and that there be nothing now to be have and therefore a unfit time to revenge their abuse. send master michael phittiplace by land to james town. whether we sail with all the speed we can we have in this journey for 25 of copper and 50 of iron and bead, enough to keep 46. land to james town, whether we sail with all the speed we can, we have in this journey for 25 of copper and 50 of iron and bead, enough to keep 46 man six week and every man for his reward a month provision. extraordinary, no trade be allow, but for the store we get near 100l ^ weight of dear suct and deliver to the cape merchant 479 bushel of corne. those temporize proceed to some may seem too charitable to such a daily dare treacherous people, to other not please that we wash not the gr^und with their blood, nor show such strange invention in mangle, murder, ransack and destroy, as do the spaniard, the simple body of such ignorant soul. nor delightful, because not stuff. the gr^und with their blood. nor show such strange invention in mangle, murder, ransack and destroy, as do the spaniard, the simple body of such ignorant soul. nor delightful, because not stuff with relation of heap and join, of gold and silver, nor such rare commodity as the portugal and spany^rds find in the east and west indies, the want whereof have beget we, that be the first undertaker, no less sco^ne and contempt than the noble conquest and valiant adventure, beautify with it praise and honour. too much, i confess, the world can attribute to their ever memorable merit. and to clear we from the blind world, ignorant censure, these few word may suffice any reasonable understanding: a apology for the first planter. it be the spaniard. their ever memorable merit and to clear we from the blind world, ignorant censure, these few word may suffice any reasonable understanding. a apology for the first planter. it be the spaniard. good hap to happen in those part, where be infinite number of people who have manure the ground with that providence it afford victual at all time, and time have bring they to that perfection. they have the use of gold and silver and the most of such commodity as those country afford. so that what the spaniard get be chief the spoil and pillage of those country people and not the labour of their own hand. but have those fruitful country be as savage, as barbarous, as ill people, as little plant labour and manure. pillage of those country people and not the labour of their own hand. but have those fruitful country be as savage, as barbarous, as ill people, as little plant labour and manure as virginia- their proper labour, it be likely- will have produce as small profit as we. but have virginia be people, plant manure and adorn with such store of precious jewel and rich commodity as be the indies, then have we not get and do as much as by their example may be expect from we. the world may then have traduce we and our merit and have, make shame and infamy our recompense and reward. but we chance in a land, even as god make it, where we find only a idle, improvident scatter people. our merit and have make shame and infamy our recompense and reward. but we chance in a land, even as god make it, where we find only a idle, improvident, scatter, people ignorant of the knowledge of gold or silver or any commodity and careless of any thing but from hand to mouth except babble of no worth. nothing to encourage we, but what accidental we find nature afford, which ere we can bring. to recompense our pain, defray our charge and satisfy our adventurer, we be to discover the country subdue. the people, bring they to be tractable, civil and industrious, and teach they trade that the fruit of their labour may make we some recompense or plant such colony of our own that must first make. to be tractable, civil and industrious and teach they trade that the fruit of their labour may make we some recompense or plant such colony of our own that must first make provision how to live of themselves, ere they can bring to perfection the commodity of the country, which doubtless will be as commodious for england as the west indies for spain if it be right, manage, notwithstanding all our homebred opinion that will argue the contrary, as former some have do against the spaniard and portugal. but to conclude, against all rumour of opinion, i only say this for those that the three first year begin this plantation, notwithstanding all their faction mutiny and misery. so gentle, correct and well prevent. peruse the spanish decade. the i only say this for those that the three first year begin this plantation, notwithstanding all their faction mutiny and misery. so, gentle, correct and well prevent. peruse the spanish decade, the relation of master hackl^^, and tell i how many ever, with such small mean as a barge of 22 tun, sometime with seven, eight or nine or, but at most twelve or sixteen man, do ever discover so many fair and navigable river, subject so many several king, people and nation to obedience and contribution with so little bloodshed. and if in the search of those country we have happen where wealth have be, we have as sure have it as obedience and contribution. but if we have overskip it, we will not envy they that. of those country we have happen. where wealth have be, we have as sure have it as obedience and contribution. but if we have overskip it, we will not envy they that shall find it yet. can we not but lament? it be our fortune to end when we have, but only learn how to begin and find the right course. how to proceed by richard wyffin, william phittiplace, jeffrey abbot and anas todkill, chap x, how the savage become subject to the english when the ship depart. all the provision of the store, but that the precedent have. get be so rot with the last summer rain and eat with rat and worm, as the hog will scarce, eat it yet it be the soldier diet till. the precedent have. get be so rot with the last summer rain and eat with rat and worm, as the hog will scarce eat it. yet it be the soldier diet till our return, so that we find nothing do but our victual spend and the most part of our tool and a good part of our arm convey to the savage. but now, cast up the store and find sufficient till the next harvest. the fear of starve be abandon and the company divide into ten, fifteen or, as the business require, six hour each day be spend in work, the rest in pastime and merry exercise. but the untowardness of the great number cause the precedent advise as follow, countryman, the long experience of our late. day be spend in work, the rest in pastime and merry exercise. but the untowardness of the great number cause, the precedent advise as follow, countryman, the long experience of our late misery, the precedent advice to the company, i hope be sufficient to persuade every one to a present correction of himself. and think not that either my pain nor the adventurer purse will ever maintain you in idleness and sloth. i speak not this to you all, for diverse of you, i know, deserve both honour and reward, better than be yet here to be have. but the great part must be more industrious or starve how ever you have be heretofore tolerate by the authority of the council. from that i have often command you. be have, but the great part must be more industrious or starve how ever you have be heretofore, tolerate by the authority of the council. from that i have often command you. you see now that power rest whole in myself. you must obey this now for a law, that he that will not work shall not eat except by sickness. he be disable for the labour of thirty or forty honest and industrious man shall not be consume to maintain a hundred and fifty idle loiterer. and though you presume the authority here be but a shadow and that i dare not touch the life of any but my own, must answer it. the letter patent shall each week be read to you. who content will tell. a shadow and that i dare not touch the life of any but my own must answer it. the letter patent shall each week be read to you. who content will tell you the contrary. i will wish you therefore, without contempt, seek to observe these order set down, for there be now no more counsellor to protect you, nor curb my endeavour. therefore, he that offend, let he assure expect his due punishment. he make also a table as a public memorial of every man. desert to encourage the good and with shame, to spur on the rest. to amendment. by this, many become very industrious yet more. by punishment, perform their business for all be so, task that there be. no excuse can prevail to deceive. on the rest, to amendment. by this many become very industrious yet more by punishment, perform their business for all be so task that there be no excuse can prevail to deceive he. yet the dutchman consort so close, convey they powder shot swords and tool that though we can find the defect, we can not find by who till it be too late. all this time the dutch man remain with powhatan. the dutchman plot to murder cap smith who kind entertain they to instruct the savage the use of our arm and their consort not follow they as they expect to know the cause. they send francis, their companion, a stout young fellow, disguise like a savage, to the glass-house, a place in the wood near. not follow they, as they expect to know the cause, they send francis, their companion, a stout young fellow, disguise like a savage, to the glass-house, a place in the wood near a mile from james town. where be their rendezvous for all their unsuspected villainy? forty man, they procure to lie in ambuscado for captain smith, who no soon hear of this dutchman but he send to apprehend he, but he be go yet to cross his return to powhatan, the captain present dispatch 20.. shot after he himself return from the glass-house, alone by the way, he encounter the king of pasp^hegh, a most strong, stout savage who persuasion not be able to persuade he to his ambush, see, he only arm, but with a falchion. the way he encounter the king of pasp^hegh, a most strong, stout savage who persuasion not be able to persuade he to his ambush. see he only arm but with a falchion. smith, take the king of paspahegh prisoner, attempt to have, shoot he, but the precedent prevent his shoot by grapple with he and the savage as well, prevent he for draw his falchion and perforce bear he into the river to have drown he long they struggle in the water till the precedent get such hold on his throat he have near strangle the king, but have draw his falchion to cut off his head. see how pitiful he beg his life. he lead he prisoner to james town and put he in chain, the dutchman. king but have draw his falchion to cut off his head. see how pitiful he beg his life. he lead he prisoner to james town and put he in chain. the dutchman ere long be also bring in who villainy, though all this time it be suspect. yet he feign such a formal excuse that, for want of language, captain win understand he not right and for their deal with powhatan that to save their life they be constrain to accommodate his arm of who he extreme complain to have detain they perforce, and that he make this escape with the hazard of his life and mean not to have return but be only walk in the wood to gather walnut. yet for all this fair tale there, make this escape with the hazard of his life and mean not to have return but be only walk in the wood to gather walnut. yet for all this fair tale, there be so small appearance of truth and the plain confession of paspahegh of his treachery. he go by the heel smith purpose to regain the dutchman by the, save his life. the poor savage do his best by his daily messenger to powhatan, but all return that the dutchman will not return, neither do powhatan, stay they, and to bring they fifty mile on his man back, they be not able. daily, this king, wife, child and people come to visit he with present which he liberal bestow to make his peace. much trust they have. his man back, they be not able. daily this king, wife, child and people come to visit he with present which he liberal bestow to make his peace. much trust they have in the precedent promise. but the king find his guard negligent, though fetter yet escape captain winne think to pursue. he find such troop of savage to hinder his passage as they exchange many volley of shot for flight of arrow. captain smith hear of this in return to the fort cap smith, take two savage prisoner, take two savage prisoner, call kemp and tussore the two most exact villain in all the country. with these he send captain winne and fifty choice man and lieutenant percy to have regain the king and revenge this injury. tussore, the two most exact villain in all the country. with these he send captain winne and fifty choice man and lieutenant percy to have regain the king and revenge this injury. and so have do if they have follow his direction, or be advise with those two villain that will have betray both king and kindred for a piece of copper. but he trifle away the night, the savage, the next morning by the rise of the sun. brave he to come ashore to fight. a good time, both side let fly at other, but we hear of no hurt. only they take two canowes, burn the king house and so return to james town. the savage desire peace. the precedent fear those bravado will but encourage. we hear of no hurt. only they take two canowes, burn the king house and so return to james town. the savage desire peace. the precedent fear. those bravado will but encourage the savage. begin again himself to try his conclusion whereby six or seven be slay as many make prisoner. he burn their house, take their boat with all their fish wire and plant some of they at james town for his own use, and now resolve not to cease till he have revenge himself of all they have injure he. but in his journey pass by paspahegh towards chickahamania. the savage do their best to draw he to their ambuscado, but see he regardless, pass their country. all show themselves in their brave manner to try. pass by paspahegh towards chickahamania. the savage do their best to draw he to their ambuscado, but see he regardless, pass their country. all show themselves in their brave manner to try their valour. he can not, but let fly, and ere he can land. they no soon know he, but they throw down their arm and desire peace. their orator be a lusty young fellow call okaning, who worthy discourse deserve to be remember, and thus it be okane. his oration, captain smith, my master, be here present in the company. think it capt winne and not you of he he intend to have be revenge. have never offend he if he have offend you in escape your imprisonment. the fish swim, the fowl fly and the. and not you of he he intend to have be revenge. have never offend he. if he have offend you in escape your imprisonment, the fish swim, the fowl fly and the very beast strive to escape the snare and live, then blame not. he be a man, he will entreat you. remember you be a prisoner. what pain he take to save your life if, since he have injure you, he be compel to it. but howsoever you have, revenge it with our too great loss. we perceive and well know you intend to destroy. we that be here to entreat and desire your friendship and to enjoy our house and plant our field of who fruit you shall participate, otherwise you will have the worse by we that be here to entreat and desire your friendship and to enjoy our house and plant our field of who fruit you shall participate. otherwise you will have the worse by our absence, for we can plant any where though, with more labour, and we know you can live if you want our harvest and that relief we bring you. if you promise we peace, we will believe you. if you proceed in revenge, we will abandon the country upon these term. the precedent: promise they peace till they do we injury, upon condition they shall bring in provision. thus all depart, good friend, and so continue till smith leave the country. arrive at james town. complaint be make to the precedent: a savage smother at james. shall bring in provision. thus all depart, good friend, and so continue till smith leave the country, arrive at james town. complaint be make to the precedent: a savage smother at james town and recover that the chickahamanians, who all this while continue trade and seem our friend by colour, thereof be the only thief and among other thing a pistol be steal and the thief flee. there be apprehend two proper young fellow that be brother know to be his confederate now to regain this pistol. the one be imprison, the other be send to return the pistol again within twelve hour, or his brother to be hang. yet the precedent: pity the poor naked savage in the dungeon, send he victual and some charcoal for a. return the pistol again within twelve hour or his brother to be hang. yet the precedent pity the poor naked savage in the dungeon, send he victual and some charcoal for a fire. ere midnight his brother return with the pistol but the poor savage in the dungeon be so smother with the smoke he have make and so piteous burn that we find he dead. the other most lamentable beway his death and break forth into such bitter agony that the precedent to quiet. he tell he that if hereafter they will not steal he will make he alive again. but he little think he can be recover yet. we do our best with and vinegar. it please god to restore he again to life, but so will make he alive again, but he little think he can be recover yet. we do our best with and vinegar. it please god to restore he again to life, but so drink and affright that he seem lunatic, the which as much torment and grieve the other as before to see he dead, of which malady. upon promise of their good behaviour, the precedent promise to recover he, and so cause he to be lay by a fire to sleep, who in the morning have well sleep, have recover his perfect sense and then be dress of his burn and each a piece of copper give they. they go away so well, content that this be spread among all. the savage. for a miracle that captain smith dress of his burn and each a piece of copper give they. they go away so well content that this be spread among all the savage, for a miracle that captain smith can make a man alive that be dead. another ingenuous savage of powhatans have get a great bag of powder, two or three savage slay in dry powder and the back of a armour at werowocomoco, among a many of his companion, to show his extraordinary skill. he do dry it on the back, as he have see the soldier at james town, but he dry it so long they peep over it to see his skill. it take fire and blow he to death and one or two more and the rest so scorch they. he dry it so long they peep over it to see his skill. it take fire and blow he to death, and one or two more and the rest so scorch they have little pleasure to meddle any more with powder. these and many other such pretty accident so amaze and affright both powhatan and all his people that from all part, with present, they desire peace, return. many steal, thing which we never demand nor think of. and after that those that be take steal both powhatan and his people have send they back to james town to receive their punishment and all the country become absolute as free for we as for themselves. chap 11: what be do in three month? have victual the store devour. james town to receive their punishment and all the country become absolute as free for we as for themselves. chap 11: what be do in three month? have victual the store, devour by rat how we live three month of such natural fruit as the country afford. now we, so quiet, follow our business that in three month we make three or four last of tar pitch and soap ash. produce a trial of glass. make a well in the fort of excellent sweet water which till then be want. build some twenty house, recover our church, provide net and wire for fish and to stop the disorder of our disorderly thief and the savage, build a blockhouse in the neck of our isle. keep by a garrison. church, provide net and wire for fish and to stop the disorder of our disorderly thief and the savage, build a blockhouse in the neck of our isle, keep by a garrison to entertain the saluage trade and none to pass, nor repass, savage nor christian. without the precedent order thirty or forty acre of ground we dig and plant of three, sow in eighteen month, increase 60 and odd pig and near 500 chicking bring up themselves without have any meat, give they but the hog be, transport to hog^isle, where also we build a blockhouse with a garrison to give we notice of any ship and for their exercise they make clapbord and waynicot and cut down tree. we build also a fort for a retreat. blockhouse with a garrison to give we notice of any ship, and for their exercise they make clapbord and waynicot and cut down tree. we build also a fort for a retreat near a convement river, upon a high command hill, very hard to be assault and easy to be defend. but ere it be finish this defect cause a stay, great extremity by rat. in search our cask corn we find it half rot and the rest so consume, with so many thousand of rat that increase so fast out there. original be from the ship, as we know not how to keep that little we have. this do drive we all to our wit end for there be nothing in the country but what nature afford. ship, as we know not how to keep that little we have. this do drive we all to our wit end for there be nothing in the country. but what nature afford? until this time, kemp and tassore be fetter prisoner and do double task and teach we how to order and plant our field. who now, for want of victual, we set at liberty. but so well, they like our company. they do not desire to go from we and to express their love for 16.. day continuance: the country people bring we when least 100 a day of squirrel, turkey, dear and other wild beast. but this want of corn occasion, the end of all our work. it be work sufficient to provide victual 60. or. 100 a day of squirrel, turkey dear and other wild beast. but this want of corn occasion the end of all our work. it be work sufficient to provide victual 60. or 80. with ensign laxon be send down the river to live upon oyster and 20. with liutenant percy to try for fish at point comfort ^, but in six week they will not agree. once to cast out the net he be sick and burn fore with gunpowder, master west, with as many go up to the fall, but nothing can be find but a few acorn of that in store every man have their equal proportion till this present. by the hazard and endeavour of some thirty or forty, this whole colony have ever be. a few acorn of that in store, every man have their equal proportion till this present. by the hazard and endeavour of some thirty or forty, this whole colony have ever be feed bread, make of dry sturgeon. we have more sturgeon then can be devour by dog and man, of which the industrious, by dry and pound, mingle with caviar^, sorrel and other wholesome herb, will make bread and good meat. other will gather as much tockwhogh root in a day as will make they bread a week. so that of those wild fruit and what we catch, we live very well in regard of such a diet. but such be the strange condition of some 150 that have they not be force perforce to gather and what we catch. we live very well in regard of such a diet, but such be the strange condition of some 150 that have they not be force perforce to gather and prepare their victual. they will all have starve or have eat one another of those wild fruit the savage often bring we, and for that the precedent will not fulfil the unreasonable desire of those distract gluttonous loiterer to sell not only out kettle, hows, their desire to destroy themselves tool and iron, nay, sword piece, and the very ordnance and house may they have prevail to have be but idle for those savage fruit they will have have impart all to the saluage especial for one basket of corn they hear of to be at. have prevail to have be but idle for those savage fruit they will have have impart all to the saluage especial for one basket of corn they hear of to be at powhatans, fifty mile from our fort, though he buy near half of it to satisfy their humour. yet to have have the other half, they will have sell their soul, though not sufficient to have keep they a week. thousand be there, exclamation, suggestion and device to force he to those base invention to have make it a occasion to abandon the country, want, perforce, constrain he to endure their exclaim folly till he find out the author, one dyer, a most crafty fellow, and his ancient maligner, who he worthy punish, and with the rest. perforce constrain he to endure their exclaim folly till he find out the author, one dyer, a most crafty fellow, and his ancient maligner, who he worthy, punish. and with the rest he argue the case in this manner, the precedent order for the drone. fellow soldier, i do little think any so false to report, or so many to be so simple to be persuade that i either intend to starve you, or that powhatan at this present have corn for himself, much less for you, or that i will not have it if i know where it be to be. have neither. and i think any so malicious, as now i see a great many. yet it shall not so passionate i, but i will do. know where it be to be. have neither, and i think, any so malicious, as now i see a great many yet it shall not so passionate i. but i will do my best for my most maligner. but dream no long of this vain hope from powhatan. not that i will long forbear to force you from your idleness and punish you if you rail, but if i find any more runner for newfoundland with the pinnace, let he assure, look to arrive at the gallow. you can deny, but that by the hazard of my life, many a time i have save you when may your own will have prevail. you will have starve and will do still, whether i will or noah, but i protest. my life. many a time i have save you when, may your own will have prevail. you will have starve and will do still, whether i will or noah. but i protest by that god that make i, since necessity, have not power to force you to gather for yourselves those fruit the earth do y^eld. you shall not only gather for yourselves but those that be sick. as yet, i never have more from the stor^ than the worst of you and all my english extraordinary provision that i have, you shall see, i divide it among the sick. and this savage trash you so scornful repine at be put in your mouth, your stomach can digest. if you will have better you shall have bring it. it among the sick, and this savage trash you so scornful repine at be put in your mouth, your stomach can digest. if you will have, better you shall have bring it, and therefore i will take a course. you shall provide what be to be have. the sick shall not starve, but equal share of all our labour, and he that gather not every day as much as i do the next day, shall be set beyond the river and be banish from the fort as a drove till he amend his condition, or starve. but some will say with seneca, i know those thing thou say, be true, good nurse, but fury force i to follow. worse, my man be bury headlong up and down desire. but some will say with seneca. i know those thing thou say be true, good nurse, but fury force i to follow. worse, my man be bury headlong up and down. desire better counsel, yet find none this order. many murmur be very cruel, but seven of 200 die in nine moneth^. but it cause the most part so well, bestir themselves that of 200.. except they be drown, there die not pass seven. as for captain winne and master leigh, they be dead ere this want happen and the rest die. not so want of ^uch as preserve the rest. many be billet among the savage ^h^r^oy. we know all their passage, field and habitation, how t^ gather and use there fruit as well as themselves for. ^uch as preserve the rest. many be billet among the savage ^h^r^oy. we know all their passage field and habitation, how t^ gather and use there fruit as well as themselves. for they do know we have such a command power at james town. they dare not wrong we of a pin. so well, those poor savage use we that be. thus billet the savage return our fugitive, that diverse of the soldier run away to search kemp and tassore our old prisoner. glad be these savage to have such a opportunity to testify their love unto we. for in stead of entertain they and such thing as they have steal with all their great offer and promise they make they. how to revenge their injury upon captain. unto we, for in stead of entertain they, and such thing as they have steal with all their great offer and promise, they make they how to revenge their injury upon captain smith kemp. first, mad^ himself sport in. show his country man ^y they how he be. use, feed ^en with this law: who will not work, must not eat till they be near starve in. ^^^de continual threaten to beat they to death. neither can they get from he till he and his consort. bring they perforce to our captain that so well content he, and punish they as many other that intend also to follow. they be rather content to labour at home than adventure, to live id among the savage of who there be. he and punish they as many other that intend also to follow. they be rather content to labour at home than adventure, to live id. among the savage of who, there be more hope to make better christian (@) good subject than the one half of those that counterfeit themselves, both for so afraid be (@) those king and the better sort of the people to displease we, that some of the base sort that we have extreme hurt and punish for there villainy will hire we. we shall not tell it to their king or countryman, who will also repunish they. and yet return they to james town to content the precedent for a testimony of their love, master sicklemore. well, return from chawwonoke, master sicklemores journey. countryman who will also repunish they. and yet return they to james town to content the precedent for a testimony of their love, master sicklemore. well, return from chawwonoke. master sicklemores, journey to chawwonoke but find little hope and less certainty of they be. leave by sir walter raleigh. the river, he see, be not great, the people few, the country most over grow with pine. where there do grow, here and there straggle pemminaw we call silk grass. but by the river the ground be good and exceed furtill. master powel journey to the mangoag. master nathanael powell and anas todkill be also by the quiyoughquohanock conduct to the mangoag to search they there, but nothing can they learn, but they be all dead. this honest proper. master nathanael powell and anas todkill be also by the quiyoughquohanock conduct to the mangoag to search they there, but nothing can they learn. but they be all dead. this honest, proper, good promise keep, king of all the rest. do ever best affect we. and though to his false god he be very zealous, yet he will confess our god as much exceed he as our gun do. his bow and arrow often send our precedent. may present to pray to his god for rain or his corn will perish, for his god be angry. three day journey they conduct they through the wood^ into a high country towards the southwest ^here they see here and there a little c^rne fi^^d by some little spring or small. three day journey. they conduct they through the wood^ into a high country towards the southwest ^here they see here and there a little c^rne, fi^^d by some little spring or small brook, but no river. they can see the pe^^le in all respect, like the rest, except there language. they live most upon root fruit and wild beast and trade with they towards the sea and the fat country for dry fish and corn, for sk^ns. the dutch man project all this time to recover the dutchman and one bentley, another fugitive, we employ one willi^m volday, a zwitzar by birth, with pardon and promise to regain they little. we then suspect this double villain of any villainy who plain teach we in the most trust be. willi^m volday, a zwitzar by birth, with pardon and promise to regain they little. we then suspect this double villain of any villainy who plain teach we in the most trust, be the great treason for this wicked hypocrite by the seem hate he bear to the lewd condition of his curse country man, have this opportunity by his employment to regain they convey they every thing they desire to e^fect their project to destroy the colony with much devotion. they expect the spaniard, to who they intend good service, or any other that will but carry they from we but to begin with the ^^rst opportunity, th^^ se^ing necessity. thus enforce we to disperse ourselves, importune powhatan to lend they but his force, and they will not. carry they from we, but to begin with the ^^rst opportunity, th^^ se^ing necessity. thus enforce we to disperse ourselves, importune powhatan to lend they but his force, and they will not only destroy our hog, fire our town and betray our pinnace, but bring to his service and subjection the most of our company. with this plot they have acquaint many discontent and many be agree to their devilish practice, but one, thomas douse and thomas mallard, who, christian heart, relent at such a unchristian act, voluntary, reveal it to captain smith, who cause they to conceal it, persuade ^ouse and mallard to proceed in their confederacy, only to bring the irreclamable dutch man and the inconstant savage in such a manner, among such ambuscado as he. to conceal it, persuade ^ouse and mallard to proceed in their confederacy, only to bring the irreclamable dutch man and the inconstant savage in such a manner, among such ambuscado as he have prepare, that not many of they shall return from our peninsula. but this brute come to the ^ares of the impatient multitude. they so importune the precedent to cut off those dutch man as among many that offer to cut their throat before the face of powhatan, the first be lieutenant percy and mr john cuderington, two gentleman of as bold, resolute spirit as can possible be find but the precedent have occasion of other employment for they and give. give way to master wyffin and sergeant jeffrey abbot to go and stab they or as can possible be find. but the precedent have occasion of other employment for they and give, give way to master wyffin and sergeant jeffrey abbot to go and stab they or shoot. they two gentleman, send to the german, but the dutch man make such excuse, accuse velday who they suppose have reveal their project, as abbot will not. yet wyff will perceive it but deceit the king, understand of this their employment, send, present his messenger to captain smith to signify it be not his fault to detain they, nor hinder his man from execute his command, nor do he, nor will he maintain they or any to occasion his displeasure. the first arrival of captain argall, but whilst this business be in hand, arrive one. execute his command, nor do he, nor will he maintain they or any to occasion his displeasure. the first arrival of captain argall. but whilst this business be in hand, arrive one captain argall and master thomas sedan, send by master cornelius to truck with the colony and fish for sturgeon with a ship well furnish with wine and much other good provision. though it be not send we, our necessity be such as enforce we to take it. he bring we news of a great supply and preparation for the lord woore with letter that much tax our precedent for his hear. deal with the savage and not return the ship fraught notwithstanding, we keep this ship, tell the fleer arrive. true it be argall lose his. much tax our precedent for his hear, deal with the savage and not return the ship fraught notwithstanding, we keep this ship, tell the fleer arrive, true it be argall, lose his voyage, but we renictual he and send he for england with a true relation of the cause of our defailment and how impossible it be to return that wealth. they expect or observe there instruction to endure the savage insolence or do any thing to any purpose, except they will send we man and mean that can produce that they so much desire. otherwise all they do be lose and can not but come to confusion. the villainy of volday, we still dissemble. adam upon his pardon, come home, but samuel still stay with powhahan to. all they do be lose and can not but come to confusion. the villainy of volday, we still dissemble. adam upon his pardon, come home, but samuel still stay with powhahan to hear further of their estate by this supply. now all their plot. simth so well understand they be his best advantage to secure we from any treachery can be do by they. or the savage which, with facility, he can revenge when he will, because all those country more fear he then powhatan, and he have such party with all his border neighbour and many of the rest, for love or fear will have do any thing, he will have they. upon any commotion though, these fugitive have do all they can to persuade powhatan king. many of the rest, for love or fear will have do any thing, he will have they. upon any commotion, though, these fugitive have do all they can to persuade powhatan. king james will kill smith for use. he and his people, so unkind by this. you may see, for all those cross, treachery and dissension, note these inconvenience, how he wrestle and overcome without bloodshed all that happen. also, what good be do. how few die. what food the country natural afford, what small cause there be, man shall starve or be murder by the savage that have discretion to manage they with courage and industry. the two first year, though, by his adventure he have oft bring the savage to a tractable trade. yet you see, savage that have discretion to manage they with courage and industry. the two first year, though, by his adventure he have oft bring the savage to a tractable trade. yet you see how the envious authority ever cross he and frustrate his best endeavour. but it wrought in he that experience and estimation among the savage, as otherwise it have be impossible he have ever effect that he do, notwithstanding the many miserable, yet generous and worthy adventure he have oft and long endure in the wide world. yet in this case he be again to learn his lecture by experience which with thus much ado have obtain. it be his ill chance to end, when he have but only learn how to begin, and though he leave. learn his lecture by experience which, with thus much ado, have obtain. it be his ill chance to end, when he have but only learn how to begin. and though he leave those unknown difficulty, make easy and familiar to his unlawful successor who, only by live in james town, presume to know more than all the world can direct they. now, though they have all his soldier with a triple power and twice triple better mean. by what they have do in his absence, the world may see what they will have do in his presence. have he not prevent their indiscretion? it do just prove what cause he have to send they for england and that he be neither factious, mutinous nor dishonest. but they have presence. have he not prevent their indiscretion? it do just prove what cause he have to send they for england and that he be neither factious, mutinous nor dishonest. but they have make it more plain since his return for england. have his absolute authority free in their power, with all the advantage and opportunity that his labour have effect, as, i be sorry, their action have make it so manifest. so i be unwilling to say what reason do compel i, but only to make apparent the truth, lest i shall seem partial, reasonless and malicious. chapter 12: the arrival of the three supply to redress those jar and ill proceed the treasurer council, the alteration of the government and company of virginia, not find that return. malicious chapter 12, the arrival of the three supply to redress those jar and ill. proceed the treasurer council, the alteration of the government and company of virginia, not find that return and profit they expect and they engage there, not have mean to subsist of themselves. make mean to his majesty to call in their commission and take a new in their own name, as in their own publication 1610. you may ^eade at large, have thus annihilate the old by virtue of a commission. make to the right honourable sir thomas west, lord la war, to be general of virginia, sir thomas gate, his lieutenant, sir george somers, admiral sir thomas dale, high marshal, sir ferdinando wainman, general of the horse, and so all other office. war to be general of virginia, sir thomas gate, his lieutenant sir george somers, admiral sir thomas dale, high marshal sir ferdinando wainman, general of the horse, and so all other office to many other worthy gentleman. for their life, though not any of they have ever be in virginia except captain newport, who be also by patent, make vice-admiral. those noble gentleman draw in such great sum of money that they send sir thomas gate, sir george somers and captain newport with nine ship and five hundred people who have each of they a commission who first arrive to call in the old without the knowledge or consent of they that have endure all those former danger to beat the path not any regard have at all. who first arrive, to call in the old without the knowledge or consent of they that have endure all those former danger to beat the path. not any regard have at all of they. all thing be ready. because those three captain can not agree for place, it be conclude they shall go all in one ship. so all their three commission be in that ship with. they call the sea-venture. they set sail from england in may 1609.. sir thomas smith, treasurer, a small catch perish at sea in a hurricane. the admiral with a hundred and fifty man, with the two knight and their new commission, their bill of load with all manner of direction and the most part of their provision arrive not with the hundred and fifty man, with the two knight and their new commission, their bill of load with all manner of direction and the most part of their provision, arrive not with the other seven ship as captain arrive, ratliffe, the loss of virginia, who right name, as be say be sicklemore, martin and archer, with captain wood, captain webbe, captain moon, captain king, captain davis and diverse gentleman of good, mean and great parentage, but the first, as they have be troublesome at sea, begin again to mar all ashore for though, as be say they be former send for england, yet now return again, grace by the title of captain of the passenger. see the admiral want and great probability of her loss. strengthen themselves with those. be former send for england, yet now return again, grace by the title of captain of the passenger. see the admiral want and great probability of her loss strengthen themselves with those new company. so exclaim against captain smith that they mortal hate he ere ever. they see, he who understand by his scout the arrival of such a fleet, little dream of any such supply. suppose they spaniard the savage offer to fight under our colour. but he quick so determine and order our affair as we little fear their arrival, nor the success of our encounter, nor be the savage any way negligent for the most part to aid and assist we with their best power. have it so be. we have be happy for we. our encounter, nor be the savage any way negligent for the most part, to aid and assist we with their best power. have it so be. we have be happy, for we will not have trust they but as our foe where receive they as our countryman and friend. they do what they can to murder our precedent, to surprise the store, the fort and our judge, to usurp the government and make we all their servant and slave, till they can consume we and our remembrance, and rather, indeed, to supplant. we then supply we as master william box, a honest gentleman, in this voyage thus relate in the tail of a hurricane, we be separate from the admiral which, although it be but the remainder of as master william box, a honest gentleman, in this voyage thus relate, in the tail of a hurricane we be separate from the admiral which, although it be but the remainder of that storm, there be seldom any such in england or those northern part of europe. some lose their mast, some their sail, blow from their yard, the sea so over-raking our ship, much of our provision be spoil, our fleet separate and our man sick and many die. and in this miserable estate we arrive in virginia. but in this storm, when rattle, thunder run along the cloud, do not the sailor, poor and master, proud a terror, feel as strike with fear of god, do not their tremble joint than dread his rod, lest for. run along the cloud. do not the sailor, poor and master proud, a terror feel as strike with fear of god, do not their tremble joint than dread his rod. lest for foul deed and black mouth blasphemy, the rueful time be come that vengeance cry, mutiny to a thousand mischief, those lewd captain lead this lewd company, wherein be many unruly gallant pack thither by their friend to escape ill destiny. and those will dispose and determine of the government sometime to one, the next day, to another to day. the old commission must rule to morrow the new the next day. neither in fine they will rule all or ruin all. yet in charity we must endure they thus to destroy we, or by correct their. to morrow the new the next day. neither in fine they will rule all or ruin all. yet in charity we must endure they thus to destroy we or by correct their folly have, bring the world censure upon we to be guilty of their blood. happy have we be. have they never arrive and we for ever abandon. and as we be, leave to our fortune. for on earth, for the number be never more confusion or misery than their faction. occasion the precedent. see the desire those brave have to rule. see how his authority be so unexpected change will willing have leave all and have return for england. but see there be small hope this new commission will arrive. long he will not suffer those authority be so unexpected change, will willing have leave all and have return for england. but see there be small hope this new commission will arrive. long he will not suffer those factious spirit to proceed. it will be too tedious, too strange and almost incredible. shall i particular relate the infinite danger, plot and practice he daily escape among this factious crew, the chief whereof he quick lay by the heel till his leisure. better serve to do they justice and to take away all occasion of further mischief. master percy have his request grant to return for england, be very sick and mr west, with a hundred and twenty of the best he can choose, the plant nandsamund he send to the f^lles. martin with near to return for england be very sick, and mr west with a hundred and twenty of the best he can choose, the plant nandsamund he send to the f^lles martin with near as many to nandsamund, with their due proportion of all provision according to their number. now the precedent year be near expire, he make captain martin precedent to follow the order for the election of a precedent every year. but he know his own insufficiency and the company untowardness and little regard of he, within three hour after resign it again to captain smith and at nandsamund. thus proceed the people be contributor, use he kind the breach of peace with the savage. yet such be his jealous fear in the midst of their mirth he. and at nandsamund thus proceed the people be contributor. use he kind the breach of peace with the savage. yet such be his jealous fear. in the midst of their mirth he do surprise this poor naked king with his monument house and the isle he inhabit and there fortify himself, but so apparent distract with fear. as embolden the savage to assault, he kill his man, release their king, gather and carry away a thousand bushel of corn. he not once offer to intercept they, but send to the precedent. then, at the fall for thirty, good shot which from james town immediate be send he. but he so well employ they. they do just nothing but return, complain of his tenderness, yet he come away with. thirty good shot, which from james town immediate be send he. but he so well employ they. they do just nothing but return, complain of his tenderness. yet he come away with they to james town, leave his company to their fortune. here i can omit the courage of george forrest that have seventeen arrow stick in he and one shoot through he. yet live six or seven day as if he have small hurt then, for want of chirurgery, die. master west have seat his man by the fall present return to revisit james town. the precedent follow he to see that company seat meet he by the way. wonder at his so quick return and find his company plant so inconsiderate in a place not only the precedent, follow he to see that company seat, meet he, by the way, wonder at his so quick return and find his company plant so inconsiderate, in a place not only subject to the river inundation but round environ with many intolerable inconvenience. for remedy whereof he present, send to powhatan to sell he the place, call powhatan, promise to defend he against the monacan. powhatan buy for copper, and these shall be his condition with his people to resign he the fort and house and all that country for a proportion of copper that all steal offender shall be. send he thereto receive their punishment that every house, as a custom, shall pay he, a bushel of corn for a inch square of copper and a. all steal offender shall be, send he thereto receive their punishment, that every house, as a custom, shall pay he a bushel of corn for a inch square of copper and a proportion of pocones as a yearly tribute to king james for their protection, as a duty. what else they can spare to barter at their best discretion. but both this excellent place and those good condition do those fury refuse mutiny, contemn both he his kind care and authority. so much they depend on the lord general new commission as they regard none the worst they can do to show their spite. they do suppose all the monacan country gold and none shall come there. but who they please, i do more than wonder to think. worst they can do to show their spite. they do suppose all the monacan country gold and none shall come there, but who they please. i do more than wonder to think how, only with five man, he either dare or will adventure, as he do know how greedy they be of his blood, to land among they and commit to imprisonment all the chieftain of those mutiny. five suppress a hundred and twenty, till by their multitude be a hundred and twenty, they force he to retire. yet in that interim he surprise one of their boat, wherewith he return to their ship, where in deed be their provision, which also he take. and well it chance he find the mariner so tractable and constant, or there. their boat wherewith he return to their ship where in deed be their provision, which also he take, and well it chance he find the mariner so tractable and constant, or there have be small possibility he have ever escape. there be diverse other of better reason and experience that from their first land hear the general good report of his old soldier and see with their eye his action so well manage with discretion, as captain wood, captain webbe, cap moon, captain fitz james, master william powel, master partridge, master white and diverse other when they perceive the malice of ratliffe and archer and their faction leave their company and ever rest his faithful friend. but the worst be that, the poor savage that daily bring in. they perceive the malice of ratliffe and archer and their faction leave their company and ever rest his faithful friend. but the worst be that, the poor savage that daily bring in their contribution to the precedent breach of peace, with the savage at the falle^, that disorderly company so torment those poor soul by steal their corn, rob their garden, beat they, break their house and keep some prisoner that they daily complain to captain smith. he have bring they for protector worse enemy than the monacan themselves, which, though till then for his love they have endure. they desire pardon if hereafter they defend themselves, since he will not correct they, as they have long expect he will, so much they importune he to punish their they have endure. they desire pardon if hereafter they defend themselves, since he will not correct they, as they have long expect he will, so much they importune he to punish their misdemeanour, as they offer if he will lead they to fight for he, against they, but have spend nine day in seek to reclaim. they show they how much they do abuse themselves with these great guild hope of the south sea mine commodity or victory they so mad conceive. then see, nothing will prevail. he set sail for james town, thus oft we see from small green wound and from a little grief a great sore and sickness grow. then will admit relief, for thus themselves they do be guile and with the rest play. see, from small green wound and from a little grief a great sore and sickness grow, then will admit relief. for thus themselves they do be guile and with the rest play thief. now, no, soon be the ship under sail, but the savage assault. those hundred and twenty in their fort, a assault by the savage, find some straggle abroad in the wood. they slay many and so affright the rest as their prisoner escape and they safe retire with the sword and cloak of those they have slay. but ere we have sail half a league, our ship ground, give we once more liberty to summon they to a parley where we find they all so strange, amaze with this poor, silly assault of twelve saluage. a league, our ship ground, give we once more liberty to summon they to a parley where we find they all so strange, amaze with this poor, silly assault of twelve saluage, that they submit themselves upon any term to the precedent mercy who present, put by the heel six or seven of the chief offender, the rest he seat, gallant at powhatan in that savage fort, ready build and pretty, fortify with pole and bark of tree sufficient to have defend they from all the savage in virginia, dry house for lodging and near two hundred accre of ground ready to be plant, and no place we know so strong, so pleasant and delightful in virginia, for which we call it non-such the plant of non-such the. hundred accre of ground ready to be plant, and no place we know, so strong, so pleasant and delightful, in virginia, for which we call it non-such, the plant of non-such, the savage also. he present appease, redeliver to either party their former loss. thus all be friend the savage appease, new officer appoint to command and the precedent again ready to depart. at that instant arrive captain west who, gentle nature by the persuasion and compassion of those mutinous prisoner, allege they have only do this for his honour. be so much abuse that to regain their old hope, new turboyle do arise, for they ashore, be possess of all there, victual munition and every thing grow to that height in their former faction. as the precedent. regain their old hope. new turboyle do arise, for they ashore, be possess of all there, victual munition and every thing grow to that height in their former faction as the precedent. leave they to their fortune. they return again to the open air at west fort, abandon non such, and he to james town with his best expedition. but this happen. he in that journey, captain smith, blow up with powder, sleep in his boat for the ship be return. two day before accidental one fire his powder-bag which tear the flesh from his body and thigh nine or ten inch square in a most pitiful manner. but to quench the torment, fire fry he in his clothes. he leap overboard into the deep river where ere. and thigh, nine or ten inch square in a most pitiful manner. but to quench the torment, fire fry he, in his clothes, he leap overboard into the deep river, where ere they can recover he. he be near drown in this estate without either chirurgeon or chirurgery. he be to go near a hundred mile, arrive at james town, cause all thing to be, prepare for peace or war to obtain provision, while those thing be provide ratliffe, archer and the rest of their confederate be to come to their trial. their guilty conscience fear a just reward for their desert. see the precedent: unable to stand and near bereave of his sense by reason of his torment, a bloody intent they have plot to have murder. a just reward for their desert. see the precedent: unable to stand and near bereave of his sense by reason of his torment, a bloody intent, they have plot to have murder, he in his bed, but his heart do fail, he that shall have give fire to that merciless pistol. so not find that course to be the best. they join together to usurp the government, thereby to escape their punishment. the precedent: have notice of their project, the which to withstand though his old soldier importune. he but permit they to take their head that will resist his command, yet he will not suffer. they but send for the master of the ship and take order with they for his return for england. see there be. that will resist his command. yet he will not suffer they, but send for the master of the ship and take order with they for his return for england, see there be neither chirurgeon nor chirurgery in the fort to cur^ his hurt and the ship to depart the next day. his commission to be suppress, he know not why. himself and soldier to be reward, he know not how. and a new commission grant, they know not to who. the which disable that authority he have, as make they presume so oft to those mutiny as they do beside. so grievous be his wound and so cruel his torment. few expect he can live, nor be he able to follow his business to regain what they have. as they do beside. so grievous be his wound and so cruel his torment, few expect he can live, nor be he able to follow his business, to regain what they have lose, suppress those faction and range the country for provision, as he intend, and well he know. in those affair his own action and presence be as requisite as his direction, which now can not be. he go present abroad, resolve there to appoint they governor and to take order for the mutineer. but he can find none he think fit for it will accept it in the mean time, see he go. they persuade master percy to stay, who be then to go for england and be their precedent within less than a hour be accept it. in the mean time, see he go. they persuade master percy to stay, who be then to go for england and be their precedent within less than a hour, be this mutation, begin and conclude. for when the company understand smith will leave, they and see the rest in arm call precedent and councillor diverse begin to fawn on those new commander that now bend all their wit to get he resign, they, his commission, who, after much ado and many bitter repulse that their confusion, which he ^ould they be at their elbow, shall not be attribute to, he for leave the colony without a commission. he be not unwilling, they shall steal it, but never will he give it to such as they. and shall not be attribute to he for leave the colony without a commission. he be not unwilling, they shall steal it, but never will he give it to such as they. and thus, strange, violent force, draw we on unwilling reason, persuade against our love, rebel we see and know the better. ah, curse, accurse that notwithstanding, we embrace the worst, but have that unhappy blast not happen. he will quick have qualify the heat of those humour and faction, the cause why smith leave the country and his commission, have the ship, but once leave they and we to our fortune and have make that provision from among the savage, as we neither fear spaniard savage nor famine, nor will have leave virginia nor our lawful authority. they and we to our fortune, and have make that provision from among the savage, as we neither fear spaniard savage nor famine, nor will have leave virginia nor our lawful authority, but at as dear a price as we have buy it and pay for it. what shall i say? but thus we leave, he that in all his proceed, make justice his first guide and experience his second, even hate, baseness, sloth, pride and indignity, more than any danger, that never allow more for himself than his soldier with. he that upon no danger will send they where he will not lead they himself that will never see. we want what he either have or can by any mean get. we that will rather want then. will send they where he will not lead they himself that will never see. we want what he either have or can by any mean get. we that will rather want then borrow or starve then not pay that love action more than word and hate, falsehood and covetousness worse than death. who adventure be our life and who loss our death. leave we thus with three ship, seven, boat commodity ready to trade the harvest, new gather, ten week provision in the store, four hundred ninety and odd person, twentie-foure piece of ordnance, three hundred musket, snaphance and firelock, shot powder and match sufficient curate pike, sword and morrios, more than man the savage, their language and habitation well know to a hundred, well train and expert. musket, snaphance and firelock, shot powder and match, sufficient curate pike, sword and morrios, more than man the savage, their language and habitation well know to a hundred, well train and expert soldier, net for fish, tool of all sort to work apparel to supply our want. six mare and a horse, five or six hundred swine, as many hen and chicken, some goat, some sheep, what be bring or breed there remain, but they regard nothing but from hand to mouth do consume that we have, take care for nothing but to perfect some colourable complaint against captain smith for effect, whereof three week long they stay the ship till they can produce they. that time and charge may much better have be spend, but it suit. complaint against captain smith for effect, whereof three week long they stay the ship till they can produce they that time and charge may much better have be spend, but it suit well with the rest of their discretion. beside james town that be strong, pallizadoe, contain some fifty or sixty house. he leave five or six other, several fort and plantation. though they be not so sumptuous as our successor expect, they be better than they provide any for we all. this time. we have but one carpenter in the country and three other that can do little but desire to be learner, two blacksmith, two sailor and those we write labourer be for most part footman and such as they that be adventurer bring to attend. can do little but desire to be learner. two blacksmith, two sailor and those we write labourer. be for most part footman and such as they that be adventurer, bring to attend they, or such as they can persuade to go with, they that never do know what a day work be, except the dutchman and pole and some dozen other. for all the rest be poor gentleman, tradesman, servingman libertine and such like ten time more fit to spoil a commonwealth. then either begin one or but help to maintain one, for when neither the fear of god, nor the law, nor shame nor displeasure of their friend can rule they here. there be small hope ever to bring one in twenty of they ever to be. fear of god, nor the law, nor shame, nor displeasure of their friend can rule they here. there be small hope ever to bring one in twenty of they ever to be good there notwithstanding, i confess, diverse among they have better mind and grow much more industrious than be expect. yet ten good workman will have do more substantial work in a day than ten of they in a week. therefore, man may rather wonder how we can do so much then. use we so bad because we do no more, but leave those example to make other beware and the fruit of all we know not for who, the end of the dutchman, but to see the justice of god upon these dutchman. valdo, before speak. to make other. beware, and the fruit of all we know, not for who? the end of the dutchman, but to see the justice of god upon these dutchman, valdo, before speak of, make a shift to get for england, where, persuade the merchant. what rich mine he have find and great service he will do. they be very well. reward and return with the lord war, but be find a mere impostor. he die most miserable. adam and francis, his two consort, be flee again to powhatan, to who they promise at the arrival of my lord, what wonder they will do. will he suffer they? but to go to he. but the king, see they will be, go, reply you, that will have betray, captain smith. my lord, what wonder they will do. will he suffer they? but to go to he. but the king, see they will be. go, reply you. that will have betray, captain smith, to i will, certain betray i to this great lord, for your peace, so cause his man to beat out their brain. to conclude, the great honour that ever belong to the great monarch be the. enlarge their dominion and erect commonweal. yet, howsoever any of they have, attribute to themselves the conqueror of the world. there be more of the world never hear of they than ever any of they all have in subjection for the mede, persian and assyrian. never conquer all asia, nor the grecian, but part of europe and asia, the roman. of they than ever any of they all have in subjection for the mede, persian and assyrian. never conquer all asia, nor the grecian, but part of europe and asia- the roman indeed have a great part of both, as well as africa. but as for all the northern part of europe and asia, the interior, southren and western part of africa, all america, and they be all ignorant, nor be our knowledge, yet but superficial, that their beginning, end and limitation be proportion by the almighty be most evident. but to consider of what small mean many of they have begin be wonderful, for some write that even rome herself, during the reign of romulus, exceed not the number of a thousand house, and carthage grow so mean many of they have begin be wonderful, for some write that even rome herself, during the reign of romulus, exceed not the number of a thousand. house and carthage grow so great a potentate that at first be but incircule in the thong of a bull skin as to fight with rome for the empire of the world. yea, venice, at this time, the admiration of the earth, be at first but a marish inhabit by poor fisherman, and likewise niniveh, thebes, babylon, delos, troy, athens, mycena and sparta grow from small, beginning to be most famous state, though now they retain little more than a naked name. now this, our young commonwealth in virginia, as you have read once, consist but of 38 person, and in most famous state, though now they retain little more than a naked name. now this, our young commonwealth in virginia, as you have read once, consist but of 38 person, and in two year increase but to 200. yet by this small mean, so high be approve the plantation in virginia, as how many lord with worthy knight and brave gentleman pretend to see it. and some do. and now, after the expense of fifteen year more, and such massy sum of man and money grow, they disanimate. if we true consider our proceed with the spaniard and the rest, we have no reason to despair, for with so small charge they never have either great discovery with such certain trial of more, several commodity then in this. spaniard and the rest we have no reason to despair for with so small charge they never have either great discovery with such certain trial of more. several commodity then in this short time have be return from virginia and by much less mean new england, be bring out of obscurity and afford fraught for near 200 sail of ship where there be now erect a brave plantation for the happiness of summer isle. they be no less then either. and yet those have have a far less and a more difficult beginning then, either rome, carthage or venice. write by richard pot, clarke of the council, william tankard and gp new. see there be thus much paper here to spare that you shall not be altogether clear. carthage or venice. write by richard pot clarke of the council, william tankard and gp new. see there be thus much paper here to spare that you shall not be altogether clear with prose. such verse, as my worthy friend bestow upon new england, i here present you because, with honesty, i can neither reject nor omit their courtesy in the deserve honour of the author, captain john smith, and his worke, damn envy be a sprite that ever haunt beast, misnamed man, coward or ignorant, but only such she follow who, dear worth, maugre, her malice set their glory forth. if this fair overture, then take not. it be envy, be spite, dear friend, in man of-wit or fear lest morsel which our mouth possess may fall. malice set their glory forth. if this fair overture, then take not. it be envy, be spite, dear friend, in man of-wit, or fear lest morsel which our mouth possess may fall from thence, or else it be sottishness. if either- i hope neither thee- they raise thy * * hindere^^ letter, be as letter in thy praise who by their vice improve when they reprove thy virtue, so in hate procure thou loue then on firm worth, this monument i frame. scorn for any smith to forge such fame. john davies heref to his worthy captain, the author that which we call the subject of all story. be truth which, in this work of thou, give glory to all that thou have. do then scorn the spite. captain, the author, that which we call the subject of all story be truth which, in this work of thou, give glory to all that thou have. do then scorn the spite of envy, which do no man merit right. my sword may help the rest. my pen no more can do but this: i have say enough before your sometime soldier, i codrinton, now templar to my worthy friend and cousin, captain john smith. it overioye my heart when, as thy word of these design with deed i do compare here be a book such worthy truth afford. none shall the due desert thereof impair. sith thou the man deserve of these age much pain have. take for this our kingdom good in clime, unknown amongst turk. worthy truth afford, none shall the due desert thereof impair sith, thou the man, deserve of these age much pain have. take for this our kingdom, good in clime, unknown amongst turk and savage, to enlarge our bound though with thy loss of blood. hence, damn detraction stand not in our way. envy itself will not the truth gainsay n smith in the deserve honour of my honest and worthy captain, john smith, and his worke, captain and friend, when i peruse thy book with judgement eye into my heart, i look, and there i find what sometime albion know a soldier to his countries-honour. true, some fight for wealth and some for empty praise, but thou alone, thy country fame to raise with due discretion and undaunted. what sometime albion know, a soldier to his countries-honour. true, some fight for wealth and some for empty praise, but thou alone, thy country fame to raise with due discretion and undaunted heart. i oft so well have see thou act thy part in deep plunge of hard extremity, as force the troop of proud foe to fly, though man of great rank and less desert will pish-away thy praise. it can not start from the true owner, for all good man, tongue shall keep the same, to they that part belong. if then wit, courage and success shall get thou fame, the muse for that be in thy debt, a part whereof, lest able though i be thus here, i do disburse to honour thou raleigh crashaw. and success shall get thou fame the muse for that be in thy debt a part, whereof, lest able though i be thus here, i do disburse to honour thou raleigh crashaw, michael phettiplace, wil phettiplace, and richard wiff, gentleman and soldier under captain smith command in his deserve, honour for his work and worth. why may not we in this work have our mite, that have our share? in each black day and night when thou virginia foild'st yet kepte unstained and hold the king of paspeheh, exchaind thou all alone, this savage stern. do take pamaunkees, king. we see thou captive, make among seven hundred of his stout man to murder thou, and we resolve when, fast by the hair thou lead this savage grin thy. take pamaunkees, king, we see thou captive, make among seven hundred of his stout man to murder thou, and we resolve, when fast by the hair thou lead this savage grin, thy pistol at his breast, to govern he which do infuse such awe in all the rest sith their dread. sovereign thou have so distress that thou and we poor sixteen, safe, retire unto our helpless ship thou thus admire. do make proud powhatan his subject, send to james his town, thy censure to attend, and all virginia, lord and petty king, awe by thy virtue, crouch and present, bring to gain thy grace. so dread thou have be and yet a heart more mild be seldom see. so make valour, virtue real. who haste nought in. virtue crouch and present. bring to gain thy grace, so dread thou have be and yet a heart more mild be seldom see. so make valour, virtue real who haste. nought in thou counterfeit or sly if in the sleight be not the true art that make man famous for fair desert. who say of thou this savour of vain glory? mistake both thou and we and this true story. if it be ill in thou so well to do, then be ill in we to praise thou too. but if the first be well, do it be well to say it do. if so, it do excel. praise be the guerdon of each dear desert. make the praise act, the praise part, with more alacrity, honour spur. it be well to say it do. if so, it do excel. praise be the guerdon of each dear desert. make the praise act, the praise part with more alacrity. honour spur be praise, without which it, regardless, soon decay. and for this pain of thou we praise thou. rather that future time may know who be the father of that rare work, new england, which may bring praise to thy god and profit to thy king. the summer ils, the tribe, be signify by these figurs: 1, sand, 2. southampton, 3, warwick, 4. padget, 5. pembroke, 6. cavendish, 7. smith, 8. hambleton, st catherins fort f. pembroke, fort k, king castle m. southampton, fort l, devonshire, redute o a scale of 8 mile: 1, 2, 3, 4. pembroke, 6. cavendish, 7. smith, 8. hambleton, st catherins. fort f, pembroke. fort k, king castle m, southampton, fort l, devonshire redute o a scale of 8 mile, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, st george town d warwick fort e, the 3 bridge abc p, riches mount state house. the letter abc show the sittuation of the 3 bridge p the mount defghiklmno the fort, how and by who they be make. the history will show you the description of the land by mr norwood, all contract into this order by captain john smith, smith, fort i, pagets, fort h, penistons, redoute g, charles n print by james reeve, the four book, to make plain the true proceed of the history for 1609.. we must smith, smith fort i, pagets, fort h, penistons, redoute g, charles n print by james reeve, the four book to make plain the true proceed of the history for 1609.. we must follow the examination of doctor simons and two learned oration publish by the company with the relation of the right honourable the lord la ware. what happen in the first government after the alteration, in the time of captain george piercie, their governor? the day before captain smith return for england with the ship, captain davis arrive in a small pinnace, the plant point comfort, with some sixteen proper man. more to these be add a company from james town, under the command of captain john sickelmore, alias ratliffe, to inhabit point comfort, captain martin and comfort with some sixteen proper man more to these be add a company from james town under the command of captain john sickelmore, alias ratliffe, to inhabit point comfort. captain martin and captain west have lose their boat and near half their man among the saluage. be return to james town. for the saluage, no, soon understand, smith be go. but they all revolt and do spoil and murder all they encounter. now we be all constrain to live only on that. smith have only for his own company. for the rest have consume their proportion. and now they have twenty precedent with all their appurtenance. master piercie our new precedent. be so sick he can neither go nor stand, but ere all be consume, captain west and and now they have twenty precedent with all their appurtenance. master piercie, our new precedent, be so sick he can neither go nor stand. but ere all be consume. captain west and captain sickelmore, each with a small ship and thirty or forty man, well appoint, seek abroad to trade. sickelmore, upon the confidence of powhatan, with about thirty other as careless as himself, be all slay. only jeffrey shortridge escape and pocahontas, the king daughter, save a boy call henry spilman, that live many year after by her mean among the patawomeke. powhatan still, as he find mean, cut off their boat, deny they trade, so that captain west set sail for england. now we all find the loss of captain smith yea, his great maligner can. he find mean cut off their boat, deny they trade so that captain west set sail for england. now we all find the loss of captain smith. yea, his great maligner can now curse his loss. as for corn provision and contribution from the saluage, we have nothing but mortal wound with clubs and arrow. as for our hog, hen, goat, sheep, horse or what live our commander, officer and saluage daily, consume they some small proportion. sometime we taste till all be devour then sword, arm piece or any thing we trade with the saluage who cruel finger be so oft embrue in our blood that what by their cruelty, our governors indiscretion and the loss of our ship of five hundred within six month after captain. who cruel finger be, so oft embrue in our blood that what by their cruelty, our governors indiscretion and the loss of our ship of five hundred within six month after captain smith departure, there remain not pass sixty man, woman and child, most miserable and poor creature, and those be preserve for the most part by root, herb, acorn, walnut, berry, now and then a little fish. they that have startch in these extremity make no small use of it, yea, even the very skin of our horse. nay, so great be our famine that a savage we slay and bury the poor sort, take he up again and eat he. and so do diverse one another, boil and stew with root and herb, and one among a savage. we slay and bury the poor sort, take he up again and eat he, and so do diverse one another, boil and stew with root and herb, and one among the rest, do kill his wife, powder she, and have eat part of she before it be know, for which he be execute, as he well deserve. now, whether she be better roast, boil or carbonado, i know not, but of such a dish as powder wise, i never hear. of this, be that time which, still to this day, we call the starve time, it be too vile to say and scarce to be believe what we endure, but the occasion be our own, for want of providence, industry and government, and not the barrenness. time it be too vile to say, and scarce to be believe, what we endure, but the occasion be our own, for want of providence, industry and government, and not the barrenness and defect of the country as be general suppose. for till then, in three year, for the number be land we. we have never from england provision sufficient for six month, though it seem by the bill of load, sufficient be. send we such a glutton be the sea and such good fellow the mariner. we as little taste of the great proportion, send we as they of our want and misery, yet notwithstanding they ever over-swayed and rule the business though we endure all that be say and chief, live on what this good country. we as they of our want and misery. yet notwithstanding they, ever over-swayed and rule the business, though we endure all that be say and chief, live on what this good country natural afford. yet have we be even in paradise itself with these governor. it will not have be much better with we. yet there be among we who have they have the government as captain smith appoint, but that they can not maintain. it will sure have. keep we from those extremity of misery. this, in ten day more will have supplant we all with death. the arrival of sir thomas gate, but god, that will not. this country shall be unplanted. send sir thomas gate and sir george summer with one hundred and fifty people. with death the arrival of sir thomas gate. but god that will not. this country shall be unplanted. send sir thomas gate and sir george summer with one hundred and fifty people, most happy preserve by the bermuda to preserve we, strange it be to say how miraculous they be, preserve in a leak ship, as at large you may read in the ensue history of those land: the government resign to sir thomas gate, 1610. when these two noble knight do see our misery be but stranger in that country and can understand no more of the cause. but by conjecture of our clamour and complaint of accuse and excuse one another, they embark we with themselves with the best mean they can, james town abandon and of the cause, but by conjecture of our clamour and complaint of accuse and excuse one another, they embark we with themselves with the best mean they can. james town, abandon and abandon. james town. set sail for england whereby you may see the event of the government of the former commander leave to themselves, although they have live there many year as former have be speak. who hinder now their proceed, captain smith, be go. at noon they fall to the i will of hog and the next morning to mulberry point. at what time they descry the longboat of the lord ware, for god will not have it. so abandon for this honourable lord. than, governor of the country, meet they with three ship exceed well. they descry the longboat of the lord ware, for god will not have it. so abandon for this honourable lord. than, governor of the country, meet they with three ship, exceed, well furnish with all necessary fit, who again return they to the abandon james town, out of the observation of william simmons, doctor of divinity. the government devolve to the lord ware the arrival of the lord ware. his lordship arrive the nine of june 1610.. accompany with sir ferdinando warnman, captain houl^roft, captain lawson and diverse other gentleman of sort, the ten, he come up with his fleet, go on shore, hear a sermon, read his commission and enter into consultation for the good of the colony, in which secret counsel we will a little leave. up with his fleet, go on shore, hear a sermon, read his commission and enter into consultation for the good of the colony, in which secret counsel we will a little leave. they that we may due observe the reveal counsel of god. he that shall but turn up his eye and behold the spangle canopy of heaven, or shall but cast down his eye and consider the embroider carpet of the earth and withal, shall mark how the heaven hear the earth and the earth the corn and oil, and they relieve the necessity of man, that man will acknowledge god infinite providence. but he that shall further observe how god incline all casual event to work the necessary help of his saint, must needs adore the. man, that man will acknowledge god infinite providence. but he that shall further observe how god incline all casual event to work, the necessary help of his saint must needs. adore the lord infinite goodness. never have any people more just cause to cast themselves at the very footstool of god and to reverence his mercy than this distress colony. for if god have not send sir thomas gate from the bermuda within four day, they have almost be famish. if god have not direct the heart of that noble knight to save the fort from fire at their ship, for many be very importunate to have burn it. they have be destitute of a present harbour and succour if they have abandon the fort any long time. fire at their ship, for many be very importunate to have burn it. they have be destitute of a present harbour and succour if they have abandon the fort any long time and have not so soon return. questionless the indian will have destroy the fort, which have be the mean of our safety among they and a terror. if they have set sail soon and have launch into the vast ocean, who will have promise? they shall have encounter the fleet of the lord ware, especial when they make for new find land, as they intend, a course contrary to our navy approach. if the lord ware have not bring with he a year provision, what comfort will those poor soul have receive to have be reland? intend a course contrary to our navy approach. if the lord ware have not bring with he a year provision, what comfort will those poor soul have receive to have be reland to a second destruction? this be the arm of the lord of host who will have his people pass the red sea and wilderness, and then to possess the land of canaan. it be divine. speak of heathen socrates. if god for man be careful, why shall man be over-distrustfull? for he have so temper, the contrary quality of the element that neither cold thing want heat, nor moist thing, dry nor sad thing. spirit to quicken they thereby yet make they musical content of contrariety which conquer knit they in such link together. they do. thing want heat, nor moist thing dry, nor sad thing. spirit to quicken they thereby yet make they musical content of contrariety which conquer, knit they in such link together. they do produce even all this whatsoever. the lord governor, after mature deliberation, deliver some few word to the company. lay just blame upon they for their haughty vanity and sluggish idleness. earnest entreat they to amend those desperate folly, lest he shall be compel to draw the sword of justice and to cut off such delinquent, which he have rather draw to the shed of his vital blood. to protect they from injury, hearten they with relation of that store he have bring with he constitute officer of all condition to rule over they allot every man. his vital blood to protect they from injury. hearten they with relation of that store he have bring with he constitute officer of all condition to rule over. they allot every man his particular place to watch, vigilant and work painful. this oration and direction be receive with a general applause. you may short behold the idle and resty disease of a divide multitude by the unity and authority of this government to be substantial cure. those that know not the way to goodness before but cherish singularity and faction, can now chalk out the path of all respective duty and service. every man endeavour to outstrip other in diligence. the french prepare to plant the vine, the english labour in the wood and ground. every man know. of all respective duty and service, every man endeavour to outstrip other in diligence. the french prepare to plant the vine, the english labour in the wood and ground. every man know his charge and discharge the same with alacrity. neither let any man be discourage by the relation of their daily labour, as though the sap of their body shall be spend for other man profit. the settle time of work to effect all themselves or, as the adventurer need desire, require no more pain than from six of the clock in the morning until ten, and from two in the afternoon till four, at both which time they be provide of spiritual and corporal relief. first they enter into the church and make their prayer unto ten, and from two in the afternoon till four, at both which time they be provide of spiritual and corporal relief. first they enter into the church and make their prayer unto god. next they return to their house and receive their proportion of food. nor shall it be conceive that this business exclude gentleman who breed never know what a day labour mean, for though they can dig, use the spade nor practise the axe. yet may the stay spirit of any condition find how to employ the force of knowledge, the exercise of counsel, the operation and power of their best breed and quality. the house which be build be as warm and defensive against wind and weather as if they be tile and slate be the operation and power of their best breed and quality. the house which be build be as warm and defensive against wind and weather as if they be tile and slate. be cover above with strong board and some mat round with indian mat. our force be now such as be able to tame the fury and treachery of the saluage. our fort assure the inhabitant and frustrate all assailant, and to leave no discouragement in the heart of any who, personal, shall enter into this great action, i will communicate a double comfort. first, sir george summer. return to the bermuda. sir george summer, that worthy admiral, have undertake a dangerous adventure for the good of the colony upon the 15. of june, accompany with captain samuel. george summer return to the bermuda. sir george summer, that worthy admiral have undertake a dangerous adventure for the good of the colony upon the 15. of june. accompany with captain samuel argall, he return in two pinnace unto the bermuda. promise, if by any mean god will open a way to that island of rock, that he will soon return with six month provision of flesh, with much cross weather, at last he there safe arrive. but captain argall be force back again to james town who, the lord la beware, not long after send to the river of patawomeke to trade for corn. where find a english boy, one henry spilman, a young gentleman. well, descend by those people, preserve from the fury of powhatan by. to the river of patawomeke to trade for corn, where find a english boy, one henry spilman, a young gentleman well, descend by those people, preserve from the fury of powhatan by his acquaintance, have such good usage of those kind saluage that they fraught his ship with corn wherewith he return to james town. the build fort henry and fort charles. the other comfort be that the lord ware have build two new fort, the one call fort henry, the other fort charles, in honour of our most noble prince and his hopeful brother, upon a pleasant plain and near a little rivilet they call southampton river. they stand in a wholesome air, have plenty of spring of sweet water. they command a great circuit of ground. a pleasant plain and near a little rivilet they call southampton river. they stand in a wholesome air, have plenty of spring of sweet water. they command a great circuit of ground, contain wood, pasture and marsh with apt place for vine, corn and garden, in which fort it be resolve that all those that come out of england shall be at their first land quarter, that the wearisomeness of the sea may be refresh in this, please, part of the country. and sir thomas gate he send for england. but to correct some injury of the paspahegs he send captain pearcie, master stacy and fifty or threescore shot where the saluage fly. they burn their house, take the queen and her child prisoner who not long after the paspahegs, he send captain pearcie, master stacy, and fifty or threescore shot. where the saluage fly, they burn their house, take the queen and her child prisoner who, not long after they slay the fertility of the soil, the temperature of the climate, the form of government, the condition of our people, their daily invocate of the name of god be thus express. why shall the success by the rule of mortal judgement be disparage? why shall not the rich harvest of our hope be seasonable? expect, i dare say, that the resolution of caesar in france, the design of alexander, the discovery of hernando cortes in the west, and of emanuel, king of portugal, in the east, be not encourage upon so firm ground of state. in france, the design of alexander, the discovery of hernando cortes in the west and of emanuel, king of portugal in the east, be not encourage upon so firm ground of state and possibility. but his lordship be at the fall. the saluage assault his troop and slay three or four of his man. not long after his honour grow very sick, he return for england the 28. of march, in the ship be about five and fifty man, but ere we arrive at fyall forty of we be near sick to death of the scurvy, calenture and other disease. the governor be a englishman, kind use we, but small relief we can get, but orange, of which we have plenty, whereby within eight day we recover and calenture and other disease. the governor be a englishman kind, use we but small relief. we can get, but orange, of which we have plenty, whereby within eight day we recover and all be well and strong by that they come into england. write by william box. the counsel of virginia find the smallness of that return, which they hope shall have defray the charge of a new supply, enter into a deep consultation whether it be fit to enter into a new contribution or in time to send for they home and give over the action, and therefore they adjure sir thomas gate to deal plain with they who with a solemn and a sacred oath, reply that all thing before report be true and that all action and therefore they adjure sir thomas gate to deal plain with they who, with a solemn and a sacred oath, reply that all thing before report be true and that all man know that we stand at the devotion of politic prince and state who, for their proper utility, devise all course to grind our merchant and by all pretence to confiscate their good and to draw from we all manner of gain by their inquisitive invention. when in virginia a few year labour by plant and husbandry will furnish all our de^^cts with honour and security. out of a declaration publish by the counsel 1610. the government leave again to captain george piercie and the return of the lord ware with his relation to the council. and security out of a declaration publish by the counsel 1610.. the government leave again to captain george piercie and the return of the lord ware with his relation to the council. my lord now, by accident, return from my charge at virginia. sir thomas smith, treasurer, contrary either to my own desire or other man expectation, who spare not to censure, i in point of duty and to discourse and question the reason, though they apprehend not the true cause of my return, the relation of the lord ware, i be force, out of a willingness to satisfy every man, to deliver unto your lordship and the rest of this assembly. in what state i have live ever since my arrival to the colony? what have be. willingness to satisfy every man, to deliver unto your lordship and the rest of this assembly. in what state i have live ever since my arrival to the colony? what have be the just cause of my sudden departure, and on what term i have leave the same, the rather, because i perceive that since my come into england, such a coldness and irresolution be breed in many of the adventurer that some of they seek to withdraw their payment, by which the action must be support, make this my return colour of their needless backwardness and unjust protraction, which that you may the better understand. i be welcome to james town by a violent ague. be cure of it within thre^ week after i begin to be. and unjust protraction which, that you may the better understand i be welcome to james town by a violent ague. be cure of it. within thre^ week after i begin to be distemper with other grievous sickness which, successive and several, assail i for beside, a relapse into the former disease which, with much more violence, hold i more than a month and bring i to great weakness. the flux surprise i and keep i many day than the cramp, assault my weak body with strong pain and after the gout, all those draw i to that weakness be unable to stir, bring upon i the scurvy which, though in other it be a sickness of slothfulness, yet be it in mean effect, of weakness which never leave. that weakness be unable to stir, bring upon i the scurvy which, though in other it be a sickness of slothfulness, yet be it in mean effect of weakness which never leave i. till i be ready to leave the world. in these extremity, i resolve to consult with my friend who find nature spend in i and my body almost consume. my pain likewise daily increase. give i advice to prefer a hopeful recovery before a assure ruin which must necessary have ensue. have i live but twenty day long in virginia, want at that instant both food and physic fit to remedy such extraordinary disease. wherefore i ship myself with doctor bohun and captain argall for mevis in the west indies, but be cross with southerly. instant both food and physic fit to remedy such extraordinary disease. wherefore i ship myself with doctor bohun and captain argall for mevis in the west indies, but be cross with southerly wind, i be force to shape my course for the western isle where i find help for my health and my sickness, assuage by the mean of fresh diet, especial orange and lemon, and undoubted remedy for that disease. then i intend to have return back again to virginia, but i be advise not to hazard myself before i have perfect, recover my strength. so i come for england, in which accident, i doubt not, but man of judgement will imagine, there will more prejudice have happen by my death there than i hope can do. so i come for england, in which accident, i doubt not, but man of judgement will imagine- there will more prejudice have happen by my death there than i hope can do by my return for the colony. i leave it to the charge of captain george piercie, a gentleman of honour and resolution, until the come of sir thomas dale, who commission be likewise to be determine. upon the arrival of sir thomas gate, according to the order your lordship appoint, the number i leave be about two hundred, the most in health and provide of at least ten month victual, and the country people tractable and friendly. what other defect they have? i find by sir thomas gate at the cow, his fleet be sufficient furnish. of at least ten month victual and the country people tractable and friendly. what other defect they have? i find by sir thomas gate at the cow, his fleet be sufficient furnish with supply. but when it shall please god that sir thomas dale 100 cow and 200. swine send to virginia, and sir thomas gate shall arrive in virginia with the extraordinary supply of 100 cow and 200. swine, beside store of other provision for the maintenance of the colony, there will appear that success in the action as shall give no man cause of distrust that have already adventure, but encourage every good mind to further so good a work as will redound both to the glory of god, to the credit of our nation and distrust that have already adventure, but encourage every good mind to further so good a work as will redound, both to the glory of god, to the credit of our nation and the comfort of all those that have be instrument in the further of it. out of the lord wares discourse, publish by authority, 1611.. the government surrender to sir thomas dale, who arrive in virginia the ten of may 1611.. out of master hamors book, before the lord ware arrive in england, sir thomas smith, treasurer the arrival of sir thomas dale. the council and company have dispatch away sir thomas dale with three ship, man and cattle and all other provision necessary for a year, all which arrive well, the ten of may 1611.. where. and company have, dispatch away sir thomas dale with three ship, man and cattle and all other provision necessary for a year, all which arrive well, the ten of may 1611.. where he find they grow again to their former estate of penury, be so improvident as not to put corn in the ground for their bread but trust to the store, then furnish, but with three month provision. his first care therefore be to employ all hand about set of corn at the two fort at kecoughtan, henry and charles, whereby the season than not full pass, though about the end of may, we have a indifferent crop of good corne. this business take order for, and the care and trust of it commit to his under-officer. full pass, though about the end of may we have a indifferent crop of good corne. this business take order for, and the care and trust of it commit to his under-officer. his preparation to build a new town, to james town, he hasten, where most of the company be ^t their daily and usual work, bowl in the street. these he employ about necessary work as fell of timber, repair their house ready to fall on their head and provide pale post and rail to impale his purpose. new town, which by reason of his ignorance be but new, arrive. he have not resolve where to seat. therefore, to better his knowledge, with one hundred man, he spend some time in view the river of nausamund in ignorance be, but new arrive. he have not resolve where to seat. therefore, to better his knowledge, with one hundred man, he spend some time in view the river of nausamund, in despite of the indian, then our enemy, then our own river, to the fales where, upon a high land environ with the main river, some twelve mile from the fales by arsahattock, he resolve to plant his new town. it be no small trouble to reduce his people, so timely, to good order, be of so ill a condition, as may well witness his severity and strict imprint. book of article then needful, with all extremity to be execute, now much mitigate, so as if his law have not be so strict. execute, i see not. severity and strict imprint book of article then needful, with all extremity to be execute, now much mitigate so as if his law have not be so strict, execute. i see not how the utter subversion of the colony shall have be. prevent witness web and price design. the first year since that of abbot and other more dangerous than the former. here i entreat your patience for a apology, though not a pardon. this jeffrey abbot, how ever this author censure he and the governor, execute he. i know he have long serve both in ireland and netherlands. here he be a sergeant of my company and i never see in virginia a more sufficient soldier, less turbulent, a better wit, more hardy or industrious, nor any. ireland and netherlands. here he be a sergeant of my company and i never see in virginia a more sufficient soldier, less turbulent, a better wit, more hardy or industrious, nor any more forward to cut off they that seek to abandon the country or wrong the colony. how ingrateful those desert may be, reward envy or neglect, or his far inferior prefer to overtop he, i know not. but such occasion may move a saint, much more a man, to a unadvised passionate impatience. but how ever it seem he have be punish for his offence, that be never reward for his desert. and even this summer cole and kitchins plot, with three more diverse mutiny, suppress, bend their course to ocanahowan, five day journey from we. offence that be never reward for his desert. and even this summer, cole and kitchins plot, with three more diverse mutiny, suppress, bend their course to ocanahowan, five day journey from we, where they report be spaniard inhabit. these be cut off by the saluage hire by we to hunt they home to receive their desert. so, as sir thomas dale, have not be so tyrannous nor severe by the half, as there be occasion and just cause for it, and though the manner be not usual, we be rather to have regard to those who we will have terrify and make fearful to commit the like offence than to the offender just condemn, for among they, so harden in evil, the fear of a cruel, painful and we will have, terrify and make fearful to commit the like offence than to the offender just condemn. for among they, so harden in evil, the fear of a cruel, painful and unusual death, more restrain they than death itself. thus much i have proceed of his endeavour until the come of sir thomas gate, in prepare himself to proceed, as he intend now, in england again to second this noble knight, the counsel and company with all possible expedition. prepare for sir thomas gate six tall ship with three hundred man and one hundred cow and other cattle, with munition and all other manner of provision that can be think needful, and about the first or second of august 1611. arrive safe at james town. the government. and other cattle, with munition and all other manner of provision that can be think needful, and about the first or second of august 1611.. arrive safe at james town, the government return again to sir thomas gate, 1611.. these worthy knight be meet after their welcome salutation. the second arrival of sir thomas gate, sir thomas dale. acquaint he what he have do and what he intend, which design sir thomas gate well, approve, furnish he with three hundred and fifty man such as himself, make choice of in the begin of september 1611. he set, fail and arrive where he intend to build his new town within ten or twelve day. he have environ it with a pale and in honour of our noble prince henry. set fail and arrive where he intend to build his new town. within ten or twelve day, he have environ it with a pale and, in honour of our noble prince henry, call it henrico. the next work he do be: build at each corner of the town a high command watch-house, a church and storehouse which finish he begin to () convenient house for himself and man which, with all possible speed he can he effect to the great content of his company and all the colony. this town be situate upon a neck of a plain rise land, the building of henrico, three part environ with the main river. the neck of land, well, empale, make it like a. i will it have three street of. a plain rise land, the building of henrico three part environ with the main river, the neck of land well empale, make it like a. i will it have three street of well frame house, a handsome church and the foundation of a better lay to be build of brick beside storehouse, watch-house and such like. upon the verge of the river there be five house wherein live the honest sort of people as farmer in england and they keep continual centinel for the town security. about two mile from the town into the main be another pal^ near two mile in length from river to river, guard with several commander, with a good quantity of corn-ground, impail, sufficient secure to maintain more than i suppose will come. another pal^, near two mile in length from river to river, guard with several commander, with a good quantity of corn-ground impail, sufficient secure to maintain more than i suppose will come this three year. on the other side of the river, for the security of the town. be intend to be empale for the security of our hog, about two mile and a half, by the name of hope in faith and coxendale, secure by five of our manner of fort, which be but palisado, call charity fort, mount malado, a guest house for sick people, a high ^eat and wholesome air, elisabeth fort and fort patience. and here have master whitaker choose his parsonage, empale a fair frame parsonage, and one hundred acre call rock hall. people a high ^eat and wholesome air. elisabeth, fort and fort, patience. and here have master whitaker, choose his parsonage, empale a fair frame parsonage and one hundred acre call rock hall. but these be not half finish about christmas. follow in this same year, 1611.. in regard of the injury, do we by they of apamatuck, sir thomas dale, without the loss of any except some few saluage, take it and their corn, be but five mile by land from henrico and consider how commodious it may be, for we resolve to possess and plant it and at the instant call it the new bermuda, the building, the bermuda whereunto he have lay out and annex to the belong freedom and corporation for ever, many mile of. it and at the instant call it the new bermuda, the building, the bermuda whereunto he have lay out and annex to the belong freedom and corporation, for ever many mile of champion and woodland ground, in several hundred as the upper and neither hundred, rochdale hundred, west shirley hundred, and dig his hundred in the neither hundred he first begin to plant for there be the most corn-ground and with a pale of two mile, cut over from river to river, whereby we have secure eight english mile in compass, upon which circuit, within half a mile of each other, be many fair house already build beside particular man house, near to the number of fifty rochdale, by a cross pale, wellnigh four mile long be also. a mile of each other. be many fair house already build beside particular man house, near to the number of fifty rochdale, by a cross pale wellnigh four mile long. be also plant with house along the pale in which hundred our hog and cattle have twenty mile circuit to graze in secure the building of the city be refer till our harvest be in which he intend to make a retreat against any foreign enemy. about fifty mile from these be james town upon a fertile which, although fomer scandal for a unhealthful air, we find it as healthful as any other part of the country. it have two row of house of frame timber and some of they two story and a garret high three large. find it as healthful as any other part of the country. it have two row of house of frame timber and some of they two story and a garret high, three large storehouse join together in length and he have new strong empale the town, this i will, and much ground about it, be much in habit to kecoughtan. we account it forty mile where they live well, with half that allowance, the rest have from the store because of the extraordinary quantity of fish, fowl and dear, as you may read at large in the discovery of captain smith and thus i have true, relate unto you the present estate of that small part of virginia we frequent and possess. sir thomas smith, treasurer, captain argals arrival. discovery of captain smith and thus, i have true, relate unto you the present estate of that small part of virginia we frequent and possess. sir thomas smith, treasurer, captain argals arrival, since there be a ship fraught with provision and forty man, and another since then, with the like number and provision, to stay twelve month in the country with captain argall, which be send not long after, after he have recreate and refresh his company, he be send to the river patawomeake to trade for corn, the saluage about. we have small quarter, but friend and foe as they find advantage and opportunity but to conclude our peace. thus it happen, captain argall have enter into a great acquaintance with japazaw a () of captain smith. friend and foe as they find advantage and opportunity, but to conclude our peace. thus it happen, captain argall have enter into a great acquaintance with japazaw, a () of captain smith, and so to all our nation, ever since ^ee discover the country @ hard by he, there be pocahontas, who captain smith relation entitle the numparell of virginia, and though she have be many time a preserver of he and the whole colony, yet till this accident she be never see at james town, since his departure be at patawom^ke as it seem think herself unknown be easy by her friend japazaw persuade to go abroad with he and his wife to see the ship, for captain argall have promise he a copper kettle to bring. herself unknown, be easy by her friend japazaw, persuade to go abroad with he and his wife to see the ship, for captain argall have promise he a copper kettle to bring she, but to he promise no way to hurt she. how pocahontas be, take prisoner but keep she till they can conclude a peace with her father, the savage for this copper kettle will have do any thing, it seem by the relation for though she have see and be in many ship, yet he cause his wife to feign how desirous she be to see one and that he offer to beat she for her importunity @ till she weep. but at last he tell she, if pocahontas will go with she, he be content. to see one and that he offer to beat she for her importunity @ till she weep. but at last he tell she, if pocahontas will go with she, he be content. and thus they betray the poor, innocent pocahontas aboard. where they be all kind, feast in the cabin, japazaw tread oft on the captain foot to remember he have do his part. the captain, when he see his time, persuade pocahontas to the gun-roome, feign to have some conference with japazaw, which be only that she shall not perceive he be any way guilty of her captivity. so send for she again. he tell she, before her friend, she must go with he and compound peace betwixt her country and we, before she ever shall see. of her captivity. so send for she again. he tell she before her friend she must go with he and compound peace betwixt her country. and we, before she ever shall see powhatan, whereat the old jew and his wife begin to howl and cry as fast as pocahontas that upon the captain, fair persuasion by degree, pacify herself, and japazaw and his wife with the kettle and other toy go merry on shore and she to james town. a messenger forthwith be send to her father that his daughter pocahontas, he love so dear, he must ransom with our man, sword piece, tool etc. he treacherous have steal this unwelcome news. much trouble powhatan, because he love both his daughter and our commodity. well, yet it be. must ransom with our man, sword, piece, tool etc. he treacherous have steal this unwelcome news. much trouble powhatan, because he love both his daughter and our commodity well, yet it be three month after ere he return we any answer. then, by the persuasion of the council, he return seven of our man, seven english return from powhatan prisoner, with each of they a unserviceable musket, and send we word that when we will deliver his daughter he will make we satisfaction for all injury do we and give we five hundred bushel of corn and for ever be friend with we. that he send we receive in part of payment and return he this answer that his daughter shall be well use. but we can not. and for ever be friend with we that he send we receive in part of payment and return he this answer that his daughter shall be well use. but we can not believe the rest of our arm be either lose or steal from he and therefore, till he send they we will keep his daughter. this answer it seem much displease he, for we hear no more from he a long time after. when, with captain argals ship sir thomas dale, his voyage to pamavuke, and some other vessel belong to the colony, sir thomas dale with a hundred and fifty man well appoint, go up into his own river to his chief habitation with his daughter, with many scornful brauado they affront. we proud, demand why. dale with a hundred and fifty man well appoint, go up into his own river to his chief habitation with his daughter. with many scornful brauado they affront we proud, demand why we come thither. our reply be we have, bring his daughter and to receive the ransom for she, that be promise, or to have it perforce they. nothing dismay thereat. tell we we be welcome if we come to fight for they be, provide for we, but advise we, if we love our life, to retire, else they will use we as they have do, captain ratcliff. we tell they we will present, have a better answer. but we be no soon within shot of the shore than they let fly their arrow among we in. do, captain ratcliff? we tell they we will present have a better answer. but we be no soon within shot of the shore than they let fly their arrow among we in the ship, be thus just provoke. we, present man, our boat, go on shore, a man shoot in the forehead, burn all their house and spoil all they have we can find, and so the next day proceed high up the river where they demand: ^hy, we burn their house and we why they shoot at we? they reply it be some straggle savage with many other excuse. they intend no hurt but be our friend. we tell they, we come not to hurt they, but u^sit they as friend also. upon this we conclude a. with many other excuse. they intend no hurt but be our friend. we tell they, we come not to hurt they, but u^sit they as friend. also, upon this we conclude a peace and forthwith. they dispatch messenger to powhatan, who answer. they tell we, we must expect four and twenty hour ere the messenger can return. then they tell we, our man be run away, for fear we will hang they. yet powhatans man be run after they. as for our sword and piece, they shall be bring we the next day, which be only but to delay time for the next day they come not. then we go high to a house of powhatans call matchot, where we see about four hundred man, well appoint here. but to delay time for the next day. they come not. then we go high to a house of powhatans call matchot, where we see about four hundred man, well, appoint here they dare we to come on shore, which we do no show of fear they make at all, nor offer to resist our land, but walk bold, up and down among we demand to confer with our captain of his come in that manner and to have truce till they can, but once more send to their king to know his pleasure, which, if it be not agreeable to their expectation, than they will fight with we and defend their own as they can, which be but only to defer the time to carry away their it be not agreeable to their expectation, than they will fight with we and defend their own as they can, which be, but only to defer the time to carry away their provision. yet we promise they truce ti^l the next day at noon, and then, if they will fight with we, they shall know when we will begin by our drum and trumpet upon this promise. two of powhatans son come unto we to see their sister. two of powhatans son come to see pocahontas. at who sight see she? well, though they hear to the contrary, they much rejoice. promise they will persuade her father to redeem she and for ever be friend with we. and upon this the two brethren go aboard with we and the contrary, they much rejoice, promise they will persuade her father to redeem she and for ever be friend with we. and upon this the two brethren go aboard with we and we send m^ster john rolfe and master sparkes to powhatan to acquaint he with the business kind. they be entertain but not admit the presence of powhatan. but they speak with opechaucanough, his brother and successor. he promise to do the best he can to powhatan. all may be well. so it be april and time to prepare our ground and set our corn. we return to james town, promise the forbearance of their, perform their promise till the next harvest, long before this master john rolfe, a honest gentleman @ and of good behaviour, the we return to james town, promise the forbearance of their, perform their promise till the next harvest, long before this, master john rolfe, a honest gentleman @ and of good behaviour, the marriage of pocahontas to master john rolfe, have be in love with pocahontas and she with he, which thing, at that instant, i make know to sir thomas dale by a letter from he wherein he entreat his advice and she acquaint her brother with it. sir thomas smith, treasurer, which resolution sir thomas dale well approve, the brute of this marriage come soon to the knowledge of powhatan, a thing acceptable to he, as appear by his sudden consent, for within ten day he send opachisco, a old uncle of she and two of his. to the knowledge of powhatan, a thing acceptable to he, as appear by his sudden consent, for within ten day he send opachisco, a old uncle of she and two of his son, to see the manner of the marriage and to do in that behalf what they be request for the confirmation thereof as his deputy, which be according do. about the first of april and ever since, we have have friendly trade and commerce as well with powhatan himself as all his subject. the chicahamanias desire friendship. beside this, by the mean of powhatan, we become in league with our next neighbour, the chicahamanias, a lusty and a dare people free of themselves. these people, so soon as they hear of our peace with powhatan, send we become in league with our next neighbour, the chicahamanias. a lusty and a dare people free of themselves. these people, so soon as they hear of our peace with powhatan, send two messenger with present to sir thomas dale and offer he their service, excuse all former injury. hereafter they will ever be king james, his subject, and relinquish the name of chickahamania to be call tassautessus, as they call we, and sir thomas dale there governor as the king deputy. only they desire to be govern by their own law, which be eight of their elder as his substitute. this offer he kind accept and appoint the day he will come to visit. they wh^n the appoint day. come sir thomas dale and captain argall with their elder as his substitute. this offer he kind accept and appoint the day he will come to visit they. wh^n the appoint day. come, sir thomas dale and captain argall, with fifty man, well appoint, go to chickahamania, where we find the people expect our come, they use we kind, and the next morning sit in counsel to conclude their peace upon these condition. article of peace: first: they shall for ever be call englishman and be true subject to king james and his deputy. second: neither to kill nor detain any of our man nor cattle, but bring they home. three to be always ready to furnish we with three hundred man against the spaniard or any four. they shall not enter ^ur town but send. nor cattle, but bring they home. three, to be always ready to furnish we with three hundred man against the spaniard or any four. they shall not enter ^ur town but send word. they be new englishman. five, that every fight man at the begin of harvest shall bring to our store two bushel of corn for tribute, for which they shall receive so many hatchet. last the eight, chief man shall see all this perform or receive the punishment themselves for their diligence. they shall have a red coat, a copper chain and king james his picture, and be account his nobleman. all this they conclude with a general assent and a great shout to confirm it, than one of the old man begin a oration bend. his picture and be account his nobleman. all this, they conclude with a general assent and a great shout to confirm it, than one of the old man begin a oration, bend his speech first to the old man, then to the young and then to the woman and child, to make they understand how strict they be to observe these condition. and we will defend they from the fury of powhatan or any enemy whatsoever and furnish they with copper bead and hatchet. but all this be rather for fear powhatan and we be so link together will bring they again to his subjection, the which to prevent they do rather choose to be protect by we than torment by he who they hold a tyrant and link together will bring they again to his subjection, the which to prevent they do rather choose to be protect by we than torment by he who they hold a tyrant. and thus we return again to james town. the benefit of liberty in the planter, when our people be feed out of the common store and labour joint together, glad be he can slip from his labour or slumber over his task, he care not how, nay, the most honest among they will hardly take so much true pain in a week as now for themselves they will do in a day. neither care they for the increase. presume that, howsoever the harvest prosper, the general store must maintain they so that we reap not so much. themselves they will do in a day. neither care they for the increase. presume that, howsoever the harvest prosper, the general store must maintain they, so that we reap not so much corn from the labour of thirty as now three or four do provide for themselves. to prevent which, sir thomas dale have allot every man three acre of clear ground in the nature of farm, except the bermuda who be exempt, but for one month service in the year, which must neither be in feed-time nor harvest, for which do no other duty they pay yearly to the store, but two barrel and a half of corn from all those farmer, whereof the first be william spence, a honest william spence, the first farmer in virginia. pay yearly to the store but two barrel and a half of corn from all those farmer, whereof the first be william spence, a honest william spence, the first farmer in virginia, valiant and a industrious man, and have continue from 1607.. to this present, from those be expect such a contribution to the store as we shall neither want for ourselves nor to entertain our supply. for the rest, they be to work eleven month for the store and have one month only allow they to get provision to keep they for twelve, except two bushel of corn they have out of the store. if those can live, so why shall any fear starve? and it be much better to deny they passage that will not ere. bushel of corn they have out of the store, if those can live. so why shall any fear starve? and it be much better to deny they passage that will not ere they come be content to engage themselves to those condition, for only from the slothful and idle drone, and none else have, spring the manifold imputation virginia innocent have undergo, and therefore i will deter such from come here that can well brook labour, except they will undergo much punishment and penury if they escape the scurvy. but for the industrious there be reward sufficient, and if any think there be nothing but bread. i refer you to his relation that discover the country first the government. leave to sir thomas dale, upon sir thomas gate. sufficient, and if any think there be nothing but bread, i refer you to his relation. that discover the country first. the government leave to sir thomas dale upon sir thomas gate, return for england. sir thomas dale understand there be a plantation of frenchman in the north part of virginia about the degree of 45. captain argall voyage to port royal. send captain argall to port royal and where find the frenchman abroad, disperse in the wood. surprise their ship and pinnace, which be but new, come from france, wherein be much good apparel and other provision which he bring to james town. but the man escape and live among the saluage of those country. it please, sir thomas dale, before my return to england, sir thomas, other provision which he bring to james town. but the man escape and live among the saluage of those country. it please, sir thomas dale, before my return to england, sir thomas smith, treasurer, because i will be able to speak somewhat of my own knowledge, to give i leave to visit powhatan and his court. be provide. i have thomas savage with i for my interpreter with he and two saluage for guide. i go from the bermuda in the morning and come to matchet the next night where the king lie upon the river of pamavuke. his entertainment be strange to i, the boy he know well and tell he, my child, i give you leave, be my boy, to go see your friend and these of pamavuke, his entertainment be strange to i, the boy he know well, and tell he my child, i give you leave, be my boy, to go see your friend. and these four year i have not see you, nor hear of my own man, namoutack. i send to england, though many ship since have be return thence have do with he. he begin with i and demand for the chain of pearl. he send his brother, sir thomas dale, at his first arrival, which be a token betwixt they. when ever he shall send a messenger from himself to he, he shall wear that chain about his neck since the peace be conclude. otherways he be to bind he and send he home. it be true, sir. messenger from himself to he. he shall wear that chain about his neck since the peace be conclude. otherways he be to bind he and send he home. it be true, sir thomas dale, have send he such word and give his page order to give it i, but he forget it and till this present i never hear of it. master hamars journey to powhatan. yet i reply. i do know there be such a order, but that be when upon a sudden he shall have occasion to send a englishman without a indian guide. but if his own people shall conduct his messenger as two of his, do i who know my message, it be sufficient, with which answer he be content and so conduct we. but if his own people shall conduct his messenger as two of his do, i who know my message, it be sufficient, with which answer he be content. and so conduct we to his house, where be a guard of two hundred bowman that always attend his person. the first thing he do, he offer i a pipe of tobacco. than ask i how his brother, sir thomas dale, do, and his daughter and unknown son, and how they live love. and like i tell he his brother be well and his daughter so content she will not live again with he, whereat he laugh and demand the cause of my come. i tell he my message be private and i be to deliver it only to himself. will not live again with he, whereat he laugh and demand the cause of my come. i tell he my message be private and i be to deliver it only to himself and papaschicher, one of my guide, that be acquaint with it. instant he command all out of the house but only his two queen that always sit by he and bid i speak on. i tell he by my interpreter, sir thomas dale have send you two piece of copper, five string of white and blue bead, five wooden comb, his message to powhatan, ten fishhook, a pair of knife and that when you will send for it he will give you a grindstone. all this, please, he. but then i tell he his brother, dale. ten fishhook, a pair of knife and that when you will send for it he will give you a grindstone. all this please he. but then i tell he his brother, dale, hear of the same of his young daughter desire. in any case, he will send she by i unto he, in testimony of his love as well, for that he intend to marry she as the desire her sister have to see she, because be now one people and he desirous for ever to dwell in his country. he conceive there can not be a true assurance of peace and friendship than in such a natural band of a unite union. i need not entreat his answer by his oft, interrupt i in my speech and a true assurance of peace and friendship than in such a natural band of a unite union. i need not entreat his answer by his oft interrupt i in my speech and present with much gravity. he thus reply: powhatans answer: i glad accept your salute of love and peace which, while i live i shall exact, keep his pledge thereof i receive with no less thanks, although they a^e not so ample as former he have receive. but for my daughter i have sell she within this few day, to a great werowance for two bushel of rawrenoke, three day journey from i. i reply: i know his greatness in restore the rawrenoke. may call she again to gratify his brother and the, rather because she be. bushel of rawrenoke, three day journey from i. i reply. i know his greatness in restore the rawrenoke. may call she again to gratify his brother and the, rather, because she be but twelve year old, assure he, beside the band of peace he shall have for she three time the worth of the rawrenoke in bead, copper, hatchet, etc. his answer be he love his daughter as his life and though he have many child he delight in none so much as she who, if he shall not often behold he can not possible live which she live with we. he can not do, have resolve upon no term to put himself into our hand or come among we. therefore desire i to urge he no further. which she live with we. he can not do, have resolve upon no term to put himself into our hand or come among we. therefore desire i to urge he no further but return his brother this answer that i desire no former assurance of his friendship than the promise he have make from i. he have a pledge: one of my daughter which, so long as she live, shall be sufficient. when she die, he shall have another. i hold it not a brotherly part to desire to bereave i of my two child at once. far tell he, though he have no pledge at all. he need not distrust any injury from i or my people. there have be too many of his man and i. once far, tell he, though he have no pledge at all. he need not distrust any injury from i or my people. there have be too many of his man and i slay, and by my occasion there shall never be more. i, which have power to perform it, have say it, although i shall have just cause, for i be now old and will glad end my day in peace if you offer i injury my country. be large enough to go from you thus much. i hope will satisfy my brother now, because you be weary and i sleepy. we will thus end. so, command we victual and lodging, we rest that night and the next morning he come to visit we and kind conduct we. be weary and i sleepy. we will thus end. so command we victual and lodging. we rest that night and the next morning he come to visit we and kind, conduct we to the best cheer he have, william parker. william parker recover while i here remain. by chance come a englishman who there have be surprise, three year ago at fort henry, grow so like, both in complexion and habit. like a savage, i know he not, but by his tongue he desire i to procure his liberty, which i intend and so far urge powhatan that he grow discontent and tell i: you have one of my daughter and i be content, but you can see one of your man with i, but you must have powhatan that he grow discontent and tell i: you have one of my daughter and i be content, but you can see one of your man with i. but you must have he away or break friendship. if you must needs have he, you shall go home without guide, and if any evil befall you, thank yourselves. i tell he i will, but if i return not well, he must expect a revenge and his brother may have just cause to suspect he so in passion. he le^t i till supper and then give i such as he have, with a cheerful countenance. about midnight he awake we and promise in the morning my return with parker. but i must remember his brother to send he ten great as he have with a cheerful countenance. about midnight he awake we and promise in the morning my return with parker. but i must remember his brother to send he ten great piece of copper, a shaving-knife, a, a grindstone, a net fishhook and such toy which, lest i shall forget he cause, i write in a table-book he have. how ever he get it, it be a fair one. i desire he will give it i. he tell i. no, it do he much good in show to stranger. yet in the morning when we depart have furnish we well with provision, he give each of we a buck skin, as well dress as can be, and send two more to his son and daughter. and so depart have, furnish we well with provision. he give each of we a buck skin as well dress as can be and send two more to his son and daughter. and so we return to james town. write by master ralph hamor and john rolph from a letter of sir thomas dale and master w^itakers. i have read the substance of this relation in a letter write by sir thomas dale, another by master whitaker and a three by master john rolse. how careful they be to instruct she in christianity and how capable and desirous she be thereof after she have be some time thus tutor, she never have desire to go to her father, nor can well endure the society of her own nation, the true. she be thereof after she have be some time thus tutor. she never have desire to go to her father, nor can well endure the society of her own nation. the true affection she constant bear her husband be much, and the strange apparition and violent passion he endure for her love as he deep protest, be wonderful and she open, renounce her country idolatry, confess the faith of christ and be baptize. but either the coldness of the adventurer or the bad usage of that be collect, or both cause this worthy knight to write thus: oh why shall so many prince and nobleman engage themselves and thereby intermeddle herein, have cause a number of soul, transport themselves and be transport hither. why shall they, i say, thus, oh why, shall so many prince and nobleman engage themselves and thereby intermeddle herein, have cause a number of soul, transport themselves and be transport hither. why shall they, i say, relinquish this so glorious a action? for if their end be to build god a church, they ought to persevere. if otherwise, yet, their honour, engage they to be constant, howsoever they stand, affect here, be enough to content they. these be the thing have animate i to stay a little season. from they, i be bind in conscience to return unto leave all content, pleasure and mundall delight to reside here with much turmoil, which i will rather do than see god glory diminish, my king and country dishonour and these poor soul i have. content, pleasure and mundall delight to reside here with much turmoil, which i will rather do than see god glory diminish, my king and country dishonour and these poor soul i have in charge reviue, which will quick happen if i shall leave they- so few i have with i fit to command or manage the business master whitaker, their preacher, complain and much muse that so few of our english minister that be so hot against the surplice and subscription come hither, where neither be speak of, do they not wilful, hide their talent or keep themselves at home for fear of lose a few pleasure. be there not any among they of moses his mind and of the apostle that forsake all to follow christ. but keep themselves at home for fear of lose a few pleasure. be there not any among they, of moses, his mind, and of the apostle that forsake all to follow christ, but i refer they to the judge of all heart and to the king that shall reward every one according to his talon from virginia, june 18. 1614. the business be bring to this perfection, captain arga^l, return for england in the latter end of june 1614. arrive in england and bring this good tiding to the council and company by the assistance of sir thomas gate. th^t also have return from virginia, but the march, before it be present, conclude that to supply this good success with all expedition, the stand lottery shall be draw with. thomas gate th^t also have return from virginia, but the march before it be present, conclude that to supply this good success with all expedition, the stand lottery shall be draw with all diligent conveniency, and that posterity may remember upon occasion to use the like according to the declaration. i think it not amiss to remember thus much the content of the declaration of the lottery publish by the counsel. it be apparent to the world by how many former proclamation we manifest our intent to have draw out the great stand lottery long before this, sir thomas smith, treasurer, which not fall out as we desire and other expect who money be adventure therein. we think good, therefore, for the avoid all unjust and sinister construction. this, sir thomas smith, treasurer, which not fall out as we desire and other expect who money be adventure therein. we think good, therefore, for the avoid all unjust and sinister construction to resolve the doubt of all indifferent mind in three special point for their better satisfaction. but ere i go any far, let we remember there be a run lottery use a long time in saint paul churchyard, where this stand, that bring into the treasury good sum of money daily, though the lot be but small. now for the point. the first be for as much as the adventurer come in, so slack for the year past, without prejudice to the generality in lose the blank and prize, we be force to petition to the for as much as the adventurer come in, so slack for the year past, without prejudice to the generality, in lose the blank and prize, we be force to petition to the honourable lord who, out of their noble care to further this plantation, have recommend their letter to the country, city and good town in england, which we hope, by send in their voluntary adventurer, will sufficient supply. we, the second for satisfaction, to all honest, well affect. mind be that though this expectation answer not our hope, yet we have not fail in our christian care. the good of that colony to who we have late send two sundry supply, and be they. but now supply with more hand. we shall soon resolve the division of christian care the good of that colony. to who we have late send two sundry supply, and be they. but now supply with more hand we shall soon resolve the division of the country by lot and so lessen the general charge. the three be our constant resolution. that see our credit be so far engage to the honourable lord and the whole state for the draw, this great lottery, which we intend shall be, without delay, the 26. of june next. desire all such as have undertake with book to solicit their friend that they will not withhold their money till the last month be expire, lest we be unwilling force to proportion a less value and number of our blank and prize which hereafter follow. welcome. will not withhold their money till the last month be expire, lest we be unwilling force to proportion a less value and number of our blank and prize which hereafter follow. welcome to he that first shall be draw out with a blank: 100 crown. to the second, 50 crown. to the three: 25 crown. to he that every day, during the draw of this lottery, shall be first draw out with a blank: 10 crown prize. 1 great prize of 4500 crown. 2 great prize each of 2000 crown. 4 great prize each of 1000 crown. 6 great prize each of 500 crown. 10 prize each of 300 crown. 20 prize each of 200 crown. 100 prize each of 100 crown. 200 prize each of 50 crown. crown 6 great prize each of 500 crown. 10. prize each of 300 crown. 20. prize each of 200 crown. 100. prize each of 100 crown. 200. prize each of 50 crown. 400. prize each of 20 crown: 1000. prize each of 10 crown: 1000. prize each of 8 crown. 1000. prize each of 6 crown: 4000. prize each of 4 crown: 1000. prize each of 3 crown: 1000. prize each of 2 crown. reward to he that shall be last draw out with a blank: 25 crown. to he that put in the great lot under one name: 400 crown. to he that put in the second great number: 300 crown. to he that put in the three great number: 200 crown. to he that put in: under one name, 400 crown. to he that put in the second great number, 300 crown. to he that put in the three great number, 200 crown. to he that put in the four great number, 100 crown. if diverse be of equal number. their reward be to be divide proportional. addition of new reward. the blank that shall be draw out next before the great prize shall have 25 crown. the blank that shall be draw out next after the say great prize, 25 crown. the blank that shall be draw out immediate before the two, next great prize shall have each of they 20 crown. the several blank next after they each, shall have 20 crown. the several blank next before the four, great prize each. two, next great prize, shall have each of they 20 crown. the several blank next after they each shall have 20 crown. the several blank next before the four great prize, each shall have 15 crown. the several blank next after they each shall have 15 crown. the several blank next before the six great prize: each shall have 10 crown. the several blank next after they each shall have 10 crown. the prize, welcome and reward shall be pay in ready money, plate or other good reasonable rate. if any dislike of the plate or good, he shall have money abate only the ten part, except in small prize of ten crown or under. the money for the adventurer be to be pay to sir thomas smith. good he shall have money abate. only the ten part, except in small prize of ten crown or under the money for the adventurer be to be pay to sir thomas smith, knight and treasurer for virginia, or such officer as he shall appoint in city or country under the common seal of the company. for the rece^t thereof, all prize welcome and reward draw, where ever they dwell, shall of the treasurer have present pay, and whosoever, under one name or po^sie, pay three pound in ready money, shall receive six shilling and eight penny or a silver spoon of that value at his choice. about this time it chance a spanish ship beat too, and again before point comfort and at last send a shore their or a silver spoon of that value at his choice. about this time it chance a spanish ship, beat too, and again before point comfort, and at last send a shore their boat. as desirous of a pilot, a spanish ship in virginia, captain james davis, the governor, immediate, give they one, but he be no soon in the boat, but away they go with. he leave three of their companion behind. they, this sudden accident, occasion some distrust and a strict examination of those three thus leave. yet with as good usage as our estate can afford, they, they only confess, have lose their admiral accident, have force they into those part, and two of they be captain and in chief authority in the fleet. thus they can afford. they, they only confess, have lose their admiral accident, have force they into those part and two of they be captain and in chief authority in the fleet. thus they live till one of they be find to be a englishman and have be the spaniard pilot for england in 88 and have here induce some malcontent to believe his project to run away with a small bark which be apprehend, some execute and he expect, but the hangman courtesy direct, confess that two or three spanish ship be at sea purposely to discover the estate of the colony, but their commission be not to be open till they arrive in the bay, so that of any thing more he be utter ignorant. one of the the estate of the colony, but their commission be not to be open till they arrive in the bay, so that of any thing more he be utter ignorant. one of the spaniard at last die, the other be send for england, but this reprieve till sir thomas dale, hang he at sea in his voyage homeward, the english pilot they carry for spain who, after a long time imprisonment with much ^^te be return for england. whilst those thing be effect, sir thomas dal^ have settle to his think, all thing in good order. make choice of one master, george, yearly, sir thomas smith, treasurer, to be depu^y-governour in his absence, and so return for england, accompany with po^ahontas, the king daughter and master r^lfe, her husband, choice of one master, george, yearly, sir thomas smith, treasurer, to be depu^y-governour in his absence, and so return for england, accompany with po^ahontas the king, daughter and master r^lfe, her husband, and arrive at plymouth the 12. of june 1616.. the government leave to captain yearly. now a little to commentary upon all these proceed. a digression, let i leave, but this as a caveat. by the way, if the alteration of government have subvert great empire, how dangerous be it then in the infancy of a commonweal, the multiplicity of governor be a great damage to any state. but uncertain daily change be burdensome because their entertainment be chargeable and many will make hay whilst the sun do shine. how ever it shall fare with the damage to any state, but uncertain daily change be burdensome because their entertainment be chargeable and many will make hay whilst the sun do shine. how ever it shall fare with the generality? this dear buy land with so much blood and cost have only make some few rich and all the rest loser. but it be intend at the first. the first undertaker shall be, first prefer and reward and the first adventurer satisfy, and they, of all the rest, be the most neglect and those that never adventure a groat, never see the country, nor ever do any service for it. employ in their place, adorn with their defer and enrich with their ruin. and when they a^e lead fat, then in come other so lean. nor ever do any service for it employ in their place, adorn with their defer and enrich with their ruin. and when they a^e lead fat, then in come other, so lean as they be, who through their omnipotency do as much. thus, what one officer do, another undoth only aim at their own end. think all the world deride. his dignity can (@) be coffer, be in authority with any thing, every man have his mind free, but he can never be a true member to that estate that, to enrich himself, beggar all the country. which bad course. there be many yet in this noble plantation who, true honour and worth, as much scorn it as the other love it for the nobility and gentry there. country, which bad course. there be many yet in this noble plantation who, true honour and worth, as much scorn it as the other love it. for the nobility and gentry there be, scarce any of, they expect any thing bu^ the prosperity of the action. and there be some, merchant and other, i be confident, persuade do take more care and pain, nay, and at their continual^ great charge, than they can be hire to for the love of money. so honest, regard the general good of this great work, they will hold it worse than sacrilege to wrong it but a shilling or extort upon the common soldier a penny. but to the purpose and to follow the history, the government of captain yea^ley, mr george. than sacrilege to wrong it but a shilling, or extort upon the common soldier a penny. but to the purpose and to follow the history, the government of captain yea^ley, mr george, yearly now invest, deputy governor by sr thomas dale, apply himself for the most part in plant tobacco as the most present commodity they can devise for a present gain, so that every man betake himself to the best place he can for the purpose. now though, sir thomas dale have cause such a abundance of corn to be plant that every man have sufficient. yet the supply be send. we come so unfurnished, as quick ease we of our superfluity. to relieve their necessity, he send to the chickahamanias for the tribute corn, sir thom^s. sufficient yet the supply be send. we come so unfurnished, as quick ease we of our superfluity to relieve their necessity he send to the chickahamanias for the tribute corn sir thom^s dale and captain argall have condition for with they. but such a bad answer they return he that he draw together one hundred of his best shot with who he go to chick^hamania. the people in some place use he indifferent, but in most place with much scorn and contempt. tell he he be but sir thomas d^les man and they have pay his master according to condition, but to give any to he they have no such order. neither will they obey he as they have do his master after he have tell they his. master according to condition. but to give any to he, they have no such order. neither will they obey he as they have do his master after he have tell they his authority and that he have the same power to enforce. they that dale, have they dare he to come on shore to fight, presume more of his, not dare than their own valour yearly. see their insolence make no great difficulty to go on shore at oziny, and they as little to encounter he but march from thence towards mamanahunt. they put themselves in the same order. they see, we, lead by their captain kissanacomen, governor of oziny, and so march close along by we each as threaten other who shall first begin. but that night, the same order. they see we lead by their captain kissanacomen, governor of oziny, and so march close along by, we each as threaten other who shall first begin. but that night we quarter against mamanahunt, and they pass the river. the next day we follow they. there be few place in virginia have, then, more plain ground together, nor more plenty of corn, which, although it be but new gather yet they have, hide it in the wood where we can not find it. a good time we spend thus in argue. the cause, the saluage, without fear, stand in troop among we seem, as if their countenance have be sufficient to daunt we. what other practice they have, i know not, but to prevent the worst. saluage, without fear, stand in troop among we, seem as if their countenance have be sufficient to daunt we. what other practice they have, i know not. but to prevent the worst, our captain cause we all to make ready and upon the word, to let fly among they where he appoint other also, he command to seize on they they can for prisoner. all which be do according to our direction. the captain give the word and we present discharge. where twelve lay, twelve saluage slay, twelve prisoner take and peace conclude, some dead, the rest for life sprawl on the ground. twelve more, we ^^oke prisoner, two whereof be brother, two of their eight elder, the one take by sergeant boothe, the other by robert a. rest for life, sprawl on the ground. twelve more we ^^oke prisoner, two whereof be brother, two of their eight elder, the one take by sergeant boothe, the other by robert, a polonian, near one hundred bushel of corn we have for their ransom, which be promise the soldier for a reward, but it be not perform now. opechankanough have agree with our captain for the subject of those people that neither he nor powhatan can ever bring to their obedience, and that he shall make no peace with they without his advice. in our return by oziny with our prisoner, we meet opechankanough who, with much ado, feign with what pain he have, procure their peace, the which to requite they call he the king of ozin^s. by oziny. with our prisoner, we meet opechankanough who, with much ado, feign with what pain he have, procure their peace, the which to requite. they call he the king of ozin^s and bring he from all part many present of bead, copper and such trash as they have here as at many other time we be. behold to captain henry spilman, our interpreter, (@) 108. a gentleman have live long time in this country and sometime a prisoner among the saluage, and do much good service, though, but bad reward. from hence we march towards james town. we have three boat load with corn and other luggage, eleven man cast away. the one of they be more willing to be at james town with the news than james town we have three boat load with corn and other luggage, eleven man cast away, the one of they be more willing to be at james town with the news than the other be overset, and eleven man cast away with the boat, corn and all their provision notwithstanding, this put all the rest of the saluage in that fear, especial in regard of the great league we have with opechankanough, that we follow our labour quiet and in such security that diverse saluage of other nation daily frequent we with what provision they can get and will guide our man on hunt, and oft hunt, for we themselves, captain, yearly have a savage or two so well train up to their piece they be as expert. get and will guide our man on hunt and oft hunt. for we themselves, captain yearly, have a savage or two, so well train up to their piece, they be as expert as any of the english, a bad-presiders, and one he keep purposely to kill, he foul. there be diverse, other have saluage in like manner for their man. thus we live together as if we have be one people all the time. captain yearley stay with we, but such grudge and discontent daily increase among ourselves that upon the arrival of captain argall, send by the council and company to be our governor, captain yearley return for england in the year 1617.. from the write of captain nathaniel powel, william cantrill, sergeant boothe, edward gurganey, during. by the council and company to be our governor, captain yearley return for england in the year 1617.. from the write of captain nathaniel powel, william cantrill, sergeant boothe, edward gurganey: during this time the lady rebecca, alias pocahontas, daughter to powhatan pocahontas, instruction by the diligent care of master john rolfe, her husband and his friend, be teach to speak such english as may well be, understand well, instruct in christianity and be become very formal and civil after our english manner. she have also by he, a child which she love most dear, and the treasurer and company take order both for the maintenance of she and it beside there be diverse person of great rank and quality. have be very kind to she and before the treasurer and company take order both for the maintenance of she and it. beside there be diverse person of great rank and quality. have be very kind to she and before she arrive at london, captain smith, to deserve her former courtesy, make her quality know to the queen, most excellent majesty and her court, and write a little book to this effect to the queen, a abstract whereof follow to the most high and virtuous princess, queen anne of great brittany. most admire, queen, the love i bear, my god, my king and country have so oft embolden i in the worst, of extreme danger, that now honesty do constrain, i presume, thus far beyond myself to present your majesty this short discourse, if ingratitude be. have so oft embolden i in the worst of extreme danger, that now honesty do constrain. i presume thus far beyond myself to present your majesty this short discourse. if ingratitude be a deadly poison to all honest virtue, i must be guilty of that crime. if i shall omit any mean to be thankful. so it be that some ten year ago, be in virginia a relation to queen anne of pocahontas and take prisoner by the power of powhatan, their chief king, i receive from this great savage exceed great courtesy, especial from his son, the most manly, comely, bold spirit i ever see in a savage, and his sister pocahontas, the king, most dear and well-beloved daughter, be but a child of twelve or thirteen. son, the most manly, comely, bold spirit i ever see in a savage, and his sister pocahontas. the king, most dear and well-beloved daughter be but a child of twelve or thirteen year of age who compassionate pitiful heart of my desperate estate, give i much cause to respect she. i be the first christian this proud king and his grim attendant ever see and thus enthral in their barbarous power. i can say i feel the least occasion of want that be in the power of those my mortal foe to prevent, notwithstanding all their threat. after some six week fat among those savage courtier, at the minute of my execution she hazard the beat out of her own brain to save i. and not only that. threat. after some six week, fat among those savage courtier, at the minute of my execution, she hazard the beat out of her own brain to save i, and not only that, but so prevail with her father that i be safe, conduct to james town, where i find about eight and thirty miserable, poor and sick creature to keep possession of all those large territory of. such be the weakness of this poor commonwealth. as have the saluage not feed, we we direct have starve. and this relief, most gracious queen, be common, bring we by this lady pocahontas, notwithstanding all these passage, when inconstant fortune turn our peace to war, this tender virgin will still not spare to dare to visit we, and by she our. by this lady pocahontas. notwithstanding all these passage, when inconstant fortune turn our peace to war, this tender virgin will still not spare to dare to visit we. and by she, our jar have be oft appease and our want still supply, be it the policy of her father thus to employ she, or the ordinance of god thus to make she his instrument, or her extraordinary affection to our nation, i know not, but of this i be sure: when her father, with the utmost of his policy and power, seek to surprise i have but eighteen with i. the dark night can not affright she from. come through the irksome wood and with water eye give i intelligence with her best advice to escape his fury. but eighteen with i, the dark night can not affright she from. come through the irksome wood and with water eye, give i intelligence with her best advice to escape his fury which have he know he have sure slay. she james town with her wild train, she as free, frequent as her father habitation, and during the time of two or three year, she next, under god, be still the instrument to preserve this colony from death, famine and utter confusion which, if in those time have once be^ne dissolve, virginia may have line as it be at our first arrival to this day. since then, this business have be turn and vary by many accident. from that i leave it at it, be most certain after it be at our first arrival to this day. since then this business have be turn and vary by many accident. from that i leave it at it. be most certain, after a long and troublesome war, after my departure, betwixt her father and our colony, all which time she be not hear of about two year after she herself be take prisoner, be so detain near two year long the colony by that mean be relieve peace, conclude and at last reject her barbarous condition. be majy to a e^gl^s^ gentleman with who at this present she i^ in england, ^he first christi^n ^uer of ^hat nation, the first virgi^i^n ever sp^ke en^l^^^^r ^r (). marriage by a e^gl^shman, a matter sure, if my meaning be true. present. she? i^ in england, ^he first christi^n ^uer of ^hat nation, the first virgi^i^n ever sp^ke en^l^^^^r ^r (). marriage by a e^gl^shman, a matter, sure, if my meaning be true, ^^^^^dered and well understand, worthy a prince understanding. thus, most gracious lady, i have relate to your majesty what, at your best leisure, our approve. history will account you at large and do in the time of your majesty life, and however this may be, present you from a more worthy pen i^ can from a more honest heart. as yet i never beg any thing of the state or any, and it be my want of ability and her exceed desert your birth mean and author^tie her birth virtue, want and simplicity do make i. any thing of the state or any, and it be my want of ability and her exceed desert your birth mean and author^tie. her birth virtue, want and simplicity do make i thus bold, humble to beseech your majesty to take this knowledge of, she though it be from one so unworthy to be the reporter as myself, her husband estate not be able to make her fit to attend. your majesty, the most and least i can do be to tell you this, because none so oft have try it as myself and the rather be of so great a spirit, how ever her stature, if she shall not be well receive see this kingdom, may right have a kingdom by her mean, her present love to be of so great a spirit, how ever her stature, if she shall not be well receive see this kingdom, may right have a kingdom by her mean. her present love to we and christianity may turn to such scorn and fury as to divert all this good to the worst of evil. where find so great a queen shall do she some honour, more than she can imagine? for be so kind to your servant and subject will so ravish she with content as endear her dear blood to effect that your majesty and all the king, honest subject, most earnest desire. and so i humble kiss your gracious hand. be about this time prepare to set sail for new-england. i can not stay to do she. the king, honest subject, most earnest desire, and so i humble kiss your gracious hand. be about this time. prepare to set sail for new-england. i can not stay to do she that service. i desire. pocahontas meet in england with captain smith, and she well deserve, but hear she be at branford with diverse of my friend. i go to see she. after a modest salutation, without any word she turn about, obscure her face as not seem well content, and in that humour her husband with diverse other. we all leave she two or three hour, repent myself to have write. she can speak english but not long after she begin to talk and remember i well what courtesy she have do say you do promise. three hour, repent myself to have write. she can speak english, but not long after she begin to talk- and remember i well what courtesy she have- do say: you do promise powhatan, what be you shall be he, and he the like to you. you call he father, be in his land a stranger, and by the same reason so must i do you, which, though i will have excuse, i dare not allow- of that title because she be a king daughter with a well set countenance. she say: be you not afraid to come into my father country and cause fear in he and all his people. but i and fear you here, i shall call you father. i tell you then i will. and come into my father country and cause fear in he and all his people. but i and fear you here, i shall call you father. i tell you then i will and you shall call i child, and so i will be for ever and ever your countryman. they do tell we always you be dead and i know no other till i come to plymouth. yet powhatan do command vitamatomakkin to seek you and know the truth, because your countryman will lie. much this savage one of powhatans council vitamatomack, observation of his usage be among they hold a understanding fellow, the king, purposely send he, as they say, to number the people here and inform he well what we be and our state arrive at plim^th. among they hold a understanding fellow, the king purposely send he, as they say, to number the people here and inform he well what we be and our state. arrive at plim^th according to his direction he get a long stick whereon by notch he do think to have keep the number of all the man he can see, but he be quick, weary of that task. come to london where by chance i meet. he have renew our acquaintance where many be desirous to hear and see his behaviour. he tell i powhatan do, bid he to find i out to show he our god, the king, queen and prince. i so much have tell they of concern god. i tell he the best i can, the. he to find i out to show he our god, the king, queen and prince. i so much have tell they of concern god. i tell he the best i can. the king i hear he have see and the rest he shall see when he will. he deny ever to have see the king till by circumstance he be satisfy he have. then he reply very sad. you give powhatan a white dog which powhatan feed as himself. but your king, give i nothing and i be better than your white dog the small time i stay in london. diverse courtier and other, my acquaintance pocahontas, her entertainment with the queen, have go with i to see she that general conclude they do think god have a. i stay in london, diverse courtier and other, my acquaintance pocahontas, her entertainment with the queen, have go with i to see she that general conclude they do think god have a great hand in her conversion and they have see many english lady worse favour proportion and behaviour and as since i have hear it, please both the king and queen, majesty honourable to esteem, she accompany with that honourable lady, the lady de la ware, and that honourable lord, her husband and diverse other person of good quality, both public at the mask and otherwise, to her great satisfaction and content, which doubtless she will have deserve. have she live to arrive in virginia. the government devolve to captain samuel argall 1617. the treasurer council and otherwise, to her great satisfaction and content, which doubtless she will have deserve, have she live to arrive in virginia. the government devolve to captain samuel argall, 1617.. the treasurer, council and company, sir thomas smith, treasurer, have well furnish captain samuel argall, the lady pocahontas, alias rebecca, with her husband and other in the good ship. call the george it. please god, at gravesend, to take this young lady to his mercy, where she make not more sorrow for her unexpected death than joy to the beholder to hear and see she m^ke so religious and godly a end. her little child, thomas rolfe, therefore, be leave at plim^th with sir lewis stuk that desire the keep of it. the death of pocahontas, captain hamar, his vice-admiral. and godly a end. her little child, thomas rolfe. therefore be leave at plim^th with sir lewis stuk that desire the keep of it. the death of pocahontas. captain hamar, his vice-admiral, be go before but he find he at plymouth in march. they set sail 1617.. and in may he arrive at james town where he be kind entertain by captain yearley and his company in a martial order who right hand file be lead by a indian. in james town he find but five or six house, the church down the palizado, break the bridge in piece, the well of fresh water, spoil the storehouse they use for the church, the marketplace and street and all other spare place, plant with tobacco, the saluage as frequent. bridge in piece, the well of fresh water, spoil the storehouse they use for the church, the marketplace and street and all other spare place. plant with tobacco the saluage as frequent in their house as themselves, whereby they be become expert in our arm and have a great many in their custody and possession. the colony disperse all about plant tobacco. captain argall not like those, proceed, alter they agreeable to his own mind, take the best order he can for repair those defect which do exceed trouble. we we be constrain every year to build and repair our old cottage which be always a decay in all place of the country. yea, the very court of guard build by sir thomas dale be ready to fall. build and repair our old cottage, which be always a decay in all place of the country. yea, the very court of guard build by sir thomas dale be ready to fall and the palizado not sufficient to keep out hog. their number of people be about 400. but not past 200. fit for husbandry and tillage. we find there in all one hundred twenty eight cattle and fourscore and eight goat, beside innumerable number of swine and good plenty of corn in some place, 1000 bushel of corn from the saluage. yet the next year the captain send out a frigate and a pinnace that bring we near six hundred bushel more, which do great relieve the whole colony, for from the tenant we seldom have above. the captain send out a frigate and a pinnace that bring we near six hundred bushel more which do great relieve the whole colony, for from the tenant we seldom have above four hundred bushel of rend corn to the store and there be not remain of the company company past four, and fifty man, woman and child, sir thomas smith, treasurer, this year have plant our field, come a great drought and such a cruel storm of hail which do such spoil both to the corn and tobacco that we reap but small profit. the magazine that come in, the george be five month in her passage, prove very bad condition. but ere sh^ arrive we have gather and make up our tobacco the best at three. magazine that come in the george be five month, in her passage prove very bad condition. but ere sh^ arrive, we have gather and make up our tobacco, the best at three shilling the pound, the rest at eighteen penny. to supply, we, the council and company, with all possible care and diligence, furnish a good ship of some two hundred and fifty ton with two hundred people and the lord ware. they set sail in april and take their course by the western isle where the governor of the, i will of saint michael, receive the lord ware and honourable feast, he with all the content he can give, he go from thence. they be long trouble with contrary wind, in which time many of they fall. the lord ware and honourable feast, he, with all the content he can give, he go from thence. they be long trouble with contrary wind, in which time many of they fall very sick. the death of the lord ware, thirty die, one of which number be that. most honourable lord governor, the lord ware who, most noble and generous disposition be well know, to his great cost, have be most forward in this business for his country. good, yet this tender state of virginia be not grow to that maturity to maintain such state and pleasure as be fit for such a personage with so brave and great attendance, for some small number of adventurous gentleman to make discovery and lie in garrison ready upon any occasion. pleasure as be fit for such a personage with so brave and great attendance. for some small number of adventurous gentleman to make discovery and lie in garrison, ready upon any occasion to keep in fear the inconstant saluage, nothing be more requisite but to have more to wait and play than work, or more commander and officer than industrious labourer. be not so necessary. for in virginia a plain soldier that can use a pickax and spade be better than five knight, although they be knight that can break a lance for man of great place not enure to those encounter when they find thing not suitable, grow many time so discontent they forget themselves and oft become so careless that a discontent melancholy bring they to. place not enure to those encounter. when they find thing not suitable, grow many time so discontent they forget themselves and oft become so careless that a discontent, melancholy bring they to much sorrow and to other much misery. at last they stand in for the coast of new-england where they meet a small frenchman, rich of bever and other fur, though we have here but small knowledge of the coast nor country. they be relieve in new-england, yet they take such a abundance of fish and fowl and so well refresh themselves there with wood and water as, by the help of god, thereby have be at sea sixteen week. get to virginia who, without this relief, have be in great danger to perish. the frenchman make. and water as, by the help of god, thereby have be at sea sixteen week get to virginia who without this relief have be in great danger to perish. the frenchman make they such a feast with such a abundance of variety of fish, fowl and fruit as they all admire, and little expect that wild wilderness can afford such wonderful abundance of plenty. in this ship come about two hundred man but very little provision, and the ship call the treasurer come in again not long after with forty passenger. the lord wares ship lie in virginia three month. we victual she with threescore bushel of corn and eight hogshead of flesh, beside other victual she spend while they tarry there. this ship bring we advice that in virginia three month. we victual, she, with threescore bushel of corn and eight hogshead of flesh, beside other victual she spend while they tarry there. this ship bring we advice that great multitude be a prepare in england to be send and rely much upon that victual they shall find here. whereupon our captain call a council and write to the council here in england the estate of the colony, and what a great misery will ensue if they send not provision as well as people and what they do, suffer for want of skilful husbandman and mean to set their plough on work, have as good ground as any man can desire and about forty bull and ox, but they want man to bring they to. husbandman and mean to set their plough on work, have as good ground as any man can desire and about forty bull and ox, but they want man to bring they to labour and iron for the plough and harness for the cattle. some thirty or forty acre we have sow with one plough but it stand so long on the ground before it be reap, it be most shake and the rest spoil with the cattle and rat in the barn. but no better corn can be for the quantity. richard killingbeck: be with the captain at kekoughtan. richard killingbeck and four other murder by the saluage desire leave to return to his wife at charles hundred. he go to james town by water. there he get. captain at kekoughtan, richard killingbeck and four other, murder by the saluage, desire leave to return to his wife at charles hundred, he go to james town by water. there he get four more to go with, he by land. but it prove that he intend to go trade with the indies of chickahamania where make show of the great quantity of truck they have, which the saluage perceive partly for their truck, partly for revenge of some friend they pretend shall have be slay by captain yearley. one of they, with a english piece, shoot killingbeck dead. the other, saluage, assault the rest and slay they, strip they and take what they have. but fear this murder will come to light and may cause they to suffer. killingbeck dead, the other saluage, assault the rest and slay they, strip they and take what they have. but fear this murder will come to light and may cause they to suffer, for it will now proceed to the perfection of villainy. for present, they rob their machacomocko house of the town, their church and storehouse, steal all the indian treasure thereout and flee into the wood, as other indian relate. on sunday, follow one, farfax that dwell a mile from the town. go to church, farfax, three child and two boy also murder. leave his wife and three small child safe at home, as he think, and a young youth she suppose prayer to be do. leave the child and go to meet her husband, present after. wife and three small child, safe at home, as he think, and a young youth she suppose prayer to be. do leave the child and go to meet her husband present. after come, three or four of those fugitive saluage enter the house and slay a boy and three child and also another youth that steal out of the church in prayer time. meet they be likewise murder. of this disaster the captain send to opechankanough for satisfaction, but he excuse the matter as altogether ignorant of it. at the same time the saluage that be rob be complain to opechankanough and much fear the english will be revenge on they, so that opechankanough send to captain argall to assure he the peace shall never be break by. rob be complain to opechankanough and much fear the english will be revenge on they. so that opechankanough send to captain argall to assure he the peace shall never be break by he desire that he will not revenge the injury of those fugitive upon the innocent people of that town, which town he shall have, and send he a basket of earth as possession give of it and promise so soon as possible they can catch these robber to send he their head for satisfaction. but he never perform it. samuel argall, john rolfe. a relation from master john rolfe, june 15. 1618.. concern the state of our new commonwealth. it be somewhat better, for we have sufficient to content ourselves, though not in such abundance, as relation from master john rolfe, june 15.. 1618. concern the state of our new commonwealth. it be somewhat better, for we have sufficient to content ourselves, though not in such abundance as be vain. report: in england powhatan die this last april. powhatans death. yet the indian continue in peace. itopatin, his second brother, succeed. he, and both he and opechankanough have confirm our former league. on the eleven of may, about ten of the clock, in the night, hailstone eight inch about, happen a most fearful tempest, but it continue not pass half a hour, which pour down hailstone eight or nine inch about that none dare go out of their door, and though it tear the bark and leaf of the tree, yet we find not. which pour down hailstone, eight or nine inch about that, none dare go out of their door, and though it tear the bark and leaf of the tree, yet we find not. they hurt either man or beast. it fall only about james town, for but a mile to the east and twenty to the west. there be no hail at all. thus, in peace, every man follow his building and plant without any accident worthy of note. sir edwin sands, treasurer, master john fare^, deputy, some private difference happen, betwixt, captain bruster and captain argall, and captain argall and the company here in england, but of they i be not full inform, neither be they here for any use and therefore unfit to be remember in december. and captain argall and the company here in england, but of they i be not full inform, neither be they here for any use and therefore unfit to be remember. in december one captain stallings, a old planter in those part, be employ by they of the west country for a fish voyage in new-england, fall foul of a frenchman who he take, leave his own ship to return for england himself with a small company, remain in the french bark some small time after upon the coast and thence return to winter in virginia. the government surrender to sir george yearley for to begin with the year of our lord, 1619.. there arrive a little pinnace private from england about easter for captain argall who take order. government surrender to sir george yearley for to begin with the year of our lord, 1619.. there arrive a little pinnace private from england about easter for captain argall, who take order for his affair within four or five day, return in she and leave for his deputy captain, nathaniel powel, on the e^ighteenth of april, which be but ten or twelve day after arrive, sir george yearley, by who we understand sir edwin sands be choose treasurer and master, john farrar, his deputy, and what great supply be a prepare to be send. we which do ravish we so much with joy and content, we think ourselves now full satisfy for our long toil and labour and as happy man as any in the world. notwithstanding such, do ravish we so much with joy and content. we think ourselves now full satisfy for our long toil and labour and as happy man as any in the world. notwithstanding, such a accident happen, captain stallings: the next day. his ship be cast away and he not long after slay in a private quarrel. sir george, yearly to begin his government, add to be of his council captain francis west, captain nathaniel powel, master john pory, master john rolfe and master william wickam and master samuel macocke, and propound to have a general assembly with all expedition. upon the twelve of this month come in a pinnace of captain bargrave and on the seventeen captain lownes and one master euans who intend to plant themselves at waraskoyack. all expedition. upon the twelve of this month come in a pinnace of captain bargrave, and on the seventeen captain lownes and one master euans who intend to plant themselves at waraskoyack. waraskoyack plant, but now ophechankanough will not come at. we that cause, we suspect his former promise in may come in the margaret of bristol with four and thirty man all well and in health and also many devout gift, and we be much trouble in examine some scandalous letter send into england to disgrace this country with barrenness, to discourage the adventurer and so bring it and we to ruin. and confusion notwithstanding, we find by they of best experience a industrious man. not other way employ may well tend four acre of corn and so bring it and we to ruin. and confusion notwithstanding, we find by they of best experience, a industrious man, not other way employ may well tend four acre of corn and 1000 plant of tobacco, and where they say a acre will yield but three or four barrel, we have ordinary four or five, but of new ground six, seven and eight, and a barrel of pease and beanes which we esteem as good as two, of corn which be after thirty or forty bushel a acre a barrel, they account four bushel, so that one man may provide corn for five and apparel for two by the profit of his tobacco. they say also english wheat will yield but sixteen bushel a acre, and we have one man may provide corn for five and apparel for two by the profit of his tobacco. they say also english wheat will yield. but sixteen bushel a acre and we have reap thirty beside to manure the land. no place have more white and blue marble than here, have we but carpenter to build and make cart and plough, and skilful man that know how to use they and train up our cattle to draw they, which, though we endeavour to effect, yet our want of experience bring but little to perfection. but plant tobaco, and yet of that many be so covetous to have much, they make little good. beside there be so many sofisticate tobaco-mungers in england, be it never so bad, they will sell. and yet of that many be so covetous to have much, they make little good. beside there be so many sofisticate tobaco-mungers in england, be it never so bad. they will sell it for verinas, and the trash that remain shall be virginia. such devilish, bad mind we know some of our own countryman do bear, not only to the business but also to our mother england herself. can they, or dare they, as free defame, she, the 25. of june, come in the trial with corn and cattle, all in safety, which take from we clear all fear of famine? then our governor and council cause burgess to be, choose in all place their time of parliament and meet at a general assembly where all matter be. clear all fear of famine, then our governor and council cause burgess to be, choose in all place their time of parliament and meet at a general assembly where all matter be debate. think expedient for the good of the colony and captain ward be send to monahigan in new england to fish in may and return the latter end of may, but to small purpose, for they want salt. the george also be send to newfoundland with the cape merchant. there she buy fish that defray her charge and make a good voyage in seven week. about the last of august come in a dutch man of war that sell, we twenty negars, and japazou, king of patawomeck, come to james town to desire two ship to. week, about the last of august, come in a dutch man of war that sell we twenty negars, and japazou, king of patawomeck, come to james town to desire two ship to come trade in his river for a more plentiful year of corn have not be in a long time yet very contagious and by the treachery of one poule in a manner turn heathen. we be very jealous. the saluage will surprise we. the governor have bound four corporation which be the company, the university, four corporation, name the governor and glebe land ensign wil spencer and thomas barret, a sergeant with some other of the ancient planter. be set free. we be the first farmer that go forth and have choose place to their content. wil spencer and thomas barret, a sergeant, with some other of the ancient planter be set free. we be the first farmer that go forth and have choose place to their content so that now know their own land. they strive who shall exceed in building and plant. the four of november, the come in with all her people, lusty and well. not long after one master dirme, send out by some of plymouth for new-england, arrive in a bark of five ton and return the next spring, notwithstanding the ^il rumour of the unwholsomnesse of james town, the new comer that be plant at old p^spaheghe, little more than a mile from it, have their health better than any in the country. captain ward exploit in december. james town. the new comer that be plant at old p^spaheghe, little more than a mile from it, have their health better than any in the country. captain ward exploit in december captain ward return from pat^womeck. the people there deal false with he so that he take 800.. bushel of corn from. they perforce captain woddiffe of bristol come in not long after with all his people, lusty and in health, and we have two particular governor send we under the title of deputy to the company, the one to have charge of the college land, the other of the company. now you be to understand that because there have be many complaint against the governor, captain and officer in virginia for buy and sell ^en and land, the other of the company. now you be to understand that because there have be many complaint against the governor, captain and officer in virginia for buy and sell ^en and b^^es, or to b^^ set over from one to another for a yearly rent, be ^eld in (@) a ^^^ng most intolerable o^, that ^he tenant or lawful seruan^s shall b^ put ^^om ^^^ir p^^ces or abridge their covenant ^as ^o ^di^us (@) the ^ery (@) ^h^re^^ b^^ught a great scandal to the general action t^^ () good and wor^h^ () and appoint a hundred man sho^^ () provide to serve and attend the gover^^^^ () government, which number he be, to make good at his departure and (@) to his successor in like manner. fifty. hundred man sho^^ () provide to serve and attend the gover^^^^ () government, which number he be, to make good at his departure, and (@) to his successor in like manner, fifty to the deputy-governour of the college land and fifty to the deputy of the company land, fifty to the treasurer, to the secretary, five and twenty and more to the marshal and c^pe merchant, which they be also to leave to their successor, and likewise to every particular officer, such a competency as he may live well in his office without oppress any under their charge. which good law i pray god it be well observe, and then we may true say in virginia we be the most happy people in the world. by i john. their charge. which good law i pray god it be well observe. and then we may true say in virginia we be the most happy people in the world. by i, john rolfe, there go this year by the company, record 11.. ship and 1216.. the number of ship and man, person to be thus dispose on tenant for the governor land, fourscore beside fifty, send the former spring for the company land. a hundred and thirty for the college, a hundred for the glebe land. fifty, young woman to make wife. ninety servant for public service. fifty and fifty more who labour be to bring up thirty of the infidel child. the rest be send to private plantation. gift give two person unknown have. give fair plate. service, fifty and fifty more who labour be to bring up thirty of the infidel child. the rest be send to private plantation gift give two person unknown have, give fair plate and ornament for two communion table, the one at the college, the other at the church of mistress mary robinson, who, towards the foundation, give two hundred pound, and another unknown person send to the treasurer five hundred and fifty pound for the bring up of the savage child in christianity. master nicholas farrar, decease, have by his will give three hundred pound to the college to be pay when there shall be ten young saluage place in it. in the mean time, four and twenty pound yearly to be distribute unto three discreet and godly. the college to be pay when there shall be ten young saluage place in it. in the mean time, four and twenty pound yearly to be distribute unto three discreet and godly young man in the colony to bring up three wild young infidel in some good course of life. also, there be grant eleven patent, but few perform. they upon condition to transport people and cattle to increase the plantation. a desperate sea-fight betwixt two spanish man of war and a small english ship. at the i will of dominica go to virginia by captain anthony chester. the earl of southampton treasurer, and m john ferrar, deputy, have take our journey towards virginia in the begin of february. a ship call the margaret and john of one anthony chester, the earl of southampton, treasurer, and m john ferrar, deputy, have take our journey towards virginia in the begin of february. a ship, call the margaret and john, of one hundred and sixty tun, eight iron piece and a falcon with eighty passenger beside sailor after many tempest and foul weather, about the fourteen of march we be in thirteen degree and a half of northerly latitude where we descry a ship at hull. it be but a fair gale of wind. we edge towards she to see what she be, but she present, set sail and run we quick out of sight. this make we keep our course for mettalina and the next day pass dominica. we come to a anchor at guardalupo, a frenchman set sail and run we quick, out of sight. this make we keep our course for mettalina. and the next day pass dominica, we come to a anchor at guardalupo, a frenchman cast away at guardalupo to take in fresh water. six frenchman there, cast away sixteen month ago, come aboard we, they tell we a spanish man of war. but seven day before be seek his consort, and this be she. we descry at hull at m^uis. we intend to refresh ourselves. have be eleven week pester in this unwholesome ship. but there we find two tall ship with the hollander colour. but necessity force we on shore. we anchor fair by they, the spaniard, begin and in friendly manner send to hale they. but see they. two tall ship with the hollander colour, but necessity force, we on shore, we anchor fair by. they, the spaniard begin and in friendly manner send to hale they, but see they be spaniard, retire to our ship. they send such a volley of shot after we that shoot the boat, split the oar and some through the clothes, yet not a man hurt, and then follow with their great ordnance that many time over-racked our ship, which be so cumber with the passenger provision. our ordnance be not well fit, nor any thing, as it shall have be, but perceive what they be. we fit ourselves the best we can to prevent a mischief. see they warp themselves to windward. we think it not good to be. shall have be, but perceive what they be. we fit ourselves the best we can to prevent a mischief. see, they warp themselves to windward. we think it not good to be board on both side at a anchor. we intend to set sail, but that the vice-admiral batter so hard our starboard side. the vice-admiral shoot between wind and water that we fall to our business and answer their unkindness with such fair shot from a demiculver that shoot, she, between wind and water, whereby she be glad to leave. we and her admiral together come fair by our quarter. he take in his holland flag and put forth his spanish colour. and so hale we, we quiet and quick, answer he both what we be and come fair by our quarter. he take in his holland flag and put forth his spanish colour. and so hale we, we, quiet and quick answer. he both what we be and whither bind, relate the effect of our commission and the cause of our come thither for water. and not to annoy any of the king of spain subject, nor any she command, we amain for the king of spain, we reply with enlarge, the particular. what friend both the king, our master be, and as we will do no wrong, we will take none. they command, we aboard to show our commission, which we refuse. but if they will send their boat to we willing, they shall see it the manner of their fight. but for they command we aboard to show our commission, which we refuse, but if they will send their boat to we, willing, they shall see it the manner of their fight. but for answer they make two great shot at we with a volley of small shot which cause we to leave the deck. then, with many ill word, they lay we aboard, which cause we to raise our main sail and give the word to our small shot, which lie close and ready. that pay they in such sort they quick retire. the fight continue half a hour as if we have be environ with fire and smoke, until they discover the waste of our ship, naked where they brave board. we loof for loof haste with pike. a hour, as if we have be environ with fire and smoke. until they discover the waste of our ship, naked where they brave board. we loof for loof haste with pike and sword to enter, but it please god so to direct our captain and encourage our man with valour that our pike be former place under our half deck and certain shot lie close for that purpose under the port hole. encounter they so rude that their fury be not only rebate but their hastiness intercept and their whole company beat back. many of our man be hurt, but i be sure they have two for one. in the end. they be violent repulse until they be reinforce to charge ag^in^ by their comm^^ds wh^ stand. our man be hurt, but i be sure they have two for one in the end they be violent repulse until they be reinforce to charge ag^in^ by their comm^^ds wh^ stand upon their honour, think it a great indignity to be so, affront which cause a second charge and that answer with a second beat back whereat the captain grow iurage and constrain they to come on again afresh, which they do so effectual that questionless it have wrought a alteration if the god that toss monarchy and rear mountain have not teach we to toss our p^kes with prosperous event and pour out a volley of small shot among they, whereby that valiant commander be slay and many of his soldier drop down likewise on the. toss our p^kes with prosperous event and pour out a volley of small shot among they, whereby that valiant commander be slay and many of his soldier drop down likewise on the top of the hatch. this we see with our eye and rejoice with it at our heart. the captain slay so that we may perceive good success. come on, our captain present, take advantage of their discomfiture, though with much commiseration, of that resolute captain, and not only ply they again with our ordnance but have more shot under the pike which be bestow to good purpose, and amaze our enemy with the suddenness. among the rest, one lucas, our carpenter mate, must not be forget a worthy exploit of lucas, who perceive away how to. to good purpose and amaze our enemy with the suddenness. among the rest, one, lucas, our carpenter mate, must not be forget a worthy exploit of lucas, who perceive away how to annoy they as they be, thus puzzle and, in a confusion, draw out a minion under the half deck and there bend it upon they in such a manner that, when it be fire, the case of stone and piece of iron fall upon they so thick as clear the deck and slay many, and in short time we see few assailant but such as creep from place to place, covert from the fury of our shot, which now be thick than they, for although have, far as we may commend our enemy, they have do. as creep from place to place, covert from the fury of our shot, which now be thick than they, for although have, far as we may commend our enemy, they have do something worthy of commendation. yet either want man or be overtake with the unlooked for valour of our man, they now begin to shrink and give we leave to be wanton with our advantage. yet we can only use but four piece of ordnance, but they serve the turn as well as all the rest. for she be shoot so oft between wind and water. we see they be willing to leave we, but by reason she be fast in the latch of our cable which, in haste of weigh our anchor, hang aloof, she can. water. we see they be willing to leave we but by reason she be fast in the latch of our cable which, in haste of weigh our anchor hang aloof. she can not clear herself, as she wrought to do, till one cut the cable with a axe and be slay by free. we have be a board we two hour and a half see herself clear all the shot we have play on both side, which last till we be out of shot. than we discover the vice-admiral come to her assistance who begin a far off to ply we with their ordnance and put we in mind. we have another work in hand whereupon we separate the dead and hurt body and man, the ship with far off to ply we with their ordnance and put we in mind. we have another work in hand, whereupon we separate the dead and hurt body and man, the ship with the rest, and be so well, encourage we, waif they amain the admiral, stand aloof off, and the other will not come within falcon, shoot where she lie, batter we till she receive another payment from a demiculver which make she bear with the shore for smooth water to mend her leak. the next morning they both come up again with we, as if they have determine to devour we at once. but it seem it be but a bravado, though. they forsake not our quarter for a time within musket, shoot yet all the night. they have determine to devour we at once, but it seem it be but a bravado, though. they forsake not our quarter for a time within musket shoot yet all the night. only. they keep we company but make not a shot, during which time we have leisure to provide we better than before. but, god bethank, they make only but a show of another assault. ere sudden, the vide-admiral fall a starne and the other lie shake in the wind, and so they both leave we, the fight continue six hour and be the more unwelcome because we be so ill provide and have no intent to sight nor give occasion to disturb they the event of the fight. as for the loss of man, if religion, unwelcome because we be so ill provide and have no intent to sight nor give occasion to disturb they the event of the fight. as for the loss of man, if religion have not teach we what, by the providence of god, be bring to pass, yet daily experience may inform we of the danger of war and peril at sea, by storm, tempest, shipwreck, encounter with pirate, meet with enemy, cross wind, long voyage, unknown shore, barbarous nation, and a hundred inconvenience of which human policy be not capable, nor man conjecture apprehensive. we lose doctor bohun, a worthy, valiant gentleman, a long time bring up among the most learned surgeon and physician in netherlands, and this his second journey to virginia, and seven slay out right. doctor bohun, a worthy, valiant gentleman, a long time bring up among the most learned surgeon and physician in netherlands, and this his second journey to virginia. and seven slay out right, two die short of their wound, sixte^n^ be shoot who limb, god be, thank be, recover without maim and now settle in virginia. how many they lose, we know not, but we see a great many lie on the deck and their skupper run with blood. they be abou^ three hundred ton a piece each. sixteen or twenty brass piece, captain chester, who in this fight have behave himself like a most vigilant, resolute and a courageous soldier, as also our honest and valiant master, do still so comfort and encourage we by all the mean. this fight have behave himself like a most vigilant, resolute and a courageous soldier, as also our honest and valiant master do. still so comfort and encourage we by all the mean they can. at last, to all our great content, we arrive in virginia and from thence return safe to england. the name of the adventurer for virginia, alphabetical set down according to a print book set out by the treasurer and council in this present year, 1620.. a. sir william aliffe, sir roger aston, sir anthony ashley, sir john akland, sir anthony aucher, sir robert askwith, doctor francis anthony. charles. anthony. edward allen, edmund allen, esquire, john allen, thomas allen, william atkinson, esquire, richard ashcroft, nicholas andrews, john andrews the elder, john andrews the young, james. robert askwith. doctor. francis anthony. charles anthony. edward allen. edmund allen. esquire. john allen. thomas allen. william atkinson. esquire. richard ashcroft. nicholas andrews, john andrews the elder, john andrews the young. james ascough, giles allington, morris, abbot, ambrose asten. james askew. anthony abdey, john arundel, esquire b edward, earl of bedford, james lord, bishop of bath and well. sir francis barrington, sir morice barkley, sir john benet, sir thomas beaumont, sir amias bamfield, sir john bourcher, sir edmund bowyer, sir thomas bludder, sir george bolles, sir john bingley, sir thomas button, sir henry beddingfield. company of barber-surgeon. company of baker. richard banister. john bank, miles, bank. thomas barber. william bonham. james bryerley, william barner. anthony barner, esquire. william brewster. richard brooke. hugh brooker, esquire, ambrose brewsey. john brooke. barber-surgeon company of baker: richard banister, john bank, miles bank. thomas barber, william bonham, james bryerley, william barner, anthony barner, esquire, william brewster, richard brooke, hugh brooker, esquire, ambrose brewsey, john brooke, matthew bromridge, christopher brooke, esquire, martin bond, gabriel beadle, john beadle, david bear, edward barnes, john badger, edmund branduell, robert bowyer, esquire, bobert bateman, thomas britton, nicholas benson, edward bishop, peter burgoney, thomas burgoney, robert burgoney, christopher peter benson, john baker, john bustoridge, francis burl^y, william browne, robert barker, samuel burnham, edward barkley, william bennet, captain, edward brewster, thomas brocket, john bullock, george bache, thomas bayly, william barkley, george butler, timothy bathurst, george burton, thomas bret, captain john brough, thomas baker, john blunt, thomas bayly, richard and edward blunt, minion burrell, richard blackmore, william b^ck, benjamin. thomas bayly, william barkley, george butler, timothy bathurst, george burton, thomas bret, captain john brough, thomas baker, john blunt, thomas bayly, richard and edward blunt, minion burrell, richard blackmore, william b^ck, benjamin brand, john busbridge, william burrell, william barret, francis baldwin, edward b^rber, humphrey, basse, robert bell, matthew bromrick, john beaumond, george barkley, peter bartle, thomas bretton, john blount, arthur bromfeld, esquire, william b^rbloke, charles beck c. george lord, archbishop of canterbury. william lord cranborne, now earl of salisbury. william lord compton, now earl of north-hampton. william lord cavendish, now earl of devonshire. richard, earl of clanricard. sir william cavendish, now lord cavendish. grace lord chandos, sir henry cary, sir george caluert, sir lionel cranfield, sir edward cecil, sir robert cotten, sir oliver cromwell, sir anthony cope, sir. clanricard, sir william cavendish, now lord cavendish, grace. lord chandos, sir henry cary, sir george caluert, sir lionel cranfield, sir edward cecil, sir robert cotten, sir oliver cromwell, sir anthony cope, sir walter cope, sir edward carr, sir thomas conisbie, sir george cary, sir edward conwey, sir walter chute, sir edward culpeper, sir henry cary, captain. sir william craven, sir walter covert, sir george coppin, sir george chute, sir thomas coventry, sir john cutts, lady cary. company of clothworker city of chichester. robert chamberlain, richard chamberlain, francis covill, william coyse, esquire. abraham chamberlain, thomas carpenter, anthony crew, richard cox, william crosley, james chatfeild, richard caswell, john cornelis, randall carter- execut^rs of randall carter. william canning, edward carve, esquire. thomas cannon, esquire. richard champion. rawley crashaw. henry collins, henry. crew: richard cox, william crosley, james chatfeild, richard caswell, john cornelis, randall carter- execut^rs of randall carter. william canning, edward carve, esquire. thomas cannon. esquire. richard champion. rawley crashaw. henry collins, henry cromwell, john cooper, richard cooper, jo^n casson, thomas colth^rst, all^n cotten, edward cage, abraham carthwright, robert coppin, thomas conock, jo^n clapham, thomas church, william carpenter, laurence campe, james cambell, christopher cl^theroe, matthew cooper, georg^ chamber captain john cook. captain thomas conwey, esquire. edward culpeper, esquire. master william crashaw, abraham colm^r. john culpeper, edmund colbey, richard cooper, robert creswell, john cage, esquire. matthew cave, william crowe, abraham carpenter, john crowe, thomas cordell, richard connock, esquire. william compton, william chester, th^mas covel, richard carmarden, esquire. william and paul canning, h^nry cromwell, esquire. simon codrington, clement chichley, james cullemore. crowe, abraham carpenter, john crowe, thomas cordell, richard connock, esquire. william compton, william chester, th^mas covel, richard carmarden, esquire. william and paul canning. h^nry cromwell, esquire. simon codrington, clement chichley, james cullemore, william cantrell d richard, earl of dorset, edward lord d^nny, sir john digbie, now lord digbie. sir john doderidge, sir draw drewry the elder, sir thomas dennis, sir robert drewry, sir john davers, sir dudley dig, sir marmaduke dorrel, sir thomas dale, sir thomas denton. company of draper. thomas bond, esquire. david bent, esquire of dyer, town of dover. master richard dea^e. alderman henry dawkes, edward dichfield, william dunne, john davis, matthew d^qu^st^r, philip durdent, abraham dawes, john dike, thomas draper, lancelot davis, rowley dawsey. william dobson, esquire. anthony dyot, esquire. avery, dranfield, roger die john. dawkes, edward dichfield, william dunne, john davis, matthew d^qu^st^r, philip durdent, abraham dawes, john dike, thomas draper, lancelot davis rowley dawsey, william dobson, esquire, anthony dyot, esquire, avery dranfield, roger die, john downes, john drake, john delbridge, benjamin decro^, thomas dyke, jeffery duppa, daniel darnelly, sara draper, clement and henry dawkne^ e thomas, earl of exeter, sir thomas euerfield, sir francis egiock, sir robert edolph, john eldred, esquire. william euans, richard euans, hugh euans, ralph ewens, esquire, john elkin, robert euelin, nicholas exton, john exton, george etheridge f, sir moyle finch, sir henry fanshaw, sir thomas freak, sir peter fretchuile, sir william fl^^twood, sir henry fane. company of fishmonger. john fletcher, john farmer, martin fre^man, esquire, ralph freeman, william and ralph fr^^man. michael fetiplace, william fettiplace. thomas forrest. freak, sir peter fretchuile, sir william fl^^twood, sir henry fane, company of fishmonger john fletcher, john farmer, martin fre^man, esquire, ralph freeman, william and ralph fr^^man. michael fetiplace, william fettiplace, thomas forrest, edward fl^etwood, esquire, william f^lgate, william field, nichol^s f^rrar, john farrar, giles francis, edward faucet, richard farrington, john franklin, richard frith, john ferne, george farmer, thomas francis, john fenner, nicholas fuller, esquire, thomas f^xall, william fl^et, peter frank, esquire, richard fishborne, william faldoe, john fletcher and company william ferrars. g lady elizabeth grace, sir john grace, sir william godolfine, sir thomas gate, sir william gee, sir ri^hard grobham, sir william garaway, sir francis goodwin, sir george goring, sir thomas grantham, company of grocer, company of goldsmith, company of girdler john jeer, john gardiner, richard gardiner, john. gee, sir ri^hard grobham, sir william garaway, sir francis goodwin, sir george goring, sir thomas grantham, company of grocer, company of goldsmith, company of girdler, john jeer, john gardiner, richard gardiner, john gilbert, thomas grave, john grace, nicholas griece, richard goddard, thomas gipps, peter gate, thomas gibbs, esquire, laurence greene, william greenwell, robert garset, robert gore, thomas gouge, francis glanuile, esquire g henry, earl of huntingdon, lord theophilus haward l walden, sir john harrington, l harington, sir john hollis, now lord hautein, sir thomas holecroft, sir william harris, sir thomas harefleet, sir george haiward, sir warwick heale, sir baptist hicks, sir john hanham, sir thomas horwell, sir thomas hewit, sir william herrick, sir eustace hart, sir pory huntley, sir arthur harris, sir edward heron, sir persevall hart, sir. heale, sir baptist hicks, sir john hanham, sir thomas horwell, sir thomas hewit, sir william herrick, sir eustace hart, sir pory huntley, sir arthur harris, sir edward heron, sir persevall hart, sir ferdinando heiborne, sir laurence hide. master hugh hamersley. alderman master richard heron. alderman richard humble. esquire master richard edward harrison, george holeman, robert hill, griffin hinton, john hawkins, william hancocke, john harper, george hawger, john holt, john huntley, jeremy heiden, ralph hamer, ralph hamer junior. john hodgeson, john hanford, thomas harris, richard howell, thomas henshaw, leonard harwood, tristram hill. francis haselridge, tobias hinson, peter heightley, george hawkenson, thomas hackshaw, charles hawkens, john hodgis, william holland, robert hartley, gregory herst, thomas hodgis, william hodgis, roger harris, john harris m. john haiward, james haiward, nicholas hide, esquire. john. heightley. george hawkenson, thomas hackshaw, charles hawkens, john hodgis, william holland, robert hartley, gregory herst. thomas hodgis, william hodgis, roger harris, john harris m. john haiward. james haiward, nicholas hide. esquire. john hare. esquire. william hackwell. esquire hoogan humphrey hanford. william haselden, nicholas hooker. doctor anthony hunten, john hodsale, george hooker, anthony hinton, john hogsell, thomas hampton, william hicks, william holiland, ralph harison, harman harison i. sir thomas jermyn, sir robert johnson, sir arthur ingram, sir francis jones. company of ironmonger. company of inholder. company of imbroyderer. bailiff of ipswich. henry jackson, richard ironside m. robert johnson. alderman. thomas jones, william jobson, thomas johnson, thomas jadwine, john josua, george isam, philip jacobson, peter jacobson, thomas juxson, senior. james jewel, gabriel jaques, walter jobson. edward james zachary. jones esquire. johnson, alderman. thomas jones, william jobson, thomas johnson, thomas jadwine, john josua, george isam, philip jacobson, peter jacobson, thomas juxson, senior. james jewel, gabriel jaques walter jobson. edward james zachary, jones esquire. anthony irbye. esquire. william ianson. humphrey jobson k. sir valentine knightley, sir robert killigrew, sir charles kelke, sir john kaile, richard kirrill. john kirrill, ralph king. henry kent, town of kingslynne. john kettleby. esquire. walter kirkham. esquire. l henry. earl of lincoln. robert l lisle, now earl of leicester. thomas lord laware. sir francis leigh. sir richard lowlace, sir william litton, sir john lewson, sir william lower, sir samuel leonard, sir samson leonard, company of letherseller. thomas laughton, william lewson, peter latham, peter van lore, henry leigh, thomas levar, christofer landman, morris lewellin, edward lewis, edward. sir william lower, sir samuel leonard, sir samson leonard. company of letherseller: thomas laughton, william lewson, peter latham, peter van lore, henry leigh, thomas levar, christofer landman, morris lewellin, edward lewis, edward lewkin, peter lodge, thomas layer, thomas lawson, francis lodge, john langl^y, david loide, john levit^, thomas fox and luke lodge, captain richard linley, arnold lull, william laurence, i^hn landman, nicholas lichfield, nicholas leate, ged^on laune m phil^p. earl of montgomerie, doctor george mountain, now lord bishop of lincoln. william lord mounteagle, now lord morley, sir thomas mansell, sir thomas mildmay, sir william maynard, sir humphrey may, sir peter manhood, sir john merrick, sir george more, sir robert mansell, sir arthur mannering, sir david murrey, sir edward michelborn, sir thomas middleton, sir robert miller, sir cavaliero maicott. humphrey may, sir peter manhood, sir john merrick, sir george more, sir robert mansell, sir arthur mannering, sir david murrey, sir edward michelborn, sir thomas middleton, sir robert miller, sir cavaliero maicott, doctor james meddas, richard martin, esquire. company of mercer, company of merchant tailor. captain john martin, arthur mouse, adrian more, thomas mountford, thomas morris, ralph morton, francis mapes, richard maplesden, james monger, peter monsell, robert middleton, thomas mail, john martin, josias maude, richard morton, george mason, thomas maddock, richard moor, nicholas moon, alfonsus van medkerk, captain henry meoles, philip mute, thomas mayall, humphrey marret, jaruis munaz, robert mildmay, william millet, richard john miller, thomas martin, john middleton, francis middleton n dudley, lord north, francis, lord norris, sir henry nevil of berkshire, thomas nicols, christopher nicols william. jaruis munaz, robert mildmay, william millet, richard john miller, thomas martin, john middleton, francis middleton n dudley. lord north francis. lord norris. sir henry nevil of berkshire, thomas nicols, christopher nicols william nicols, george newce, joseph newberow, christopher newgate, thomas norincott, jonathan nuttall, thomas norton o william oxenbridge, esquire. robert ossley, francis oliver p william, earl of pembroke. william lord paget. john lord petre. george percy esquire. sir christofer parkins, sir amias preston, sir nicholas parker, sir william poole, sir stephen powel, sir henry peyton, sir james perrot, sir john pettus, sir robert pain, william pain, john pain, edward parkins. edward parkins, his widow, aden perkins, thomas perkin, richard partridge, william palmer, miles palmer. robert parkhurst. richard percivall esquire. richard poyntell, george pretty, george pit allen. percy abraham. john pain, edward parkins, edward parkins, his widow, aden perkins, thomas perkin, richard partridge, william palmer, miles palmer, robert parkhurst, richard percivall, esquire, richard poyntell, george pretty, george pit, allen, percy abraham peirce, edmund peirce, phenice, pet thomas philips, henry philpot, master george procter, robert penington, peter john prat, william powel, edmund peashall, captain william proud, henry price, nicholas pewriffe, thomas pelham, richard piggot, john pawlet, esquire, robert pory, richard paulson, q william quicke r sir robert rich, now earl of warwick. sir thomas row, sir henry rainsford, sir william romney, sir john ratcliff, sir steven ridlesdon, sir william russell, master edward rotheram, alderman, robert rich, tedder roberts, henry robinson, john russell, richard rogers, arthur robinson, robert robinson, millicent ramsden, john robinson, george robins, nichalas rainton, henry rolffe. ridlesdon: sir william russell, master edward rotheram, alderman, robert rich, tedder roberts, henry robinson, john russell, richard rogers, arthur robinson, robert robinson, millicent ramsden, john robinson, george robins, nichalas rainton, henry rolffe, john reignolds, elias roberts, henry reignolds, esquire, william roscarrocke, esquire, humphrey raymell, richard robins s, henry, earl of southampton. thomas, earl of suffolk. edward semer, earl of hartford. robert, earl of salisbury, marry countess of shrew^bury, edmund lord sheffeld, robert lord spencer, john lord stanhope, sir john saint-iohn, sir thomas smith, sir john samms, sir john smith, sir edwin sandys, sir samuel sandys, sir steven some, sir ralph shelton, sir thomas stewkley, sir william saint-iohn, sir william smith, sir richard smith, sir martin sintevill, sir nicolas salter, doctor matthew sutcliffe of exeter. captain john smith, thomas. steven some, sir ralph shelton, sir thomas stewkley, sir william saint-iohn, sir william smith, sir richard smith, sir martin sintevill, sir nicolas salter, doctor matthew sutcliffe of exeter. captain john smith. thomas sandys esquire. henry sandys. esquire. george sandys. esquire. company of skinner. company of salter. company of stationer john stokley, richard staper, robert singleton, thomas shipton, cleophas smith, richard strongthar^, hildebrand spruson. matthew scrivener, othowell smith. george scot, hewet. staper^. james swift, richard stratford, edmund smith, robert smith, mathias springham, richard smith, edward smith, jonathan smith, humphrey smith, john smith, george swinhow, joseph some, william sheckley, john southick, henry shelley, walter shelley, richard snarsborow, george stone, hugh shepley, william strachey, urion spencer, john scarpe, thomas scott, william sharp, steven sparrow, thomas stokes, richard shepard, henry spranger, william sheckley, john southick, henry shelley, walter shelley, richard snarsborow, george stone, hugh shepley, william strachey, urion spencer, john scarpe, thomas scott, william sharp, steven sparrow, thomas stokes, richard shepard, henry spranger, william stonnard, steven sad, john stockley, thomas steven, matthew shepard, thomas sherwell, william seabright, esquire. nicholas sherwell, augustine steward, thomas stile, abraham speckhard, edmund scot, francis smalman, gregory sprint, esquire. thomas stacey, william sandbatch, augustine stuard, esquire t. sir william twisden, sir william throckmorton, sir nicholas tufton, sir john trever, sir thomas tracy, george thorpe, esquire. doctor william turner, the trinity house: richard turner, john taverner, daniel tucker, charles towler, william tailor, leonard townson, richard tomlins, francis tate, esquire. andrew troughton, george tucker, henry timberlake, william tucker, lewis tite, robert thornton. five: sir horatio vere, sir walter. taverner. daniel tucker, charles towler, william tailor, leonard townson, richard tomlins, francis tate, esquire. andrew troughton, george tucker, henry timberlake, william tucker, lewis tite. robert thornton. five. sir horatio vere. sir walter vaughan, henry vincent, richard venne. christopher virtue, john vassell, arthur venne w henry, bishop of worcester, francis west, esquire. sir ralph winwood, sir john wentworth, sir william waad, sir robert wroth, sir percival willoby, sir charles wilmott, sir john wats, sir hugh worrell, sir edward waterhouse, sir thomas wilsford, sir richard williamson, sir john wolstenholm, sir thomas walsingham, sir thomas watson, sir thomas wilson, sir john weld, mistress kath west, now lady conway. john wroth, esquire. captain maria winckfield, esquire. thomas webb, rice webb. edward webb, sands webb. wilson thomas white, richard wiffen, william williamson, humphrey. sir john weld, mistress kath west, now lady conway. john wroth, esquire. captain maria winckfield, esquire. thomas webb, rice webb. edward webb, sands webb. wilson thomas white, richard wiffen, william williamson, humphrey westwood, hugh willeston, thomas wheatley, william wattey, william webster, james white, edmund winne, john west, john wright, edward wooller, thomas walker, john wooller, john westrow, edward welch, nathaniel waad, richard widow, david waterhouse, esquire. captain owen winne, randall wetwood, george wilmer, esquire. edward wilkes, leonard white, andrew willmer, clement willmer, george walker, william welbie, francis whistler, thomas wells, captain thomas winne, john whittingham, thomas wheeler, william willet, devereux woogam, john walker, thomas wood, john willet, nicholas wheeler, thomas wale, william wilston, john waller, william ward, william willeston, john water, thomas war, esquire. david wiffen, garret weston. wheeler, william willet, devereux woogam, john walker, thomas wood, john willet, nicholas wheeler, thomas wale, william wilston, john waller, william ward, william willeston. john water, thomas war, esquire, david wiffen, garret weston, sir george yeardley, now governor of virginia, william yong, simon yeoman, z edward, lord zouch, john zouch, esquire that most generous and most honourable lord, the earl of south-hampton, be please to take upon, he, the title of treasurer and master, john farrar, his deputy, with such instruction as be necessary and admonition to all officer to take heed of extortion, engross commodity, forestalling of market especial to have a vigilant care. the familiarity of the saluage live among they, make they not way to betray or surprise they for the build of guest-house to relieve. of market especial to have a vigilant care. the familiarity of the saluage live among they, make they not way to betray or surprise. they for the build of guest-house to relieve the weak in. and that they do wonder. in all this time they have make no discovery, nor know no more than the very place whereon they do inhabit, nor yet can ever see any return. for all this continual charge and trouble. therefore, they send to be add to the council seven gentleman, namely mr thorp, captain nuce, mr tracy, captain middleton, captain blount, mr john pountas and mr harwood, with man munition and all thing think fit, but they write from virginia. many of the ship be so pester with disease, people and throng. blount, mr john pountas and mr harwood, with man munition and all thing think fit. but they write from virginia. many of the ship be so pester with disease people and throng together in their passage. there be much sickness and a great mortality, wherefore they desire rather a few, able, sufficient man. well, provide then great multitude, and because there be few accident of note but private advertisement by letter, we will conclude this year and proceed to the next. collect out of the counsel letter for virginia, the ea^le of south-hampton, treasurer, master john farrar, deputy, the instruction and advertisement for this year be both from england and virginia, much like the last only, whereas before they have ever a suspicion of opechankanough and all the farrar, deputy. the instruction and advertisement for this year be both from england and virginia, much like the last only, whereas before they have ever a suspicion of opechankanough and all the rest of the saluage they have a eye over he more than any. but now they all write so confident of their: assure peace with the saluage. there be now no more fear nor danger either of their power or treachery, so that every man plant himself where he please and follow his business secure. but the time of sir george yearley be near expire, the council here make choice of a worthy young gentleman, sir francis wyatt, to succeed he. the election of sir francis wyatt, governor for virginia, who they forth with furnish and expire, the council here make choice of a worthy young gentleman, sir francis wyatt, to succeed he, the election of sir francis wyatt, governor for virginia, who they forth with furnish and provide, as they have do his predecessor with all the necessary instruction. all these time have acquaint they, for the conversion of the saluage, the suppress of plant tobacco and plant of corn, not depend continual to be supply by the saluage, but in case of necessity to trade with they who long ere this it have be promise and expect shall have be feed and relieve by the english, not the english by they, and careful to redress all the complaint of the needless mortality of their people and by all diligence seek to send. feed and relieve by the english, not the english by they, and careful to redress all the complaint of the needless mortality of their people and by all diligence seek to send something home to satisfy the adventurer that all this time have only live upon hope, grow so weary and discourage that it must now be substance that must maintain their proceed and not letter excuse and promise. see, they can get so much and such great estate for themselves as to spend, after the rate of 100 pound, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9- note worthy observation- 10.. nay, some 2000 or 3000. pound yearly that be not worth so many penny when they go to virginia can scarce contain themselves either in diet, 8, 9. note worthy observation 10.. nay, some 2000 or 3000. pound yearly that be not worth so many penny when they go to virginia can scarce contain themselves either in diet, apparel, game and all manner of such superfluity within a less compass than our curious, costly and consume gallant here in england which can possible be there support. but either by oppress the commonalty there or deceive the generality here, or both extract out of the counsel letter for virginia from virginia by the relation of the chieftain there. a degression, and many i have confer with that come from thence hither. i have much admire to hear of the incredible pleasure, profit and plenty this plantation do abound in and yet can never hear of. have confer with that come from thence. hither i have much admire to hear of the incredible pleasure, profit and plenty this plantation do abound in and yet can never hear of any return but tobacco. but it have oft amaze, i, to understand how strange the saluage have be, teach the use of our arm and employ in hunt and fowl, with our fowl piece and our man root in the ground about tobacco like swine. beside that, the saluage that do little but continual exercise, their bow and arrow shall dwell and lie, so familiar among our man that practise little but the spade be so far asunder and in such small party disperse and neither fort exercise of arm, use ordnance, mount court of guard. familiar among our man that practise little but the spade, be so far asunder and in such small party disperse, and neither fort exercise of arm use, ordnance, mount, court of guard, nor any preparation nor provision to prevent a foreign enemy. much more the saluage howsoever. for the saluage, uncertain conformity, i do not wonder, but for their constancy and conversion, i be and ever have be of the opinion of master jonas stockam, a minister in virginia, who, even at this time, when all thing be so prosperous and the saluage at the point of conversion against all their governor and counsel opinion, write to the council and company in england to this effect: may 28.. we that have leave our native country to sojourn in of conversion against all their governor and counsel opinion. write to the council and company in england to this effect, may 28.. we that have leave our native country to sojourn in a strange land. master stockams relation, some idle spectator who, either cowardly, dare not or covetous, will not adventure either their purse or person in so commendable a work. other support atlas of this ilmost unsupportable burden as yourselves. without who assistance this virginia firmament in which some, and i hope in short time will shine many more glorious star though there be, many italiannated and spaniolized englishman envy our prosperity and, by all their ignominious scandal they can devise, seek to dishearten what they can those that be willing to further this glorious enterprise to. italiannated and spaniolized englishman envy our prosperity and by all their ignominious scandal they can devise, seek to dishearten what they can those that be willing to further this glorious enterprise to such. i wish, according to the decree of darius, that whosoever be a enemy to our peace and seek, either by get monipolicall paten or by forge unjust tale, to hinder our welfare, that his house be pull down and a pair of gallows make of the wood and he hang on they in the place. as for those lazy servant who have rather stand all day idle than work though but a hour in this vineyard and spend their substance riotous than cast the superfluity of their wealth into your treasury, i leave they as stand all day idle than work though but a hour in this vineyard and spend their substance riotous than cast the superfluity of their wealth into your treasury. i leave they as they be to the eternal judge of the world. but you right worthy that have adventure so free. i will not examine if it be for the glory of god or your desire of gain, which it may be you expect shall flow unto you with a full tide for the conversion of the saluage, i wonder. you use not the mean, i confess you say well to have they convert by fair mean, but they scorn to acknowledge it. as for the gift bestow on they, they devour they and so they will the giver. you say: well to have they convert by fair mean, but they scorn to acknowledge it. as for the gift bestow on they, they devour they and so they will the giver, if they can. and though many have endeavour, by all the mean they can, by kindness, to convert they, they find nothing from they but derision and ridiculous answer. we have send boy among they to learn their language, but they return worse than they go. but i be no statesman, nor love i to meddle with any thing but my book. but i can find no probability by this course to draw they to goodness i and be persuade. if mars and minerva go hand in hand, they will effect more good in a hour. can find no probability by this course to draw they to goodness i and be persuade. if mars and minerva go hand in hand, they will effect more good in a hour than those verbal mercurian in their life. and till their priest and ancient have their throat cut, there be no hope to bring they to conversion. the government of sir francis wyat. the arrival of sir francis wyat about october. arrive sir francis wyatt with master george sands, appoint treasurer, master davison, secretary, doctor pot the physician and master cloyburne the surgeon. but much provision be very bad condition. nay, the hog will not eat that corn they bring, which be a great cause of their sickness and mortality. and whatsoever be say against the virginia. provision be very bad condition. nay, the hog will not eat that corn they bring, which be a great cause of their sickness and mortality. and whatsoever be say against the virginia corn, they find it do better nourish than any provision be send thither the sailor still, they complain, be much to blame for imbes^ing the provision. send to private man, kill of swine and disorderly truck for which some order will be take in. they nine ship that go with sir francis wyatt. not one passenger die at his arrival. he send master thorpe to opechancanough who he find much satisfy with his come to confirm their league, as he have do his predecessor, and so content his people shall coinhabit among they, and he find to opechancanough, who he find much satisfy with his come to confirm their league, as he have do his predecessor, and so content his people shall coinhabit among they and he find more motion of religion in he than can be imagine. every man betake himself to his quarter. it be order that for every head they shall plant but 1000 plant of tobacco, and upon each plant nine leaf which will be about 100 weight. the corn be appoint, but at two shilling and six penny the bushel. require such labour. it cause most man neglect it and depend upon trade. where be it rate at ten shilling the bushel, every man will endeavour to have plenty to sell to the new comer or any that want. neglect it and depend upon trade. where be it rate at ten shilling the bushel, every man will endeavour to have plenty to sell to the new comer or any that want, and seldom any be transport from england but it stand in as much. beside the hazard and other necessary master gookins plantation, the ship may transport of that burden. the 22. of november arrive master gookin out of ireland with fifty man of his own and thirty passenger exceed, well furnish with all sort of provision and cattle, and plant himself at nupors-newes the cotten tree in a year grow so thick as one arm and so high as a man. here any thing that be plant do prosper so well as in no place better. cotten tree in a year grow so thick as one arm and so high as a man. here any thing that be plant do prosper so well as in no place better for the mortality of the people. accuse not the place for, of the old planter and the family scarce, one of twenty miscarry only the want of necessary be the occasion of those disease. and so we will conclude this year with the ship and number send out of the counsel letter from virginia. the number of ship and man: this year be send one and twenty. sail of ship that employ more than 400.. sailor and 1300.. man, woman and child of diverse faculty, with fourscore cattle, the tiger fall in the turk hand. yet one and twenty sail of ship that employ more than 400.. sailor and 1300.. man, woman and child of diverse faculty, with fourscore cattle, the tiger fall in the turk hand, yet safe escape. and by the return of their letter from thence, the company be assure. there can be no fit place of mine wood and water for iron than there. and the french man affirm: no country be more proper for vine, olive rice and salt, etc. of which the next year they promise a good quantity. gift the gentleman and mariner that come in the royal james from the east-indies give towards the build of a free school: 70 pound, eight shilling gift give and six penny and a unknown person to further it send. in the royal james from the east-indies give towards the build of a free school 70 pound. eight shilling gift give and six penny and a unknown person to further it send thirty pound and another in like manner, five and twenty pound. another refuse to be make know. give forty shilling yearly for a sermon before the virginia company. also another that will not be know. send for the college at henrico many, excellent good religious book worth ten pound and a most curious map of all that coast of america. master thomas bargave, their preacher there decease. give a library value at one hundred mark and the inhabitant have make a contribution of one thousand and five hundred pound to build a house for the entertain. preacher there decease give a library value at one hundred mark and the inhabitant have make a contribution of one thousand and five hundred pound to build a house for the entertain of stranger. this year also there be much sue for patent for plantation patent grant who promise to transport such great multitude of people. there be much dispute concern, those division, as though the whole land have be too little for they. six and twenty obtain their desire, but as yet not past. six have send thither a man notwithstanding, many of they will have more and be not well content, who i will entreat and all other wrangler to peruse this say of honest claudius: see not the world of nature work the fair well. have more and be not well content. who i will entreat and all other wrangler to peruse this say of honest claudius. see not the world of nature work the fair well i wot how it itself together tie as in a truelove knot. nor see how the element air combine. maintain one constant plea: h^w midst of heaven content the sun and shore contain the sea, and how the air both compass and carry still earth frame, yet neither press burden it nor part leaf the same, the observation of master john pory, secretary of virginia, in his travel. have but ten man mean provide to plant the secretary land on the eastern shore. nee^e dimmack, captain wilcocks plantation my journey to the eastern shore the better. virginia in his travel have but ten man mean provide to plant the secretary land on the eastern shore. nee^e dimmack, captain wilcocks plantation. my journey to the eastern shore, the better to secure and ass^^t each other. sir george yearley intend to visit smith isle fall, so sick that he can not, so that he send i with estinien m^ll, a frenchman, to find^ a convenient place to make salt in. not long after the king of come to we to seek for thomas savage, our interpreter thus insinuate himself. he lead we into a thicket where all sit down. he shew we his n^ked breast, ask if we see any deformity upon it. we tell he no, no more, say he be the inside. but as thicket where all sit down. he shew we his n^ked breast, ask if we see any deformity upon it. we tell he no, no more. say he be the inside, but as sincere and pure. therefore, come free to my country and welcome, which we promise we will within six week after have take a muster of the company tenant a good place to make salt in, i go to smith isle. where be our salt ho^se? not far off, we find a more convenient plac^ and ^o return to james town, be furnish t^e second ^ime. we arrive at aquo hanock and confer with kiptopeke, thei^ king p^ssing, russel, ile and onaucoke. we arrive at the description of those place you may read in captain smith discovery. ^ime. we arrive at aquo, hanock and confer with kiptopeke, thei^ king p^ssing, russel, ile and onaucoke. we arrive at the description of those place you may read in captain smith: discovery therefore needless to be write again. but here arrive at a^toughcomoco, the habitation of namenacu^ and w^manato, his brother, the king of pawtxunts entertainment. long we stay not ere they come aboard, we with a brass kettle as bright without as within full of boil, oyster, strict order be give. none shall offend we, so that the next day i go with the too king a hunt to discover what i can in their confine. bring i first to his house, where he show once his wife and child, and ma^ corne-field, and be two mile. king a hunt to discover what i can in their confine. bring i first to his house, where he show once his wife and child and ma^ corne-field, and be two mile within the wood. a hunt as the young conduct i forth. so the elder bring i home and use i as kind as he can after their manner. the next day he present i twelve beaver skin and a canow, which i requite with such thing to his content that he promise to keep they whilst he live and bury they with he be dead. he much wonder at our bible, but much more to hear it be the law of our god and the first chapter of genesis expound of adam and eve and simple. dead. he much wonder at our bible, but much more to hear it be the law of our god and the first chapter of genesis expound of adam and eve and simple marriage, to which he reply he be like adam in one thing, for he never have but one wife at once. but he, as all the rest, seem more willing of other discourse, they better understand. the next day the two king with their people come aboard, we but bring nothing according to promise. so that ensign savage challenge the breach of three. promise viz not in. give he a boy, not corn, though they have plenty. nor moutapass a fugitive, call robert marcum, that have live 5 year among those northerly nation which he cunning. viz, not in. give he a boy, not corn, though they have plenty. nor moutapass a fugitive call robert marcum, that have live 5 year among those northerly nation, which he cunning answer by excuse, womanato. it seem be guiltless of this falsehood because he stay alone when the rest be go. i ask he if he desire to be great and rich, he answer they be thing all man aspire unto, which i tell he he shall be if he will follow my counsel. so he give i two token, which be return by a messenger shall suffice to make he confident. the messenger can not abuse we some thing be steal from we. he take such order that they be present, restore than we interchange present. messenger shall suffice to make he confident. the messenger can not abuse we, some thing be steal from we. he take such order that they be present, restore than we interchange, present in all thing. he much admire out discretion and give we a guide that he call brother to conduct we up the river. by the way, we meet with diverse that still tell we of marcum, and though it be in october, we find the country very hot and their corn gather before we at james town, the treachery of namanicus. the next day we go to paccamaganant and they direct we to assacomoco where their king cassatowap have a old quarrel with ensign savage but now seem reconcile, go with we with another werowance towards. we go to paccamaganant and they direct we to assacomoco where their king cassatowap have a old quarrel with ensign savage, but now seem reconcile. go with we with another werowance towards mattapanient, where they persuade we ashore upon the point of a thicket, but suppose it some treachery. we return to our boat, far we have not go from the shore, but a multitude of saluage sally out of the wood with all the ill word and sign of hostility they can. when we see plain their bad intent, we set the two werowance at liberty that all this while have line in the cabin as not take any notice of their villainy, because we will convert they by courtesy. leave they as we find they very. liberty that all this while have line in the cabin as not take any notice of their villainy because we will convert they by courtesy, leave they as we find they very civil and subtle. we return. the same way. we come to the laugh king on the eastern shore who tell we plain namanicus will also have allure he into his country under colour of trade to cut his throat, he tell we. also, opechancanough have employ onianimo to kill savage because he bring the trade from he to the eastern shore and some disgrace he have do his son and some thirteen of his people before one hundred of those easterling in reseve thomas grave who they will have slay where he and three more do. he have do his son and some thirteen of his people before one hundred of those easterling in reseve thomas grave, who they will have slay where he and three more do challenge the thirteeene pamavuke to fight, but they dare not, so that all those easterling so deride they that they come there no more. thomas saluage, good service this thomas savage. it be sixteen year since he go to virginia. be a boy he be, leave with powhatan for namontacke to learn the language and, as this author affirm with much honesty and good success, have serve the public without any public recompense, yet have a arrow shoot through his body in their service. this laugh, king at accomack, tell we the land be not two. success have. serve the public without any public recompense, yet have a arrow shoot through his body in their service. this laugh, king at accomack, tell we the land be not two day journey over in the broad place, but in some place a man may go in half a day betwixt the bay and the main ocean where inhabit many people, so that by the narrowness of the land there be not many decree but most abundance of fish and fowl. kiptope, his brother, rule ^, his lieutenant, who see his young brother more affect by the people than himself. free, resign he, the moiety of his country, apply himself only to husbandry and hunt. yet nothing neglect in his degree, nor be he careless of any. by the people than himself free, resign he the moiety of his country, apply himself only to husbandry and hunt. yet nothing neglect in his degree, nor be he careless of any thing concern the state. but as a vigilant and faithful counsellor, as he be a affectionate brother, bear the great burden in government, though the lesser honour where clean. contrary. they on the western shore, the young bear the charge and the elder the dignity. those be the best husband of any saluage we know, for they provide corn to serve, they all the year, yet spare, and the other not for half the year, yet want. they be the most civil and tractable people we have meet with, and by little stick will keep as year, yet spare, and the other not for half the year. yet want they be the most civil and tractable people we have meet with and by little stick will keep as just a account of their promise as by a tally in their marriage they observe a large distance, as well in affinity as consanguinity. nor do they use that devilish custom in make black boy. there may be on this shore about two thousand people. they on the west will invade they, but that they want boat to cross the bay, and so will diverse other nation. be they not protect by we. a few of the westerly runnagado have conspire against the laugh king but fear their treason be discover. flee to smith isle where diverse other nation, be they not protect by we. a few of the westerly runnagado have conspire against the laugh king but fear their treason be discover, flee to smith isle where they make a massacre of deer and hog, and thence to rickahake, betwixt, cissapeack and nansamund where they now be seat under the command of itoyatin. and so i return to james town where i find the government render to sir francis wyat. in february also, he travel to the south river chawonock, some sixty mile over land which he find to be a very fruitful and pleasant country, yield two harvest in a year and find much of the silk grass former speak of, be kind use by the people, and so return, captain, each. very fruitful and pleasant country, yield two harvest in a year and find much of the silk grass former speak of, be kind use by the people and so return, captain each, send to build a fort to secure the country. it be no small content to all the adventurer to hear of the safe arrival of all those ship and company, the earl of south^mpton, treasure, and nicolas farrar, deputy, which be think sufficient to have make a plantation of themselves and again to second they be send, captain each, in the abigale, a ship of three or four hundred ton who have undertake to make a block-house among the oyster bank that shall secure the river. the furnish he with instrument cost three hundred pound, but of three or four hundred ton who have undertake to make a block-house among the oyster bank that shall secure the river. the furnish, he with instrument, cost three hundred pound but the whole charge and the ship return will be near two thousand pound. in she go, captain berwick, with five and twenty man for the build ship and boat. five and twenty send only to build bark and bo and not other way to be employ, and also a select number to build the e^st indie school. but as yet from virginia little return but private man, tobacco and fair promise of plenty of iron, silk, wine and many other good and rich commodity beside the speedy conversion of the saluage. that at first be much. but private man, tobacco and fair promise of plenty of iron, silk, wine and many other good and rich commodity, beside the speedy conversion of the saluage that at first be much discourage from live among they when they be debar the use of their piece. therefore, it be dispute as a matter of state whether such as will live among they shall use they or not as a bait to allure they, or at least such as shall be call to the knowledge of christ. but because it be a great trouble for all cause to be bring to james town for a trial court be appoint in convenient place to relieve they, but as they can make no law in virginia till they be ratify here, to be bring to james town for a trial court be appoint in convenient place to relieve they. but as they can make no law in virginia till they be ratify here, so the^ think it. but reason none shall be enact here without their consent, because they only feel they and must live under they. still, they complain for want of corn, but what must be have by trade. and how unwilling any officer, when he leave his place, be to make good his number of man to his successor. but many of they, during their time to help themselves, undo the company for the servant you allow. they or such as they hire, they plant on their private land, not upon that belong to their office. their time to help themselves undo the company for the servant you allow they, or such as they hire, they plant on their private land, not upon that belong to their office, which crop always exceed you beside those which be your tenant to half be force to row they up and down, whereby both you and they lose more than half. nor be those officer the able or best deserve but make their experience upon the company cost and your land lie unmanured to any purpose and will yield as little profit to your next new officer. the massacre upon the two and twenty of march, the death of nemattanow, write by m wimp. the prologue to this tragedy be suppose be occasion by nemattanow, otherwise call. new officer, the massacre upon the two and twenty of march, the death of nemattanow. write by m wimp. the prologue to this tragedy be suppose be occasion by nemattanow, otherwise call jack of the feather, because he common be most strange, adorn with they and for his courage and policy be account among the saluage. their chief captain and immortal from any hurt can be, do he by the english. this captain come to one morgan house, know he have many commodity that he desire, persuade morgan to go with he to pamauke to truck, but the savage murder he by the way, and after two or three day return again to morgan house where he find two youth, his servant, who ask for their master jack. but the savage murder. he, by the way, and after two or three day, return again to morgan house where he find two youth, his servant, who ask for their master. jack reply, direct he be dead. the boy suspect as it be, by see he wear his cap, will have have he to master thorp. but jack so move their patience. they shoot he, so he fall to the ground, put he in a boat to have he before the governor than seven or eight mile from they. but by the way, jack find the pang of death upon he desire of the boy, two thing: the one, be that they will not make it know he be slay with a bullet. the other, to bury he. pang of death upon. he desire of the boy two thing: the one be that they will not make it know he be slay with a bullet, the other to bury he among the english. at the loss of this savage opechankanough, much grieve and repine with great threat of revenge. but the english return, he such terrible answer that he cunning, dissemble his intent with the great sign he can of love and peace. yet within fourteen day after he act, what follow security? a bad guard, sir francis wyatt, at his arrival, be advertise. he find the country settle in such a firm peace as most man there think, sure and unviolable, not only in regard of their promise but of a necessity. the poor, weak. he find the country settle in such a firm peace as most man there think sure and unviolable, not only in regard of their promise but of a necessity, the poor, weak saluage be every way better by we and safe shelter and defend whereby we may free follow our business. and such be the conceit of this conceit: peace as that there be seldom or never a sword and seldom a piece, except for a deer or fowl, by which assurance the most plantation be place, straggle and scatter as a choice vein of rich ground, invite they, and further from neighbour the better their house general, open to the saluage who be always friendly, feed at their table and lodge in their bedchamber which make the ground, invite they, and further from neighbour the better. their house general, open to the saluage, who be always friendly, feed at their table and lodge in their bedchamber which make the way plain to effect their intent and the conversion of the saluage, as they suppose, have occasion to send to opechankanough about the middle of march. he use the messenger well and tell he he hold the peace so firm the sky shall fall or he dissolve it. yet such be the treachery of those people when they have contrive our destruction even but two day before the massacre, they guide our man with much kindness through the wood and one browne that live among they to learn the language they send home to his master. two day before the massacre, they guide our man with much kindness through the wood and one browne that live among they to learn the language they send home to his master, yea. they borrow our boat to transport themselves over the river to consult on the devilish murder that ensue and of our utter extirpation, which god of his mercy, by the mean of one of themselves, convert to christianity, prevent. and as well, on the friday morning, that fatal day be the two and twenty of march, the manner of the massacre, as also in the evening before as at other time, they come unarm into our house with dear turkey fish, fruit and other provision to sell. we, yea, in some place, sit down at. in the evening before as at other time. they come unarm into our house with dear turkey fish, fruit and other provision to sell. we yea in some place, sit down at breakfast with our people who, immediate, with their own tool they slay most barbarous, not spare either age or sex, man, woman or child, so sudden in their execution that few or none discern the weapon or blow that bring they to destruction. in which manner also they slay many of our people, at several work in the field, well know in what place and quarter each of our man be in regard of their familiarity with we. for the effect that great masterpiece of work, their conversion, and by this mean fall that fatal morning. and quarter each of our man be in regard of their familiarity with we, for the effect that great masterpiece of work, their conversion, and by this mean fall that fatal morning under the bloody and barbarous hand of that perfidious and inhuman people. three hundred forty seven man, woman and child, most by their own weapon, and not be content with their life, they fall again upon the dead body, make as well as they can a fresh murder deface, drag and mangle their dead carcase into many piece and carry some part away in derision, with base and brutish triumph. neither yet do these beast spare those among the rest well know unto they, from who they have daily receive many benefit, their cruelty but spiteful. derision with base and brutish triumph. neither yet do these beast spare those among the rest well know. unto they, from who they have daily receive many benefit. their cruelty, but spiteful also, massacre they without any remorse or pity. be in this more fell than lion and dragon, as history record, which have preserve their benefactor. such be the force of good deed, though do to cruel beast to take humanity upon they. but these miscreant put on a more unnatural brutishness than beast, as by those instance may appear that worthy religion gentleman, m george thorp, the murder of master thorp, deputy to the college land sometime, one of his majesty, pensioner and in command, one of the principal in virginia, do so true affect their george thorp. the murder of master thorp, deputy to the college land sometime, one of his majesty pensioner and in command one of the principal in virginia, do so true, affect their conversion that whosoever under he do they the least displeasure be, punish severe. he think nothing too dear for they. he never deny they any thing, in so much that when they complain that our mastiff do fear they he to content they in all thing, cause some of they to be kill in their presence to the great displeasure of the owner, and will have have all the rest to make they the mild. may he have. have his will the king dwell, but in a cottage he build he a fair house after the will have have all the rest to make they the mild. may he have have his will. the king dwell, but in a cottage he build he a fair house after the english fashion in which he take such pleasure, especial in the lock and key which he so admire as lock and unlock his door a hundred time a day. he think no device in the world comparable to it thus insinuate himself into this king favour for his religious purpose. he confer oft with he about religion, as many other in this former discourse have do, and this pagan confess to he as he do to they. our god be better than they and seem to be much please with that discourse and of his company. have do, and this pagan confess to he as he do to they. our god, be better than they and seem to be much please with that discourse and of his company and to requite all those courtesy. yet this viperous brood do, as the sequel show. not only murder he, but with such spite and scorn, abuse his dead corpse as be unfitting to be hear with civil ear. one thing i can omit: that when this good gentleman, upon his fatal hour, be warn by his man who perceive some treachery, intend by those hellhound to look to himself and withal run away for fear he shall be apprehend and so save his own life. yet his master, out of his good meaning, be so void. hellhound to look to himself and withal run away for fear he shall be apprehend and so save his own life. yet his master, out of his good meaning, be so void of suspicion and full of confidence they have slay, he or he can or will believe they will hurt he, captain nathaniel powel, one of the first planter, a valiant soldier, and not any in the country better know among they the slau^hter of captain powel. yet such be the error of a overconceited power and prosperity and their simplicity, they not only slay he and his family, but butcherlike hagle their body and cut off his head to express their uttermost height of cruelty. another of the old company of captain smith call nathaniel causey. he and his family but butcherlike, hagle their body and cut off his head to express their uttermost height of cruelty. another of the old company of captain smith, call nathaniel causey, a savage slay, be cruel wound, and the saluage about he with a axe do cleave one of their head whereby the rest flee and he escape. for they hurt not any that do either fight or stand upon their guard in one place where there be but two man that have warning of it. they defend the house against 60. or more that assault it m baldwines escape m baldwin at warraskoyack, his wife be so wound she lay for dead. yet by his oft discharge of his piece save ^^er, his house himself and assault it. m baldwines escape m baldwin at warraskoyack. his wife be so wound she lay for dead. yet by his oft discharge of his piece, save ^^er, his house himself and diverse other, m thomas hamer with 22 escape at the same time. they come to one master harison house near half a mile from baldwine, where be master thomas hamer with six man and eighteen or nineteen woman and child. here the saluage with many present and fair persuasion feign. they come for capt ralph hamer to go to their king, then hunt in the wood present they send to he, but he not come as they expect, set fire of a tobacco-house and then come to tell they in the dwell house of it to. the wood present. they send to he but he not come as they expect. set fire of a tobacco-house and then come to tell they in the dwell house of it to quench it. all the man run towards it but master hamer not suspect any thing. who the saluage pursue, shoot they full of arrow, then beat out their brain. hamer have finish a letter. he be a writing. follow after to see what be the matter. but quick they shoot a arrow in his back which cause he return and barricado up the door whereupon the saluage set fire on the house. harison boy find his master piece, load, discharge it at random, at which bare report the saluage all flee. baldwin still discharge his piece. whereupon the saluage set fire on the house. harison boy find his master piece load, discharge it at random, at which bare report the saluage all flee. baldwin still discharge his piece and mr hamer with two and twenty person thereby get to his house, leave their own burn in like manner. they have fire lieutenant his house with all the rest there about, slay the people and so leave that plantation. captain ralph hamer with forty escape. captain hamer, all this while not know any thing, come to his brother that have send for he to go hunt with the king, meet the saluage, chase some yet escape, retire to his new house, then a building from whence he come there only with spade, axe and brick. to go hunt with the king, meet the saluage chase, some yet escape, retire to his new house, then a building from whence he come there only with spade, axe and brick bat he defend himself and his company till the saluage depart. not long after the master from the ship have send six musketeer with which he recover their merchant store-house where he arm ten more, and so with thirty more unarm workman find his brother and the rest at b^ldwins. now see all they have be burn and consume. they repair to james town with their best expedition, yet not far from martin hundred, where seventy three be slay be a little house and a small family that hear not of any of this till two. with their best expedition, yet not far from martin hundred, where seventy three be slay be a little house and a small family that hear not of any of this till two day after all, those and many other who they have as malicious murder, seek the good of those poor brute that thus despise god. mercy must needs now, as miscreant, be correct by justice to which leave they. i will knit together the thread of this discourse, the saluage attempt to surprise a ship. at the time of the massacre, there be three or four ship in james river and one in the next, and daily more to come in, as there do within fourteen day after one of which they endeavour to have surprise. yet four ship in james river and one in the next, and daily more to come in, as there do within fourteen day after one of which they endeavour to have. surprise yet be the heart of the english, ever stupid and avert from believe. any thing may weaken their hope to win. they by kind usage to christianity, but diverse, write from thence that almighty god have his great work in this tragedy and will thereout draw honour and glory to his name and a more flourish estate and safety to themselves, and with more speed to convert the savage child to himself. since he so miraculous have, preserve the english there be. yet god be praise. eleven, part of twelve remain who careless neglect of their own. to convert the savage child to himself, since he so miraculous have. preserve the english there be. yet god be praise eleven, part of twelve remain who careless neglect of their own safety seem to have be the great cause of their destruction. yet you see god, by a convert savage that disclose the plot, save the rest. and the pinnace, then, in pamavukes river. whereof say they though our sin make we unworthy of so glorious a conversion, yet his infinite wisdom can nevertheless bring it to pass, and in good time, by such mean as we think most unlikely. for in the delivery of they that survive no man particular carefulness, save one person, but the mere goodness of god himself, free and miraculous. preserve who as we think most unlikely, for in the delivery of they that survive, no man particular carefulness, save one person, but the mere goodness of god himself, free and miraculous, preserve who he please. the letter of master george sands, a worthy gentleman, and many other beside they return. bring we this unwelcome news that have be hear at large in public court that the indian and they live as one nation, yet by a general combination in one day plot to subvert the whole colony, and at one instant though, our several plantation be one hundred and forty mile up on river on both side. but for the better understanding of all thing, you must remember these wild, naked native live not in great number together ^^t. hundred and forty mile up on river, on both side. but for the better understanding of all thing you must remember these wild, naked native live not in great number together, ^^t disperse, common in thirty, forty, fifty or sixty in a company. some place have two hundred, few place more, but many less. yet they have all warning: give they one from another, in all their habitation, though far asunder, to meet at the day and hour. appoint for our destruction at all, our several plantation, some direct to one place, some to another, all to be do at the time. appoint which they do according. some enter their house under colour of trade, so take their advantage. other draw we abroad under fair pretence and the to be do at the time appoint, which they do according. some enter their house under colour of trade, so take their advantage. other draw we abroad under fair pretence and the rest, sudden, fall upon those that be at their labour. six of the counsel suffer under this treason, six of the council slay, and the slaughter have be universal. if god have not put it into the heart of a indian who lie in the house of one, pace, be urge by another indian, his brother that lie with he the night before, to kill pace as he shall do. perry, which be his friend, be so. command from their king. tell he also how the next day the execution shall be. finish perrys, indian present. kill pace, as he shall do perry, which be his friend, be so command from their king. tell he also how the next day the execution shall be. finish perrys indian present, arise and reveal it to pace that use he as his son and thus they that escape be save by this one, convert infidel, and though three hundred forty seven be slay, yet thousand of we be, by the mean of this alone, thus preserve, for which god name be praise for ever and ever. pace upon this. secure his house before day row to jam^s town, how it be. reveal and tell the governor of it whereby they be prevent, and at such other plantation as possible, intelligence can be give and where they see. to jam^s town how it be, reveal and tell the governor of it, whereby they be prevent and at such other plantation as possible intelligence can be give and where they see we upon our guard. at the sight of a piece they run away, but the rest be most slay their house, burn such arm and munition as they find they take away, and some cattle also they destroy. since we find opechankanough the last year have practise with a king on the eastern shore to furnish he with a kind of poison which only grow in his country to poison we. but of this bloody act never grief and shame possess any people, more than themselves to be thus butcher by so naked and cowardly a. grow in his country to poison we. but of this bloody act, never grief and shame possess any people more than themselves to be thus butcher by so naked and cowardly, a people who dare not stand the present of a staff in manner of a piece, nor a uncharged piece in the hand of a woman. but i must tell those, author, though some may be thus cowardly, there be many of they- have better spirit. thus have you hear the particular of this massacre memorandum which, in those respect, some say will be good for the plantation, because now we have just cause to destroy they by all mean possible. but i think it have be much better. it have never happen, for they have give. for the plantation, because now we have just cause to destroy they by all mean possible. but i think it have be much better. it have never happen, for they have give we a hundred time, as just occasion long ago, to subject they, and i wonder i can hear of none but master ^^ockam and master whitaker, of my opinion moreover- where before we be trouble in clear the ground of great timber which be to they of small use, now we may take their own plain field and habitation which be the pleasant place in the country beside the dear turkey and other beast and fowl will exceed increase if we beat the saluage out of the country, for at all time of the year they in the country beside the dear turkey and other beast and fowl will exceed increase if we beat the saluage out of the country, for at all time of the year they never spare male nor female, old nor young egg nor bird fat, nor lean in season or out of season, with they all be one, the like they do in our swine and goat, for they have use to kill eight in ten more than we, or else the wood will most plentiful abound with victual beside. it be more easy to civilize they by conquest, then fair mean for the one may be make at once, but their civilise will require a long time and much industry. the manner how to suppress they be so. by conquest, then fair mean for the one may be make at once, but their civilise will require a long time and much industry. the manner, how to suppress, they be so often relate and approve. i omit it here, and you have twenty example of the spaniard, how they get the west-indies and force the treacherous and rebellious infidel to do all manner of drudgery, work and slavery, for they themselves live like soldier upon the fruit of their labour. this will make we more circumspect and be a example to posterity. but i say, captain smith, this might as well have be put in practice sixteen year ago as now. thus, upon this anvil shall we now beat ourselves a armour of proof hereafter to defend. captain smith, this might as well have be put in practice sixteen year ago as now. thus, upon this anvil shall we now beat ourselves a armour of proof. hereafter to defend we against such incu^sions, his majesty g^t, and ever hereafter make we more circumspect. but to help to repair this loss, beside his majesty, bounty in arm, he give the company out of the tower and diverse other honourable person have renew their adventure. we must not omit the honourable city of london, to who endless praise we may speak. it be now set forward one hundred person and diverse other at their own cost, be a repair london. set out 100 person and all good man do think never the worse of the business. for forward one hundred person and diverse other at their own cost be a repair. london set out 100 person and all good man do think never. the worse of the business for all these dis^sters. what grow state be there ever in the world which have not the like rome grow by oppression and rise upon the back of her enemy and the spaniard have have many of those counterbuff more than we. columbus, upon his return from the west-indies into spain, have leave his people with the indies in peace and promise of good usage among they. at his return back find not one of they live but all treacherous slay by the saluage. after this, again, when the spanish colony be increase to great number, the among they. at his return back, find not one of they live, but all treacherous slay by the saluage. after this again, when the spanish colony be increase to great number, the indian, from who the spaniard for truck stuff use to have all their corn general, conspire together to plant no more at all, intend thereby to famish. they- a lamentable example, oft approve themselves. live in the mean time upon cassava, a root to make bread, only then know to themselves this plot of they, by the spaniard oversight that foolish, depend upon stranger for their bread, take such effect and bring they to such misery by the rage of famine that they spare no unclean nor loathsome beast. no, not the poisonous and hideous serpent. for their bread, take such effect and bring they to such misery by the rage of famine that they spare no unclean nor loathsome beast- no, not the poisonous and hideous serpent- but eat they up also devour one death to save they from another, and by this mean their whole colony- well-near surfeit, sicken and die miserable. and when they have again recover this loss by their incontinency, a infinite number of they die on the indian disease we call the french pox, which at first be a strange and a unknown malady, be deadly upon whosoever it light. then have they a little flea, call nigua, which get between the skin and the flesh before they be aware, and there breed and multiply, make swell and upon whosoever it light. then have they a little flea call nigua, which get between the skin and the flesh before they be aware and there breed and multiply, make swell and putrefaction, to the decay and loss of many of their bodily member. again, diverse time they be near undo by their ambition, faction and malice. of the commander columbus, to who they be also, much behold, be send, with his brother in chain, into spain and some other great commander kill and murder one another. pizzaro be kill by almagros son and he vasco behead, which vasco be take by blasco and blasco be likewise take by pizzaros brother, and thus by their covetous and spiteful quarrel they be ever shake the main pillar of their behead, which vasco be take by blasco and blasco be likewise take by pizzaros brother, and thus by their covetous and spiteful quarrel they be ever shake the main pillar of their commonweal. these and many more mischief and calamity happen. they more than ever do to we, and at one time be even at the last gasp, have two ship not arrive with supply as they do. they be so dishearten they be a leave the country. yet we see, for all those misery, they have attain to their end at last, as be manifest to all the world, both with honour, powe^ and wealth. and whereas be^ore few can be hire to go to inhabit there now with great suit, they must obtain it. note this. to all the world, both with honour, powe^ and wealth. and whereas be^ore few can be hire to go to inhabit there now with great suit, they must obtain it. note this conclusion. but where there be no honesty, nor equity, nor sanctity, nor verity, nor pierie, nor good civility, in such a country certain, there can be no stability. therefore, let we not be discourage, but rather animate by those conclusion. see, we be so well assure of the goodness and commodity may be have in virginia. nor be it to be much doubt there be any want of mine of most sort. no, not of the rich, as be well know to some. yet live that can make it manifest when time shall serve. and yet, be any want of mine of most sort. no, not of the rich, as be well know to some yet live that can make it manifest when time shall serve. and yet, to think that gold and silver mine be in a country otherwise most rich and fruitful, or the great wealth in a plantation be but a popular error, as be that opinion. likewise, that the gold and silver be now the great wealth of the west indies at this present. how the spania^ds raise their wealth in the west indies. true, it be indeed that in the first conquest the spaniard get great and mighty store of treasure from the native which they, in long space, have heap together. and in those time the indian show. that in the first conquest the spaniard get great and mighty store of treasure from the native which they in long space have heap together, and in those time the indian show they entire and rich mine which now, by the relation of they that have be there be, exceed waste. so that now the charge of get those metal be grow excessive. beside the consume the life of many by their pestilent smoke and vapour in, dig and refine they so that all thing consider the clear gain of those metal. the king part defray to the adventurer be but small and nothing near so much as vulgar. be imagine, and be it not for other rich commodity there that enrich they, those of the contraction house. to the adventurer, be but small and nothing near so much as vulgar. be. imagine, and be it not for other rich commodity there that enrich they, those of the contraction house, be never able to subsist by the mine. only for the great part of their commodity be partly natural and partly transport from other part of the world and plant in the west-indies, as in their mighty wealth of sugarcanes. be first transport from the canary and in ginger and other thing bring out of the east-indies in their cochanele cotton and their infinite store of hide, quicksilver, alum, woad, brasill, wood dye, paint, tobacco, gum, balm, oil, medicinal and perfume, sassaparilla and many other physical drug. these be the mean whereby they raise that mighty. store of hide, quicksilver, alum, woad, brasill, wood dye, paint, tobacco, gum, balm oil, medicinal and perfume, sassaparilla and many other physical drug. these be the mean whereby they raise that mighty charge of draw out their gold and silver to the great and clear revenue of their king. now see the most of those commodity, or, as useful may be, have in virginia, by the same mean. as i have former say, let we with all speed take the priority of time where also may be have the priority of place in choose the best seat of the country which now, by vanquish the saluage, be like to offer a more fair and ample choice of fruitful habitation than hitherto our gentleness and fair comportment can attain. seat of the country which now, by vanquish the saluage, be like to offer a more fair and ample choice of fruitful habitation than hitherto. our gentleness and fair comportment can attain unto the number that be slay in those several plantation: 1 at captain berkleys plantation himself and 21.. other seat at the falling-crick, 66. mile from james city: 22, 2 master thomas sheffelds plantation, some three mile from the falling-crick himself, and 12.. other 13, 3 at henrico island, about two mile from sheffelds plantation. 6, 4 slay of the college people twenty mile from henrico. 17, 5 at charles city and of captain smith man, 5, 6 at the next adjoin plantation. 8, 7 at william farrars house. 10, 8 at brickley hundred fifty mile. from henrico: 17, 5 at charles city and of captain smith man, 5, 6 at the next adjoin plantation, 8, 7 at william farrars house, 10, 8 at brickley, hundred fifty mile from charles city, master thorp, and 10, 9 at westover, a mile from brickley. 2, 10 at master john west plantation, 2, 11 at captain nathaniel west plantation, 2, 12 at lieutenant gibs, his plantation, 12, 13 at richard owen house himself and 6, 14 at master owen macar house himself, and 3, 15 at martin, hundred seven mile from james city. 73, 16 at another place, 7, 17 at edward bonit plantation, 50, 18 at master water, his house himself, and 4, 19 at apamatucks river at master perce, his plantation, five mile from the. at another place: 7, 17 at edward bonit plantation, 50, 18 at master water, his house himself, and 4, 19 at apamatucks river at master perce, his plantation five mile from the college. 4, 20 at master macocks, captain samuel macock, and 4, 21 at flowerda hundred, sir george yearleys plantation, 6, 22 on the other side, opposite to it, 7, 23 at master swinhow house himself and 7, 24 at master william bickars house himself and 4, 25 at weanock of sir george yearleys people, 21, 26 at powel brooke, captain nathaniel powel, and 12, 27 at south-hampton hundred. 5, 28 at martin brandon hundred. 7, 29 at captain henry spilmans house, 2, 30 at ensign spence house, 5, 31 at master thomas perseus, his house, by 27 at south-hampton, hundred 5, 28 at martin brandon, hundred 7, 29 at captain henry spilmans house 2, 30 at ensign spence, house 5, 31 at master thomas perseus, his house by mulberry, i will himself- and 4, the whole number 347.. man in this, take better with affliction, better, attend and mind and mark religion, for then true voice issue from their heart. then speak they what they think. in inmost part the truth remain. they cast off sain arts, how they be reduce to five or six, place this lamentable and so unexpected a disaster cause. they all believe the opinion of master stockam and drive they all to their wit end it be twenty or thirty day ere they can resolve what to do. but disaster cause. they all believe the opinion of master stockam and drive they all to their wit end it be twenty or thirty day ere they can resolve what to do, but at last it be conclude. all the petty plantation shall be abandon and draw only to make good five or six place where all their labour now, for the most part, must redound to the lord of those land where they be resident. now, for want of boat, it be impossible upon such a sudden to bring also their cattle and many other thing which with much time, charge and labour they have then in possession with they all which for the most part, at their departure be burn, ruin and destroy by the saluage gooki^s. which, with much time, charge and labour, they have then in possession with they all, which, for the most part at their departure, be burn, ruin and destroy by the saluage gooki^s and (@) resolution. only master gookins at nuports-newes will not obey the commander command in that though he have scarce five and thirty of all sort with he. yet he think himself sufficient against what can happen, and so do, to his great credit and the content of his adventurer, master samuel jordan, gather together but a few of the straggler about he at beggers-bush, where he fortify and live in despite of the enemy. nay, mistress proctor, a proper civil mod^st gentlewoman, do the like till perforce the english officer, force she and all they. beggers-bush where he fortify and live in despite of the enemy. nay, mistress proctor, a proper civil mod^st gentlewoman, do the like till perforce the english officer, force she and all they with she to go with they or they will fire her house themselves, as the saluage do when they be. go in. who, despite they have, keep it and what they have. a month or three week after the massacre, which be to their heart a grief beyond comparison, to lose all they have in that manner- the opinion of captain smith- only to secure other pleasure now here in england, it be think all those remainder may present have be reduce into fifty or hundred in place, most convenient with what they have have such. secure other pleasure now here in england, it be think all those remainder may present have be reduce into fifty or hundred in place, most convenient with what they have. have such strong house as they report they have, which with small labour may have be make invincible castle against all the saluage in the land, and then present raise a company as a run army to torment the barbarous and secure the rest. and so have have all that country betwixt the river of powhatan and pamavuke to range and sustain. they especial all the territory of kecoughtan, chiskact and paspahege from ozeny to that branch of pamavuke. come from youghtanund which straight of land be not past 4. or 5. mile to have make a much. territory of kecoughtan, chiskact and paspahege, from ozeny to that branch of pamavuke, come from youghtanund which, straight of land be not past 4. or 5. mile to have, make a much big than the summer isle environ. wi^h, the broad part of those two main river which for plenty of such thing as virgnia afford be not to be exceed, and be it well manure more than sufficient for ten thousand man. this be it well understand, can but be think be^ter than ^o bring five or six hundred to lodge and live on that which before will not well receive and maintain a hundred plant little or nothing, but spend that they have upon hope out of england. one evil beget another till the disease be. which before will not well receive and maintain a hundred plant little or nothing, but spend that they have upon hope out of england. one evil beget another till the disease be past. cure therefore it be impossible. but such course must produce most fearful misery and extreme extremity. if it prove otherwise, i shall be exceed glad. i confess i be somewhat too bold to censure other man action be not present, but they have do as much of i yea many here in england that be never there and also many there that know little more than their plantation, but as they be inform and this do touch the glory of god, the honour of my country and the public good, so much for which there little more than their plantation. but as they be inform, and this do touch the glory of god, the honour of my country and the public good, so much for which there have be so many fair pretence that i hope none will be angry for speak my opinion. see the old proverb: do allow loser leave to speak. and du bart as say. even as the wind, the angry ocean move, wave, hunt, wave and billow, billow shove, so do all nation jostle each the other, and so one people do pursue another and scarce a sec^nd have the first unhouse before a three he thence again have rouse. among the multitude of these several relation, the providence of captain nuse. it appear captain nuse see many. a sec^nd have the first unhouse before a three. he thence again have rouse. among the multitude of these several relation, the providence of captain nuse. it appear captain nuse see many of the difficulty to ensue, cause as much corn to be plant as he can at elizabeth city and though some destroy that they have set fear it will serve the saluage for ambuscado trust to relief by trade or from england, which have ever be one cause of our misery. for from england we have not have much and for trade every one have not ship, shalop, interpreter, man and provision to perform it. and those that have, use they only for their own private g^ine, not the public good. so that our beginning this: have not ship shalop, interpreter man and provision to perform it, and those that have, use they only for their own private g^ine, not the public good, so that our beginning this year do cause many to distrust the event of the next. here we will leave captain nuse for a while, lament the death of captain norton, a valiant, industrious gentleman, adorn with many good quality beside physic and chirurgery, which, for the public good, he free impart to all gratis, but most bountiful to the poor. and let we speak a little of captain croshaw. among the midst of those, broil in the river of patawom^ke, be in a small bark, call the elizabeth, captain croshaw, his voyage to patawom^k under the command of captain spilman. croshaw among the midst of those broil in the river of patawom^ke. be in a small bark, call the elizabeth captain croshaw. his voyage to patawom^k under the command of captain spilman at cekacawone, a savage steal. aboard they and tell they of the massacre and that opechancanough have plot with his king and country to betray they also, which they refuse. but they of wighcocomoco, at the mouth of the river, have undertake it upon this spilman go thither, but the saluage see his man so vigilant and well arm, they suspect. themselves discover, and to colour their guilt, the better to delude he so content, his desire in trade, his pinnace be near fraught, but see no more to be have croshaw go to patawomek where to colour their guilt, the better to delude he, so content. his desire in trade, his pinnace be near fraught, but see no more to be, have croshaw go to patawomek where he intend to stay and trade for himself. by reason of the long acquaintance he have with this king, that so earnest entreat he now to be his friend, his countenancer, his captain and director against the pazaticans, the nacotchtank and moyaons, his mortal enemy. of this opportunity, croshaw be glad as well to satisfy his own desire in some other purpose he have, as to keep the king as a opposite to opechancanough and adhere he unto we, or at least make he a instrument against our enemy. so only elis hill, stay with he. as to keep the king as a opposite to opechancanough and adhere he unto we or at least make he a instrument against our enemy. so only elis hill stay with he and the pinnace return to elizabeth city. here shall they rest also a little till we see how this news be entertain in england. it be no small grief to the council and company, the arrival of this news in england to understand of such a suppose impossible loss as that. so many shall fall by the hand of man so contemptible and yet have such warning, especial by the death of nemattanow, who the saluage do think be shot-free as he have persuade they have so long escape so many danger without any hurt. but have such warning, especial by the death of nemattanow, who the saluage do think be shot-free, as he have persuade they have so long escape, so many danger, without any hurt, but now to leap out of this labyrinth of melancholy. all this do not so discourage the noble adventurer, nor diverse other still, to undertake new several plantation, but that diverse ship be dispatch away for their supply and assistance. think sufficient yet captain smith, do entreat and move they to put in practice his old offer. see now it be time to use both it and he. how slender heretofore. both have be regard, and because it be not impertinent to the business, it be not much amiss to remember what it be, the project and it and he, how slender heretofore. both have be regard and because it be not impertinent to the business, it be not much amiss to remember what it be: the project and offer of captain john smith to the right, honourable and right worshipful company virginia. captain smith, offer to the company. if you please, i may be transport with a hundred soldier and thirty sailor by the next michaelmas, with victual munition and such necessary provision. by god assistance, we will endeavour to enforce the saluage to leave their country or bring they in that fear and subjection that every man shall follow their business secure, whereas now half their time and labour be spend in watch and ward, only to defend but altogether unable to suppress. fear and subjection that every man shall follow their business secure, whereas now half their time and labour be spend in watch and ward only to defend, but altogether unable to suppress the saluage, because every man now be for himself, will be unwilling to be draw from their particular labour to be make as packhorse for all the rest, without any certainty of some better reward and preferment than i can understand any there can or will yet give they. these i will employ only in range the country and torment the saluage, and that they shall be as a run army till this be effect and then settle themselves in some such convenient place that shall ever remain a garrison of that strength, ready upon any they shall be as a run army till this be effect and then settle themselves in some such convenient place that shall ever remain a garrison of that strength, ready upon any occasion, against the saluage or any other, for the defence of the country and to see all the english well arm and instruct they their use. but i will have a bark of one hundred ton and mean to build six or seven shalop to transport they, where there shall be occasion, towards the charge, because it be for the general good and what by the massacre and other accident virginia be disparage and many man and their purse much discourage, how ever a great many do hasten to go, think to be next heir to. by the massacre and other accident, virginia be disparage and many man and their purse much discourage. how ever a great many do hasten to go, think to be next heir to all the former loss. i fear they will not find all thing as they do imagine. therefore, leave those gild conceit and dive into the true estate of the colony. i think, if his majesty be true, inform of their necessity and the benefit of this project, he will be please to give the custom of virginia, and the planter also, according to their ability, will add thereto such a contribution as will be fit to maintain this garrison till they be able to subsist or cause some such other collection to be make as may. ability will add thereto such a contribution as will be fit to maintain this garrison till they be able to subsist or cause some such other collection to be make as may put it with all expedition in practice. otherwise it be much to be doubt, there will neither come custom nor any thing from thence to england within these few year now. if this shall be, think, a employment more fit for ancient soldier there breed than such new comer as may go with i, you may please to leave that to my discretion to accept or refuse such voluntary that will hazard their fortune in the trial of these event and discharge such of my company that have rather labour the ground then subdue their enemy. accept or refuse such voluntary that will hazard their fortune in the trial of these event and discharge such of my company that have rather labour the ground then subdue their enemy. what relief i shall have from your colony? i will satisfy and spare they when i can the like, courtesy, notwithstanding these doubt, i hope to feed they as well as defend they, and yet discover you more land unknown than they all yet know. if you will grant i such privilege as of necessity must be use for against any enemy we must be ready to execute. the best can be devise by your state there, but not that they shall either take away my man or any thing else to employ as they please. be ready to execute. the best can be devise by your state there, but not that they shall either take away my man or any thing else to employ as they please by virtue of their authority, and in that i have do somewhat for new-england as well as virginia. so i will desire liberty and authority to make the best use i can of my best experience within the limit of those two patent and to bring they both in one map and the country betwixt. they give always that respect to the governor and government, as a englishman do in scotland or a scotchman in england, or as the regiment in the low-countries do to the governor of the town and city where they be billet. government, as a englishman do in scotland or a scotchman in england, or as the regiment in the low-countries do, to the governor of the town and city where they be billet, or in garrison, where though they live with they and be as their servant to defend they, yet not to be dispose on at their pleasure, but as the prince and state do command they. and for my own pain in particular, i ask not any thing but what i can produce from the proper labour of the saluage. their answer, i can say it be general for the company, their answer for be publish in their court, the most that hear it like exceed well of the motion, and some will have be very large. it be general for the company their answer for be publish in their court the most that hear it like exceed well of the motion and some will have be very large adventurer in it, especial sir john brookes and master david wyffin. but there be such division among they. i can obtain no answer but this: the charge will be too great, their stock be decay, and they do think the planter shall do that of themselves if i can find mean to effect it. they do think i may have leave of the company, provide they may have half the pillage. but i think there be not many will much strive for that employment, for except it be a little corn at some time of the. provide they may have half the pillage. but i think there be not many will much strive for that employment, for except it be a little corn at some time of the year be to be have. i will not give twenty pound for all the pillage. be to be get among the saluage in twenty year. but because they suppose i speak only for my own end, it be good. those understand provident for the company, good they so much talk of, be send thither to make trial of their profound wisdom and long experience. the manner of the salary about this time also be propound. a proposition concern a salary of five and twenty thousand pound to be raise out of tobacco as a yearly pension. the manner of the salary about this time also be propound. a proposition concern a salary of five and twenty thousand pound to be raise out of tobacco as a yearly pension to be pay to certain officer for the erect a new office. concern the sole importation of tobacco. beside his majesty, custom fraught and all other charge, to nominate the undertaker, favourer and opposer with their argument and con will be too tedious and needless be so public know the which to establish spend a good part of that year and the beginning of the next. this make many think wonder of virginia to pay such pension extraordinary to a few here that be never there. and also in what state and pomp some chieftain and the next. this make many think wonder of virginia to pay such pension, extraordinary to a few here that be never there. and also in what state and pomp. some chieftain and diverse of their associate live in virginia and yet no money to maintain a garrison, pay poor man their wage nor yet. five and twenty penny to all the adventurer here and very little to the most part of the planter there breed such difference in opinion, it be dissolve. now let we return to captain croshaw at patawomek. captain croshaw state at patawomek and his adventure where he have not be. long ere opechancanough send two basket of bead to this king to kill he and his man, assure he of the massacre he have. and his adventure where he have not be. long ere opechancanough send two basket of bead to this king to kill he and his man, assure he of the massacre he have make and that before the end of two moon there shall not be a englishman in all their country. this fearful message the king tell this captain, who reply: he have see both the cowardice and treachery of opechancanough. sufficient try by captain smith. therefore his threat, he fear not, nor for his favour care, but will naked fight with he or any of he with their own sword. if he be slay, he will leave a letter for his country man to know: the fault be his own, not the king. two day the king. he with their own sword. if he be slay, he will leave a letter for his country man to know. the fault be his own, not the king. two day the king deliberate upon a answer at last, tell he the english be his friend and the savage emperor opitchapam now call toyatan be his brother. therefore there shall be no blood shed betwixt they. so he return the present, will the pamavuke to come no more in his country, lest the english, though against his will, shall do they any mischief. not long after the escape of water and his w^^e, a boat go abroad to seek out some relief among the plantation by nuports-newes meet. such ill weather though the man be save, they lose their. escape of water and his w^^e a boat, go abroad to seek out some relief among the plantation by nuports-newes. meet such ill weather. though the man be save, they lose their boat, which the storm and wave cast upon the shore of nandsamund, where edmund water, one of the three that first stay in summer isle and find the great piece of ambergris, dwell in virginia. at this massacre he and his wife, these nandsamunds, keep prisoner till it chance they find this boat, at which purchase they so rejoice, according to their custom of triumph, with song, dance and invocation. they be so busy that water and his wife find opportunity to get secret into their canow and so cross the river to kecoughtan, which be triumph with song, dance and invocation. they be so busy that water and his wife find opportunity to get secret into their canow and so cross the river to kecoughtan, which be nine or ten mile, whereat the english no less wonder and rejoice than the saluage be mad with discontent. thus you may see how many desperate danger some man escape when other die that have all thing at their pleasure. the arrival of captain (@) at patawomek: all man think captain croshaw, dead. captain hamer arrive with a ship and a pinnace at patawomeke. be kind entertain both by he and the king. that don hamar tell the king he come for corn. the king reply he have none, but the nacotchtank and their confederate have. be kind entertain both by he and the king. that don hamar tell the king he come for corn. the king reply he have none but the nacotchtank and their confederate have, which be enemy both to he and they. if they will fetch it he will give they 40. or 50 choice bowman to conduct and assist they, those saluage with some of the english they send who so well play their part. they slay 18.. of the nacotchtank, some write but 4. and some they have a long skirmish with they. where the patawomek be so eager of revenge, they drive they not only out of their town but all out of fight through the wood. thus take what they like and spoil the rest. they. be so eager of revenge, they drive they not only out of their town but all out of fight through the wood. thus take what they like and spoil the rest. they retire to patawomek where they lef^ captain croshaw with four man more. croshaws fort and plot for trade. the rest set sail for james town. captain croshaw now, with five man and himself, find night and day so many alarm. he retire into such a convenient place that with the help of the saluage he have quick fortify himself against all those wild enemy. captain nuse, his pinnace meet hamar, by the way, understand all this- come to see captain croshaw. after their best interchange of courtesy, croshaw write to nuse the estate of the place. captain nuse, his pinnace, meet hamar, by the way. understand all this. come to see captain croshaw. after their best interchange of courtesy, croshaw, write to nuse the estate of the place where he be, but understand by they the poor estate of the colony. offer, if they will send he but a bold shallop with man arm and provision for trade. the next harvest he will provide they corn sufficient, but as yet it be but the latter end of sune. there be little or none in all the country. ^^^taine madys^^^ent, ^ent to pataw^m^k. this be make know to the governor and the rest. they send captain madyson with a ship and pinnace and some six and thirty man. those croshaw, a good time, teach the. this be make know to the governor and the rest. they send captain madyson with a ship and pinnace and some six and thirty man, those croshaw a good time teach the use of their arm. but receive a letter from boyse, his wife, a prisoner, with nineteen more at pamavuke to use mean to the governor for their liberty. so he deal with this king. he get first two of his great man to go with he to james town and eight day after to send four of his counsel to pamavuke, there to stay till he send one of his two to they to persuade opachankanough to send two of he with two of the patawomeke to treat about those prisoner and the rest shall remain. till he send one of his two to they to persuade opachankanough to send two of he with two of the patawomeke to treat about those prisoner, and the rest shall remain their hostage at pamavuke. but the commander at james town, it seem like not of it, and so send the patawomeke back again to their own country and captain croshaw to his own habitation, the industry of captain nuse. all this time we have forget captain nuse where we leave. he but new acquaint with the massacre, call all his next adjoin, disperse neighbour together. he regard not the pester, his own house, nor any thing to relieve they and with all speed entrench himself, mount three piece of ordnance so that within 14. day he together. he regard not the pester, his own house, nor any thing to relieve they, and with all speed entrench himself, mount three piece of ordnance so that within 14. day he be strong enough to defend himself from all the saluage. yet when victual grow scant, some that will forage without order, which he punish near occasion. a mutiny notwithstanding, he behave himself to fatherly and kind to they all. they build two house for they. he daily expect from england a fair well of fresh water, mantle with brick, because the river and crick, be there, brackish or salt, in all which thing he play the sawyer, carpenter, dauber, labourer or any thing, wherein, though his courage and heart be steel, he find his body be. be there, brackish or salt, in all which thing he play the sawyer, carpenter, dauber, labourer or any thing wherein, though his courage and heart be steel, he find his body be not make of iron, for he have many sickness and at last a dropsy, no less grief to himself than sorrow, to his wife and all under his government. these cross and loss be no small increaser of his malady, nor the thus abandon our plantation, the loss of our harvest and also tobacco, which, be as our money, the vineyard, our vineyetour have bring to a good forwardness, bruise and destroy with deer and all thing ere they come to perfection with weed, disorderly person or wild beast, so that, as we be i can. bring to a good forwardness. bruise and destroy with deer and all thing ere they come to perfection with weed, disorderly person or wild beast, so that, as we be, i can perceive. but the next year will be worse. be still torment with pride and flattery, idleness and covetousness, as though they have vow here to keep their court with all the pestilent vice in the world. for their attendants enchant with a conceit stateliness even in the very bottom of miserable senselessness. short after sir george yearly and captain william powel, captain powel kill 3. saluage, take each of they, a company of well dispose gentleman and other, to seek their enemy. yearl^y range the shore of wean^ck can see nothing but their old house which 3. saluage. take each of they, a company of well dispose gentleman and other, to seek their enemy. yearl^y range the shore of wean^ck, can see nothing but their old house, which he burn, and so go home, powel, search another part, find they all flee. but three he meet by chance, who head he cut off, burn their house and so return for the saluage. be so light and swift though we see they be so load with armour, they have much advantage of we, though they be coward. the opinion of captain smith, i confess this be true, and it may cause some suppose they be grow invincible. but will any go to catch a hare with a taber and a pipe? for who know not? confess this be true and it may cause some suppose they be grow invincible. but will any go to catch a hare with a taber and a pipe? for who know not though? there be monster, both of man and beast, fish and foul. yet the great, the strong, the wild, cruel, fierce and cunning by reason, art and vigilancy, courage and industry have be slay subject or make tame, and those be still but saluage as they be, only grow more bold by our own simplicity, and still will be worse and worse till they be torment with a continual pursuit and not with lie enclose within palizado or affright. they, out of your sight, think they have, do well, can but defend themselves, and to do be torment with a continual pursuit and not with lie, enclose within palizado or affright. they, out of your sight, think they have, do well, can but defend themselves. and to do this to any purpose will require both charge, patience and experience. but to their proceed, sir george yearleys journey to accomack. about the latter end of june, sir george yearley, accompany with the council and a number of the great gallant in the land, stay three or four day with captain nuse. he make his moan to a chief man among they for want of provision for his company. the great commander reply he shall turn they to his green corn which will make they plump and fat. these field be so near the fort be. of provision for his company. the great commander reply: he shall turn they to his green corn, which will make they plump and fat. these field be so near the fort, be better regard and preserve then the rest. but the great man command, as we call they, be quick obey, for though it be scarce, half grow, either to the greatness or goodness, they devour it, green though it do they small good sir george with his company go to a^comack, to his new plantation where he stay near six week. some corn he bring home, but as he adventure for himself he according enjoy the benefit. some petty magazine come this summer, but either the restraint by proclamation or want of boat, or both cause few. home, but as he adventure for himself, he according enjoy the benefit. some petty magazine come this summer, but either the restraint by proclamation or want of boat, or both cause few but the chieftain to be little. better by they. so long as captain nuse have any thing, we have part captain nuse, his misery, but now all be spend and the people force to live upon oyster and crab. they become so faint no work can be do, and where the law be no work, no meat. now the case be alter to no meat, no work. some small quantity of milk and rice the captain have of his own and that he will distribute gratis as he see occasion. i say gratis for i know meat, no work. some small quantity of milk and rice the captain have of his own and that he will distribute gratis as he see occasion. i say gratis for i know no place else but it be sell for ready payment. those ear of corn that have escape till august, though not ripe by reason of the late plant, the very dog do repair to the corn field to seek they as the man till they be hang. and this i protest before god. be true that i have relate not to flatter, nuse nor condemn any, but all the time i have live in virginia i have not see nor hear that any commander have take such continual pain for the public or do so little. condemn any, but all the time i have live in virginia i have not see nor hear that any commander have take such continual pain for the public or do so little good for himself and his virtuous wife. be no less charitable and compassionate according to her power. for my own part, although i find neither mulberry plant house build man nor victual provide, as the honourable adventurer do promise, i in england, yet at my own charge, have make these preparation and the silkworm ready to be cover. all be lose, but my poor life and child by the massacre, the which, as god in his mercy do, preserve i continual pray we may spend to his glory a alarm four slay, the 9 of september. life and child by the massacre, the which, as god in his mercy do preserve. i continual pray we may spend to his glory a alarm four slay the 9 of september. we have a alarm and two man at their labour slay. the captain, though extreme sick, sally forth. but the saluage lay hide in the corn field all night where they destroy all they can and kill two man more much mischief they do to master edward hill cattle, yet he alone defend his house, though his man be sick and can do nothing. and this be our first assault since the massacre. the kindness of the king of patawomek, about this time, captain madyson, pass by. we have take prisoner the king of patawomek, his and this be our first assault since the massacre. the kindness of the king of patawomek, about this time, captain madyson, pass by. we have take prisoner the king of patawomek, his son and two more. and thus it happen, madyson not like so well to live among the saluage as croshaw do, build he a strong house within the fort so that they be not so sociable as before. nor do they much like pool the interpret. many alarm they have, but see no enemy madyson, before his build go to moyaones where he get provision for a month and be promise much more. so he return to patawomek and build this house and be well use by the saluage, now by the four great man, the. provision for a month and be promise much more. so he return to patawomek and build this house and be well use by the saluage now by the four great man the king send to pamavuke for the redemption of the prisoner. madyson send they a letter but they can neither deliver it nor see they. so long they stay that the king grow doubtful of their bad usage, that he swear by the sky if they return. not well, he will have war with opechankanough, so long as he have any thing. at this time two of madysons man run from he to find they. he send master john vpton and three more with a indian guide to nazatica where they hear they be at this place. two of madysons man run from he to find they. he send master john vpton and three more with a indian guide to nazatica where they hear they be at this place be a king beat out of his country by the n^costs enemy, to the patawomek, this expulse king. though he profess much love to the patawomek, yet he love not the king because he will not help he to revenge his injury, but to our interpreter, poole, he protest: great love, promise if any treason be he will reveal it. our guide conduct this bandy to with they up to patawomek and there keep he our fugitive. we find the patawomek have take and bring home and the four great man return from pamavuke not long. bandy to with they up to patawomek and there keep he our fugitive we find the patawomek have. take and bring home. and the four great man return from pamavuke. not long after this expulse king desire private conference with poole. urge he to swear by his god never to reveal what he will tell he. poole promise he will not. then quoth this king, those great man that go to pamavuke, go not as you suppose they pretend, but to contract with opechankanough how to kill you all here. and these be their plot, a saluage^ policy: first they will procure half of you to go a fish to their further town and there set upon they and cut off the rest. if that fail, they will saluage^ policy. first they will procure half of you to go a fish to their further town and there set upon they and cut off the rest. if that fail, they will feign a place where be many stranger will trade their fur, where they will persuade half of you to go trade and there murder you and kill they at home. and if this fail also, than they will make alarm two night together to tire you out with watch and then set upon you yet. of all this, say he, there be none acquaint but the king and the great conjurer. this be make know to the captain. we all stand more punctual upon our guard. mad^son, take the k^ng and kill 30. o^ 40. at. but the king and the great conjurer. this be make know to the captain. we all stand more punctual upon our guard. mad^son, take the k^ng and kill 30. o^, 40. at which the saluage wonder, desire to know the cause. we tell they we expect some assault from the pamavuke, whereat they seem content. and the next day the king go on hunt with two of our man and the other a fish, and abroad as before, till our shallop return from james town with the two saluage send home with captain croshaw by those the governor send to madyson that this king shall send he twelve of his great man. word of this be send to the king at another town where he be, who not? the governor send to madyson that this king shall send he twelve of his great man. word of this be send to the king at another town, where he be, who not come present with the messenger. madyson conceit he regard not the message and intend, as he suppose, the same treason. the next morning the king come home, be send for he come to the captain and bring he a dish of their dainty fruit. then the captain feign his return to james town. the king tell he he may if he will but desire not to leave he destitute of aid, have so many enemy about he. the captain tell he he will leave a guard but entreat. his answer concern the twelve great man for not to leave he, destitute of aid, have so many enemy about he. the captain tell he he will leave a guard but entreat his answer concern the twelve great man. for the governor. the king reply: his enemy lay so about he, he can not spare they. than the captain desire his son and one other. my son say the king be go abroad about business, but the other you desire you shall have, and that other sit by he. but that man refuse to go, whereupon madyson go forth and lock the door, leave the king, his son and four saluage and five english man in the strong house and set upon the town with the rest of his man, slay thirty or forty man, woman. the king, his son and four, saluage and five, english man in the strong house and set upon the town with the rest of his man, slay thirty or forty man, woman and child. the king demand the cause poole, tell he the treason, cry out to entreat the captain, cease from such cruelty, but have, slay and make fly all in the town. he return, tax the poor king of treason who deny to the death not to know of any such matter, but say this be some plot of they that tell it only to kill. i for be your friend. then, madyson, will he to command none of his man shall shoot at he as he go aboard, which he present do, and it be. to kill. i for be your friend. then, madyson, will he to command, none of his man shall shoot at he as he go aboard, which he present do. and it be perform. so, madyson, depart, lead the king, his son and two more to his ship. promise, when all his man be ship, he shall return at liberty notwithstanding. he bring they to james town, the king set at liberty where they lie some day, and af^er be send home by captain hamer that take corn for their ransom and after set fail for new find land. but alas, the cause of this, be only this. they understand, nor know what be amiss ever since the begin of these plantation. a digression, it have be, suppose the find land. but alas, the cause of this be only this. they understand nor know what be amiss ever since the begin of these plantation. a digression: it have be suppose the king of spain will invade. they, or our english papist, endeavour to dissolve. they bu^. neither all the counsel of spain nor papist in the world can have devise a better course to bring they all to ruin than thus to abuse their friend. nor can there ever have be a better plot to have overthrow opechankanough. then, captain chroshaws, have it be full manage with expedition. but it seem, god be angry to see virginia make a stage where nothing but murder and indiscretion contend for victory among the rest of the plantation. all this. manage with expedition. but it seem, god be angry to see virginia make a stage where nothing but murder and indiscretion contend for victory. among the rest of the plantation all this summer, little be do their proceed of the other plantation but secure themselves and plant tobacco which pass there as current silver, and by the oft turn and wind it some grow rich but many poor. notwithstanding, ten or twelve ship or more have arrive there since the massacre. although it be christmas, ere any return, and that return great reviue all man long expectation here in england. for they bring news that, notwithstanding their extreme sickness, many be recover and find the saluage. do not much trouble they, except it be sometime some disorderly straggler. expectation here in england, for they bring news that notwithstanding their extreme sickness, many be recover and find the saluage do not much trouble they, except it be sometime some disorderly straggler they cut off to lull they the better in security. they seek no revenge till their corn be ripe. than they draw together three hundred of the best soldier they can. that will leave their private business, 300, surprise nandsamund and adventure themselves among the saluage to surprise their corn under the conduct of sir george yearley be, embark in convenient ship and all thing necessary for the enterprise. they go first to nands^mund where the people set fire on their own house and spoil what they can and then flee with what they can carry. thing necessary for the enterprise. they go first to nands^mund, where the people set fire on their own house and spoil what they can and then flee with what they can carry so that the english do make no slaughter among they. for revenge, their corn field be new gather, they surprise, all they find burn. the house remain unburnt and so depart quarter about kecoughtan. samuel colyer slay after the watch be set. samuel colyer, one of the most ancient planter and very well acquaint with their language and habitation, humour and condition, and governor of a town when the watch be set, go the round, unfortunate by a sentinel that discharge his piece be slay, they surprise pamavuke. thence they sail to pamavuke, the chief seat. of a town when the watch be set, go the round, unfortunate by a sentinel that discharge his piece, be slay, they surprise pamavuke. thence they sail to pamavuke, the chief seat of opechankanough, the contriver of the massacre, the saluage seem exceed fearful promise to bring they, sara and the rest of the english yet live with all the arm and what they have to restore. much desire peace and to give they any satisfaction they can. many such device. they feign to procrastinate the time, ten or twelve day, till they have get away their corn from all the other place up the river but that where the english keep their quarter at last. when they see all those promise be but delusion, they seize on. their corn from all the other place up the river but that where the english keep their quarter at last. when they see all those promise be but delusion, they seize on all the corn there be, set fire on their house and in follow the saluage that flee before they. some few of those naked devil have that spirit. they lay in ambuscado and as our man march, discharge some shot out of english piece and hurt some of they, fly at their pleasure where they list, burn their empty house before they as they go to make themselves sport. so they escape and, sir george, return with corn where, for our pain, we have three bushel apiece. but we be enjoin, before we have it to. go to make themselves sport. so they escape and sir george return with corn where, for our pain, we have three bushel apiece, but we be enjoin, before we have it, to pay ten shilling the bushel for fraught and other charge. thus, by this mean the saluage be like, as they report, to endure no small misery this winter and that some of our man be return to their former plantation. the opinion of captain smith, what other passage or impediment happen in their proceed? that they be not full revenge of the saluage before they return? i know not, nor can ever hear more, but that they suppose they slay two, and how it be impossible for any man to do more than they do. yet they return. i know not, nor can ever hear more, but that they suppose they slay two. and how it be impossible for any man to do more than they do. yet worthy ferdinando have scarce three hundred spaniard to conquer the great city of mexico where thousand of saluage dwell in strong house, but because they be a civilise people have wealth, and those mere barbarian, as wild as beast, have nothing. i entreat your patience to tell you my opinion which, if it be god pleasure, i shall not live to put in practice yet. it may be hereafter useful for some, but howsoever, i hope not hurtful to any. how to subject all the saluage in virginia, and this it be, have these three hundred. yet it may be hereafter useful for some, but howsoever, i hope not hurtful to any. how to subject all the saluage in virginia, and this it be, have these three hundred man be at my dispose. i will have send first one hundred to captain rawley, chroshaw to patawomek, with some small ordnance for the fort the which, but with daily exercise they will have strike that love and admiration into the patowomek and terror and amazement into his enemy, which be not far off and most seat upon the other side the river. they will willing have be friend or have give any composition they can before they will be torment with such a visible fear. now though they be general perfidious, yet necessity constrain those. will willing have be friend or have give any composition they can, before they will be torment with such a visible fear. now, though they be general perfidious, yet necessity constrain those to a kind of constancy because of their enemy, and neither myself that first find they, captain argall, chroshow nor hamar never find themselves in fifteen year trial, nor be it likely now they will have so hostage their man, suffer the build of a fort, and their woman and child among they. have they intend any villainy? but suppose they have. who will have desire a better advantage than such a advertisement to have prepare the fort for such a assault? and sure it must be a poor fort. they can hurt much more. take have desire a better advantage than such a advertisement to have prepare the fort for such a assault, and sure it must be a poor fort. they can hurt much more. take, if there be but five man in it, dare discharge a piece. therefore, a man not well know their condition may be as well too jealous as too careless. such another lope sconce will i have have at onawmanient, and one hundred man more to have make such another at atquacke, upon the river of toppahanock, which be not past thirteen mile distant from onawmanient, each of which twelve man will keep as well as twelve thousand and spare all the rest to be employ as there shall be occasion. and all this with these number. onawmanient, each of which twelve man will keep as well as twelve thousand, and spare all the rest to be employ as there shall be occasion. and all this with these number may easy have be do, if not by courtesy, yet by compulsion. especial at that time of september when all their fruit be ripe, their beast fat and infinite number of wild fowl begin to repair to every creek that man, if they will do any thing, can not want. victual this do there remain yet one hundred who shall have do the like. at ozinicke, upon the river of chickahamania, not past six mile from the chief habitation of opechankanough, these small fort have be cause sufficient to cause all the inhabitant of each of. at ozinicke, upon the river of chickahamania, not past six mile from the chief habitation of opechankanough, these small fort have be cause sufficient to cause all the inhabitant of each of those river to look to themselves. then have so many ship, bark and boat in virginia as there be at that present, with what facility may you have land? two hundred and twenty man, if you have, but only five or six boat in one night: forty to range the branch of mattapanyent, forty more that of youghtanund and forty more to keep their randivous at pamavuke itself, all which place lie so near they may hear from e^ch other within four or five hour, and not any of those small party, if there be any. randivous, at pamavuke itself, all which place lie so near, they may hear from e^ch other within four or five hour, and not any of those small party if there be any valour, discretion or industry in they, but as sufficient as four thousand to force they all to contribution or take or spoil all they have. for have thus so many convenient rendezvous to believe each other, though all the whole country have be our enemy, where can they rest? but in the depth of winter we may burn all the house upon all those river in two or three day. then without fire they can not live, which they can not so hide. but we shall find, and quick. so tire they with watch and ward. river in two or three day, then without fire they can not live, which they can not so hide. but we shall find, and quick. so tire they with watch and ward. they will be so weary of their life as either fly all their country or give all they have to be release of such a hourly misery. now, if but a small number of the saluage will assist we, as there be no question, but diverse of they will, and so suppose they can not be draw to such faction, be to believe they be more virtuous than many christian and the best govern people in the world. all the pamavuke may have be dispatch as well in a month as a year, and then to be more virtuous than many christian and the best govern people in the world. all the pamavuke may have be dispatch as well in a month as a year and then to have deal with any other enemy at our pleasure and yet make all this toil and danger but a recreation. if you think this strange or impossible 12 man with myself, i find sufficient to go where i will adays and surprise a house with the people, if not a whole town, in a night, or encounter all the power they can make as a whole army, as former at large have be relate and it seem, by these small party, last among they by captain crashow, hamar and madyson. they be not grow to that. a whole army as former at large have be relate and it seem by these small party, last among they by captain crashow, hamar and madyson, they be not grow to that excellency in policy and courage, but they may be encounter and their wife and child apprehend. i know i shall be tax for write so much of myself, but i care not much, because the judicial know there be few such soldier as be my example have write their own action. nor know i who will or can tell my intent better than myself. some again find as much fault with the company for meddle with so many plantation together because they that have many iron in the fire. some must burn, but i think no. some again find as much fault with the company for meddle with so many plantation together, because they that have many iron in the fire. some must burn, but i think no. if they have man enough, know how to work they. but howsoever it be better. some burn, then have none at all. the king of spain regard but how many powerful kingdom he keep under his obedience, and for the savage country he have subject, they be more then enough for a good cosmographer to nominate and be three molehill. so much to we, and so many empire, so little for he. for my own part, i can choose but grieve that the action of a englishman shall be inferior to any and that the command and so many empire, so little for he. for my own part, i can choose but grieve that the action of a englishman shall be inferior to any and that the command of england shall not be as great as any monarchy that ever be since the world begin. i mean not as a tyrant to torment all christendom, but to suppress her disturber and conquer her enemy, for the great roman get into their hand the whole world compass, both by sea and land, or any sea or heaven or earth extend. and yet that nation can not be content much about. this time arrive a small bark of barnestable, the arrival of captain butler and his accident, which have be at the summer isle and in nation can not be content much about. this time arrive a small bark of barnestable, the arrival of captain butler and his accident, which have be at the summer isle and in her. captain nathaniel butler, who have be governor there three year and his commission expire, he take the opportunity of this ship to see virginia, at james town. he be kind entertain by sir francis wyatt, the governor. after he have rest there fourteen day, he fall up with his ship to the river of chickahamania where meet captain william powel, join together such force as they have to the number of eighty. they set upon the chickahamanians that fearful flee, suffer the english to spoil all. they have not dare to resist. they thus he. force as they have to the number of eighty. they set upon the chickahamanians that fearful flee suffer the english to spoil all they have not dare to resist. they thus, he return to james town where he stay a month at kecoughtan, as much more, and so return for england. a strange deliverance of master and other. but ride at kecoughtan m john son to doctor, a young gentleman that go with captain butler from england to this place. michael fuller, william gany, cornelius may and one other go ashore with some good late in a fair evening. such a sudden gust do arise that drive. they thwart the river in that place at least three or four mile in breadth, where the s^ore be so shallow. a fair evening, such a sudden gust do arise, that drive, they thwart the river in that place at least three or four mile in breadth, where the s^ore be so shallow at a low water and the boat beat upon the sand they leave. she wade near half a mile, and oft up to the chin. so well it happen, master have put his bandileir of powder in his hat, which next, god be all their preservation, for it be february and the ground so cold, their body become so benumb, they be not able to strike fire with a steel and a stone he have in his pocket. the stone they lose twice, and thus those poor soul grope in the dark. it be, master argents. to strike fire with a steel and a stone. he have in his pocket. the stone they lose twice, and thus those poor soul grope in the dark. it be master argents chance to find it and with a few wither, leaf, reed and brush, make a small fire. be upon the chisapeak shore their mortal enemy. great be their fear to be discover. the joyful morning appear. they find their boat and good drive ashore. not fairy from they, but so split she be unserviceable. but so much be the frost. their clothes do freeze upon their back, for they dare not make any great fire to dry they, lest thereby the bloody saluage may descry they, so that one of they die the next day and upon their back, for they dare not make any great fire to dry they, lest thereby the bloody saluage may descry they, so that one of they die the next day and the next night dig a grave in the sand with their hand, bury he in this bodily fear. they live, and fast, two day and night than two of they go into the land to seek fresh water, the other to the boat to get some meal and oil. and his comrado find a canow in which they resolve to adventure to their ship, but she be a drift in the river before they return. thus, frustrate of all hope, captain butler, the three night range the shore in his boat to seek they discharge his but she be a drift in the river before they return. thus, frustrate of all hope, captain butler, the three night, range the shore in his boat to seek. they discharge his musket, but they suppose it some saluage have get some english piece. they grow more perplex then ever so he return and lose his labour. the four day they unload their boat and stop her leak with their handkerchief and other rag. two row and two bail out the water. but far they go not ere. the water grow upon they so fast and they so tire. they think themselves happy to be on shore again, though they perceive the indian be not far off by their fire. thus, at the very period of despair, fuller they so tire. they think themselves happy to be on shore again, though they perceive the indian be not far off by their fire. thus, at the very period of despair, fuller undertake to sit a stride upon a little piece of a old canow. so well it please, god, the wind and tide serve by paddle with his hand and foot in the water, beyond all expectation, god. so guide he three or four hour upon this board. he arrive at their ship, where they no less amaze than he tire. they take, he in present as he have, conclude with his companion, he cause. they discharge a piece of ordnance, if he escape, which give no less comfort to master and the rest than terror to. present as he have, conclude with his companion he cause. they discharge a piece of ordnance, if he escape, which give no less comfort to master and the rest than terror to those plantation that hear it be late at such a unexpected alarm. but after, with warm clothes and a little strong water, they have a little recover. he, such be his courage and care of his distress friend. he return that night again with master felgate to conduct he to they, and so give thanks to god for so hopeless a deliverance. it please his divine power. both they and their provision come safe aboard, but fuller, they doubt, will never recover his benumb leg and thigh. now, before butler arrival in england, many hard speech. his divine power. both they and their provision come safe aboard, but fuller, they doubt, will never recover his benumb leg and thigh. now, before butler arrival in england, many hard speech be rumour against he for. so leave his charge before he receive order from the company diverse again of his soldier as high commend he for his good government, art, judgement and industry, but to make the misery of virginia appear that it may be reform in time, how all those city, town, corporation, fort, vineyard, nursery of mulberry, glasse-house, iron forge, guest-house, silkworm, college, the company great estate, and that plenty some do speak of here, be rather thing in word and paper then, in effect, with diverse reason of the cause of those defect. college, the company, great estate and that plenty some do speak of here, be rather thing in word and paper then, in effect, with diverse reason of the cause of those defect. if it be false, his blame nor shame can not be too much. but if there be such defect in the government and distress in the colony, it be think by many it have be too long conceal and require rather reformation than disputation. but however, it be not amiss to provide for the worst, for the best will help itself, notwithstanding it be apprehend so hardly and examine with that passion that the brute thereof be spread abroad with that expedition. it do more hurt then the massacre and the fault of all now by apprehend so hardly and examine with that passion that the brute thereof be spread abroad with that expedition. it do more hurt, then. the massacre and the fault of all now by the vulgar rumour must be attribute to the unwholesomeness of the air and barrenness of the country, as though all england be naught because the fen and marsh be unhealthy or barren. because some will lie under window and starve in cheapside, rot in goal, die in the street, highway or any where, and use a thousand device to maintain themselves in those misery rather than take any pain to live as they may by honest labour, and a great part of such like be the planter of virginia and partly the occasion of those defailement. rather than take any pain to live as they may by honest labour and a great part of such like, be the planter of virginia and partly the occasion of those defailement, in the latter end of this last year or the begin of this, how captain spilman be leave in the river of patawomek. the earl of southampton treasurer, captain h^nrie spilman, a gentleman that have live in those country thirteen or fourteen year, one of the best interpreter in the land, be furnish with a bark and six and twenty man, he be send to truck in the river of patawomek where he have live a long time among the saluage, whether he presume too much upon his acquaintance among they or they seek to be. to truck in the river of patawomek where he have live a long time among the saluage, whether he presume too much upon his acquaintance among they, or they seek to be revenge of any for the slaughter make among they by the english so late, or he seek to betray they or they he be all several relation but it seem but imaginary. for then return report: they leave he ashore about patawomek, but the name of the place they know not, with one and twenty man be but five in the bark, the saluage. ere they suspect any thing, board they with their canowes and enter so fast. the english be amaze till a sailer give fire to a piece of ordnance only at random at ere they suspect any thing, board they with their canowes and enter so fast the english be amaze till a sailer give fire to a piece of ordnance. only at random, at the report whereof the saluage leap overboard. so, distract with fear, they leave their canowes and swim a shore and present after they hear a great brute among the saluage, a shore and see a man head throw down the bank, whereupon they weigh anchor and return home. but how he be surprise or slay be uncertain. thus thing proceed and vary not a jot whether we know they or we know they not. a particular of such necessary as either private family or single person shall have cause to provide to go to virginia whereby jot, whether we know they or we know they not a particular of such necessary as either private family or single person shall have cause to provide to go to virginia whereby great number may in part conceive, the better. how to provide for themselves apparel, apparel for one man, and so, after the rate for more, a monmoth cap: 1 s 10 d 3 fall band: 1 s 3 d 3 shirt: 7 s 6 d 1 waistcoat: 2 s 2 d 1 suit of canvas, 7 s 6 d 1 suit of freeze, 10 s 1 suit of cloth, 15 s 3 pair of irish stocking, 4 s 4 pair of shoe, 8 s 8 d 1 pair of garter, 10 d 1. dozen of point^. s 1 suit of cloth. 15 s 3 pair of irish stocking. 4 s 4 pair of shoe. 8 s 8 d 1 pair of garter. 10 d 1 dozen of point^. 3 d 1 pair of canvas sheet. 8 s 7 else of canvas to make a bed and bolster to be fill in virginia serve for two man. 8 s 5 else, of course, canvas to make a bed at sea for two man. 5 s 1 course rug at sea for two man. 6 s 4 l victual for a whole year for a man, and so after the rate for more: 8 bushel of meal: 2 l 2 bushel of pease, 6 s 2 bushel of otemeale. 9 s 1 gallon of aquavitae: 2. a man, and so, after the rate for more, 8 bushel of meal, 2 l 2 bushel of pease, 6 s 2 bushel of otemeale, 9 s 1 gallon of aquavitae, 2 s 6 d, 1 gallon of oil, 3 s 6 d, 2 gallon of vinegar, 2 s 3 l, 3 s arm for a man. but if half your man be arm, it be well. so all have sword and piece 1 armour, complete light: 17 s 1 long piece, five foot and a half near musket bear, 1 l 2 s 1 sword, 5 s 1 belt, 1 s 1 bandilier, 1 s 6 d, 2 pound of powder, 18 s 6 pound of shot or lead pistol and goose shoot: 5 s 3 l. 5 s 1 belt, 1 s 1 bandilier, 1 s 6 d, 2 pound of powder, 18 s 6 pound of shot or lead pistol and goose shoot. 5 s 3 l, 9 s 6 d tool for a family of six person and so after the rate for more: 5 broad hoe at 2 s a piece, 10 s 5 narrow hoe at 16 d a piece, 6 s 8 d, 2 broad axe at 3 s 8 d a piece, 7 s 4 d, 5 fell axe at 18 d a piece. 7 s 6 d, 2 steel handsawe at 16 d a piece. 2 s 8 d, 2 two handsawe at 5 s a piece, 10 s 1 whipsaw set and file with box file. 6 d 2 steel handsawe at 16 d a piece, 2 s 8 d 2. two handsawe at 5 s a piece, 10 s 1 whipsaw, set and file with box, file and wrest, 10 s 2 hammer, 12 d a piece 2 s 3 shovel, 18 d a piece, 4 s 6 d 2. spade at 18 d a piece, 3 s 2. auger at 6 d piece 1 s 6. chissel at 6 d a piece 3 s 2 percer stock 4 d a piece, 8 d 3. gimlet at 2 d a piece, 6 d 2 hatchet at 21 d a piece, 3 s 6 d 2. frowe to cleave pale 18 d each. 3 s 2 hand bill 20 d a piece, 3 s. 6 d 2 hatchet at 21 d a piece. 3 s 6 d 2 frowe to cleave pale, 18 d each. 3 s 2 hand bill, 20 d a piece, 3 s 4 d 1 grindstone. 4 s nail of all sort to the value of 2 l 2 pickaxe. 3 s 6 l, 2 s 8 d household implement for a family and six person, and so for more or less after the rate: 1 iron pot, 7 s 1 kettell, 6 s 1 large frying-pan, 2 s 6 d 1 gridiron, 1 s 6 d 2 skellot, 5 s 1 spit, 2 s platter dish spoon of wood, 4 s, 1 l, 8 s for sugar, spice and fruit and at sea for six man, 12. d, 2 skellot, 5 s, 1 spit, 2 s, platter, dish spoon of wood, 4 s, 1 l, 8 s for sugar, spice and fruit and at sea, for six man, 12 s, 6 d. so the full charge after this rate for each person will amount about the sum of 12 l, 10 s, 10 d, the passage of each man be 6 l. the fraught of these provision for a man will be about half a tun, which be 1 l 10 s. so the whole charge will amount to about 20 l. now, if the number be great, net hook and line, but cheese, bacon, cow and goat must be add and this be the usual proportion the virginia company do bestow upon their tenant. if the number be great, net hook and line. but cheese, bacon, cow and goat must be add, and this be the usual proportion the virginia company do bestow upon their tenant. they send a brief relation write by captain smith to his majesty, commissioner for the reformation of virginia, concern some aspersion against it. honourable gentleman, for so many fair and navigable river so near adjoin and pierce through so fair a natural land, free from any inundation or large, fenny, unwholesome marsh i have not see, read nor hear of, and for the build of city, town and wharfage, if they will use the mean where there be no more ebb nor flood, nature in few place afford any so convenient for salt marsh or quagmire. of city town and wharfage if they will use the mean where there be no more ebb nor flood. nature in few place afford any so convenient for salt marsh or quagmire. in this tract of james town river i know very few. some small marsh and swamp there be, but more profitable than hurtful, and i think there be more low marsh ground betwixt eriffe and chelsey than kecoughton and the fall which be about one hundred and eighty mile by the course of the river. be enjoin by our commission not to unplant nor wrong the saluage, the cause of our first misery, because the channel be so near the shore where now be james town than a thick grove of tree. we cut they down. wrong the saluage, the cause of our first misery. because the channel be so near the shore, where now be james town, than a thick grove of tree, we cut they down. where the saluage pretend as much kindness as can be, they hurt and slay one and twenty of we in two hour. at this time, our diet be for most part water and bran and three ounce of little better stuff in bread for five man a meal, and thus we live near three month our lodging under bough of tree. the saluage be our enemy, who we neither know nor understand, occasion i think sufficient to make man sick and die. necessity. thus do enforce, i with eight or nine but ^8 english in all. our enemy who we neither know nor understand, occasion, i think, sufficient to make man sick and die. necessity thus do enforce, i with eight or nine but ^8 english in all virginia, to try: conclusion among the saluage that we get provision which recover the rest be most sick. six week i be lead captive by those barbarian, though some of my man be slay and the rest flee. yet it please god to make their great king daughter the mean to return i safe to james town and relieve our want, and then our commonwealth be in all eight and thirty. the remainder of one hundred and five be supply with one hundred and twenty, proof of the healthfulness of the country, with twelve man in. commonwealth be in all eight and thirty. the remainder of one hundred and five be supply with one hundred and twenty, proof of the healthfulness of the country. with twelve man in a boat of three tun, i spend fourteen week in those large water. the content of the way of my boat, protract by the scale of proportion, be about three thousand mile beside the river we dwell upon where no christian know ever be, and our diet for the most part what we can find, yet but one die, the saluage. be acquaint how the saluage become subject that, by command from england, we dare not hurt. they be much embolden. that famine and their insolence do force i to break our commission and instruction cause. the saluage become subject that, by command from england, we dare not hurt. they be much embolden. that famine and their insolence do force i to break our commission and instruction cause powhatan, fly his country and take the king of pamavuke prisoner, and also to keep the king of paspahegh in shackle and put his man to doubletaske in chain till nine and thirty of their king pay we contribution and the offend saluage send to james town to punish at our own discretion in the two last year. i stay there. i have not a man slay. all those conclusion be not able to prevent the bad event of pride and idleness have receive another supply of seventy. how we live of the natural fruit of. a man slay. all those conclusion be not able to prevent the bad event of pride and idleness, have receive another supply of seventy how we live of the natural fruit of the country. we be about two hundred in all but not twenty workman in follow the strict direction from england to do that be impossible at that time. so it happen that neither we nor they have any thing to eat but what the country afford natural yet of eighty who live upon oyster in june and july with a pint of corn a week for a man lie under tree, and 120 for the most part live upon sturgeon, which be dry till we pound it to powder for meal yet in ten week. but week for a man lie under tree and 120 for the most part live upon sturgeon which be dry till we pound it to powder for meal. yet in ten week, but seven die. it be true, we have of tool, arm and munition sufficient. some aquavitae vinegar, proof of the commodity we return, meal, pease and otemeale, but in two year and a half not sufficient for six month, though by the bill of load, the proportion send we will well have content. we notwithstanding, we send home ample proof of pitch tar, soap ash, wainskot, clapboord, silk, grass, iron ore, some sturgeon and glass, saxefras, cedar, cypris and black walnut crown powhaton seek the monacan country according to the instruction, send we, but they cause we. wainskot, clapboord, silk grass, iron ore, some sturgeon and glass, saxefras, cedar, cypris and black walnut crown powhaton. seek the monacan country according to the instruction send we, but they cause we neglect. more necessary work they have better have. give for pitch and soap ash one hundred pound a tun in denmark. we also maintain five or six several plantation. james town be burn, we rebuild it, and three fort more what we build beside the church and storehouse. we have about forty or fifty several house to keep we warm and dry environ with a palizado of fourteen or fifteen foot and each as much as three or four man can carry. we dig a fair well of fresh water in the fort where we have. a palizado of fourteen or fifteen foot and each as much as three or four man can carry. we dig a fair well of fresh water in the fort where we have three bulwark, four and twenty piece of ordnance of culver, demiculver, sacar and falcon, and most well mount upon convenient platform, plant one hundred acre of corne. we have but six ship to transport and supply we, and but two hundred seventy seven man, boy and woman, by who labour virginia, be bring to this kind of perfection the most difficulty past and the foundation thus lay by this small mean. yet because we have do no more, they call in our commission, take a new in their own name and appoint we near as many. foundation thus lay by this small mean. yet, because we have do no more, they call in our commission, take a new in their own name and appoint we near as many office and officer as i have soldier that neither know we nor we they, without our consent or knowledge, since there have go more than one hundred ship of other proportion and eight or ten thousand people. now, if you please to compare what have be spend, send, discover and do this fifteen year, by that we do in the three first year and every governor that have be there since give you but such a account as this, you may easy find what have be the cause of those disaster in virginia. then come in. every governor that have be there since. give you but such a account as this, you may easy find what have be the cause of those disaster in virginia. then come in captain argall and master sedan in a ship of master cornelius to fish for sturgeon. who have such good provision, we contract with they for it whereby we be better furnish. then ever, not long after, come in seven ship with about three hundred people, but rather to supplant. we then supply we their admiral with their authority be cast away in the bermuda, very angry they be. we have make no better provision for they. seven or eight week we withstand the inundation of these disorderly humour till i be near blow to death with very angry they be, we have make no better provision for they. seven or eight week we withstand the inundation of these disorderly humour till i be near blow to death with gunpowder, which occasion i to return for england how i leave the country in the year 1609, about michaelmas, i leave the country as be former relate with three ship, seven boat, commodity to trade, harvest, new gather. eight week, provision of corn and meal, about five hundred person, three hundred, musket, shot powder and match with arm for more man than we have, the saluage, their language and habitation well know to two hundred expert soldier, net for fish, tool of all sort, apparel to supply their want, six, mare and a horse, five or the saluage, their language and habitation well know to two hundred expert soldier, net for fish, tool of all sort, apparel to supply their want, six mare and a horse, five or six hundred swine, many more poultry, what be bring or breed, but victual there remain. my charge have spend some five year and more than five hundred pound in procure the letter, patent and set forward and near as much more about new england, etc. thus these nineteen year i have, here and there, not spare any thing according to my ability, nor the best advice i can to persuade how those strange miracle of misery may have be prevent which lamentable experience plain teach. i of necessity must ensue, but few will believe i till. best advice i can to persuade how those strange miracle of misery may have be prevent, which lamentable experience plain teach i of necessity must ensue. but few will believe i. till now too dear they have pay for it, wherefore hitherto i have rather leave all, then undertake impossibility or any more such costly task at such chargeable rate my reward. for in neither of those two country have i one foot of land, nor the very house i build, nor the ground i dig with my own hand, nor ever any content or satisfaction at all. and though i see ordinary, those two country share before i by they that neither have they nor know they, but by my description, yet that do not so much. at all and though i see ordinary those two country share before i by they that neither have they nor know they, but by my description yet that do not so much trouble i as to hear and see those contention and division which will hazard, if not ruin, the prosperity of virginia if present remedy be not find as they have, hinder many hundred who will have be there ere now and make they yet that be willing to stand in a demur for the book and map i have make. i will thank he that will show i so much for so little recompense and bear with their error till i have do better for the material in they i can deny, but be ready to. that will show i so much for so little recompense and bear with their error till i have do better for the material in they i can deny, but be ready to affirm they both there and here, upon such ground as i have propound, which be to have but fifteen hundred man to subdue again the saluage, fortify the country, discover that yet unknown and both defend and feed their colony, which i most humble refer to. his majesty most judicial judgement and the most honourable lord of his privy council, you, his trusty and well-beloved commissioner, and the honourable company of planter and well-willer to virginia, new-england and sommer-iland. out of these observation, it please his majesty commissioner for the reformation of virginia to desire my well-beloved commissioner and the honourable company of planter and well-willer to virginia, new-england and sommer-iland. out of these observation, it please his majesty commissioner for the reformation of virginia to desire my answer to these seven question. quest 1. what conceive you be the cause? the plantation have prosper no better since you leave it in so good a forwardness. answ, idleness and carelessness bring all i do in three year, in six month, to nothing. and of five hundred i leave scarce threescore remain. and have sir thomas gate not get from the bermuda? i think they have be all dead before they can be. supply quest 2. what conceive you shall be the cause? though the country be good, there come nothing but tobacco answ the. think they have be all dead before they can be supply quest 2. what conceive you shall be the cause. though the country be good, there come nothing but tobacco answ, the oft alter of governor, it seem. cause, every man make use of his time, and because corn be stint at two shilling, six penny the bushel, and tobacco at three shilling the pound, and they value a man labour a year worth fifty or threescore pound, but in corn not worth ten pound, presume tobacco will furnish, they with all thing now make a man labour in corn worth threescore pound and in tobacco but ten pound a man. then shall they have corn sufficient to entertain all comer and keep their people in health to. man labour in corn worth threescore pound and in tobacco but ten pound a man. then shall they have corn sufficient to entertain all comer and keep their people in health to do any thing. but till then there will be little or nothing to any purpose. quest 3. what conceive you to have be the cause of the massacre? and have the saluage have the use of any piece in your time, or when, or by who they be, teach answ the cause of the massacre be the want of marshal discipline, and because they will have all the english have, by destroy those they find so careless, secure, that they be not provide to defend themselves against any enemy, be so disperse as they be in. will have all the english have by destroy those they find so careless, secure that they be not provide to defend themselves against any enemy. be so disperse as they be. in my time though, captain nuport furnish they with sword by truck, and many fugitive do the like, and some piece they get accidental. yet i get the most of they again, and it be death to he that shall show a savage the use of a piece, since i understand they become so good shot they be employ for fowler and huntsman by the english quest 4.. what charge think you will have settle the government, both for defence and plant, when you leave it? answ twenty thousand pound will have hire good labourer and mechanical. english. quest 4. what charge think you will have: settle the government, both for defence and plant, when you leave it answ twenty thousand pound will have hire good labourer and mechanical man and have furnish they with cattle and all necessary and 100 of they will have. do more than a thousand of those that go though the lord laware, sir ferdinando waynman, sir thomas gate and sir thomas dale be persuade to the contrary, but when they have try, they confess their error. quest 5. what conceive you will be the remedy and the charge answ the remedy be to send soldier and all sort of labourer and necessary for they that they may be there by next michaelmas, the which to do well will stand. charge, answ, the remedy be to send soldier and all sort of labourer and necessary for they that they may be there by next. michaelmas, the which to do well, will stand you in five thousand pound, but if his majesty will please to lend two of his ship to transport, they less will serve beside the benefit of his grace to the action will encourage all man, quest 6.. what think you be the defect of the government both here and there? answ, the multiplicity of opinion here and officer there make such delay by question and formality that as much time be spend in compliment as in action. beside, some be so desirous to employ their ship. have six pound for every passenger and three pound question and formality, that as much time be spend in compliment as in action beside, some be so desirous to employ their ship, have six pound for every passenger and three pound for every tun of good, at which rate a thousand ship may now better be. procure then one at the first, when the common stock defray all fraught, wage, provision and magazine whereby the ship be so pester, as occasion much sickness, disease and mortality. for though all the passenger die, they be sure of their fraught, and then all must be satisfy with oration, disputation, excuse and hope. as for the letter of advice from hence and their answer, thence they be so well write, man will believe there be no great doubt of the. oration, disputation, excuse and hope. as for the letter of advice from hence and their answer, thence they be so well write, man will believe there be no great doubt of the performance and that all thing be well. to which error here they have be ever much subject and there not to believe or not to relieve the true and poor estate of that colony, who fruit be common spend before they be ripe, and this loss be nothing to they here, who great estate be not sensible of the loss of their adventure, and so they think or will not take notice. but it be so with all man. but howsoever they think or dispose of all thing at their pleasure. i be sure not myself. so they think or will not take notice. but it be so with all man. but howsoever they think or dispose of all thing at their pleasure. i be sure not myself only, but a thousand other have not only spend the most of their estate but the most part have lose their life, and all only but to make way for the trial of more new conclusion. and he that now will adventure but twelve pound ten shilling shall have better respect and as much favour than he that sixteen year ago adventure as much, except he have money as the other have, but though he have adventure five hundred pound and spend there never so much time if he have no more and not able to. except he have money as the other have, but though he have adventure five hundred pound and spend there never so much time, if he have no more and not able to begin a family of himself, all be lose by order of court, but in the beginning it be not so. all go then out of one purse till those new device have consume both money and purse. for at first there be but six patentee, now more than a thousand, then, but thirteen counsellor, now not less than a hundred. i speak not of all for there be some, both honourable and honest, but of those officer which do they manage their own estate no better than the affair of virginia, they will quick fall to. all, for there be some both honourable and honest, but of those officer which do they manage their own estate no better than the affair of virginia, they will quick fall to decay. so well as it. but this be most evident, few officer in england it have cause to turn banquerupt, nor, for all their complaint, will leave their place, neither yet any of their officer there nor few of the rest. but they will be at home. but few adventurer here will adventure any more till they see the business better establish. although there be some so wilful, improvident, they care for nothing but to get thither, and then if their friend be dead or want themselves, they die or live. but poor for want of. be some so wilful, improvident, they care for nothing but to get thither, and then if their friend be dead or want themselves, they die or live. but poor for want of necessary and to think the old planter can relieve they be too much simplicity for who here in england be so charitable to feed two or three stranger? have they never so much, much less in virginia where they want for themselves. now the general complaint say that pride, covetousness, extortion and oppression in a few that engross all, then sell all again to the commonalty at what rate they please, yea even man, woman and child. for who will give most occasion? no small mischief among the planter. as for the company or those that the commonalty at what rate they please, yea even man, woman and child, for who will give most occasion? no small mischief among the planter. as for the company or those that do transport they provide of, necessary, god forbid. but they shall receive their charge again with advantage. or that master there shall not have the same privilege over their servant as here, but to sell, he or she for forty, fifty or threescore pound, who the company have send over for eight or ten pound at the most, without regard how they shall be, maintain with apparel, meat, drink and lodging be odious and their fruit suitable. therefore such merchant, it be better they be. make such merchandise themselves than suffer any long to use that. maintain with apparel, meat, drink and lodging be odious and their fruit suitable. therefore, such merchant, it be better they be make such merchandise themselves than suffer any long to use that trade. and those be defect sufficient to bring a well settle commonwealth to misery much more. virginia, quest 7. how think you it may be rectify answ, if this majesty will please to entitle it to his crown, and yearly that both the governor here and there may give their account to you or some that be not engage in the business that the common stock be not spend in? maintain one hundred man for the governor, one hundred for two deputy, fifty for the treasurer, five and twenty for the secretary and more for the. common stock be not spend in maintain one hundred man for the governor, one hundred for two deputy, fifty for the treasurer, five and twenty for the secretary and more for the marshal and other officer who be never there nor adventure any thing, but only prefer by favour to be lord over. they that break the ice and beat the path and must teach they what to do if any thing happen. well it be their glory. if ill, the fault of the old director that in all danger must endure the worst. yet not five hundred of they have so much as one of the other also, that there be some present course take to maintain a garrison to suppress the saluage till they be able. five hundred of. they have so much as one of the other also, that there be some present course take to maintain a garrison to suppress the saluage till they be able to subsist, and that his majesty will please to remit his custom, or it be to be fear they will lose custom. and all for this can be do by promise, hope, counsel and countenance, but with sufficient workman and mean to maintain they not such delinquent as here can be rule by all the law in england. yet when the foundation be lay, as i have say, and a commonwealth establish than such there may better be constrain to labour then here. but to rectify a commonwealth with debauch people be impossible and no wise. as i have say, and a commonwealth establish than such. there may better be constrain to labour then here, but to rectify a commonwealth with debauch people be impossible and no wise man will throw himself into such a society that intend honest and know what he undertake. for there be no country to pillage, as the roman find. all you expect from thence must be by labour for the government. i think there be as much ado about it as the kingdom of scotland and ireland man here conceit virginia as they be erect as many stately office as officer with their attendant as there be labourer in the country where a constable be as good as twenty of their captain and three hundred good soldier. and many stately office as officer with their attendant, as there be labourer in the country where a constable be as good as twenty of their captain and three hundred good soldier and labourer better than all the rest that go only to get the fruit of other man labour by the title of a office. thus they spend michaelmas rend in midsummer moon and will gather their harvest before they have plant their corne. as for the maintenance of the officer, the first that go never demand any but adventure, good sum and it seem strange to i, the fruit of all their labour beside the expense of a hundred and fifty thousand pound. and such multitude of people, those collateral officer can not maintain themselves so well. to i the fruit of all their labour. beside the expense of a hundred and fifty thousand pound and such multitude of people, those collateral officer can not maintain themselves so well as the old do and have now such liberty to do to the saluage what they will. the other have not. i more than wonder. they have not five hundred saluage to work for they towards their general maintenance, and as many more to return some content and satisfaction to the adventurer that for all their care, charge and diligence can hear nor see nothing but miserable complaint. therefore, under your correction to rectify all be with all expedition to pass the authority to they who will relieve they, lest all be consume ere the difference. nothing but miserable complaint. therefore, under your correction to rectify all be with all expedition to pass the authority to they who will relieve they lest all be consume. ere the difference be determine, and except his majesty undertake it, or by act of parliament, some small tax may be grant throughout his dominion, as a penny upon every poll, call a head-penny, two penny upon every chimney or some such collection may be raise, and that will be sufficient to give a good stock and many servant to sufficient man of any faculty and transport. they free for, pay only homage to the crown of england and such duty to the public good as their estate increase. reason shall require. be this put in practice? how many? they free for, pay only homage to the crown of england and such duty to the public good as their estate increase. reason shall require, be this put in practice. how many people, of what quality you please, for all those disaster will yet glad go to spend their life there, and by this mean more good may be do in one year than all those petty particular undertake will effect in twenty. for the patent, the king may, if he please, rather take it from they that have it, then from we who have it first, pretend to his majesty what great matter they will do and how little we do. and for any thing i can conceive, have we remain still as at first it be. first pretend to his majesty what great matter they will do and how little we do. and for any thing i can conceive, have we remain still as at first. it be not likely we can have do much worse, but those oft alter of government be not without much charge, hazard and loss. if i be too plain, i humble crave your pardon. but you request i therefore. i do but my duty for the nobility who know not how free both in their purse and assistance many of they have be, to advance it, commit the manage of the business to inferior person among who, questionless also, many have do their utmost best, sincere and true, according to their conceit, opinion and understanding, yet gross error. commit the manage of the business to inferior person among who, questionless also, many have do their utmost best, sincere and true, according to their conceit, opinion and understanding. yet gross error have be commit, but no man live without his fault. for my own part, i have so much ado to amend my own, i have no leisure to look into any man particular, but those in general i conceive to be true, and so i humble rest you to command. i s the king. have please to take it into (@) ^^^sideration. thus those discord not be to be compound among themselves, nor yet by the extraordinary diligence, care and pain of the noble and right worthy commissioner, sir william jones, sir nicholas fortescue, sir francis. discord not be to be compound among themselves, nor yet by the extraordinary diligence, care and pain of the noble and right worthy commissioner, sir william jones, sir nicholas fortescue, sir francis goston, sir richard sutton, sir henry bourgchier and sir william pit. a corante be grant against master deputy farrar and 20. or 30. other of that party to plead their cause before the right, honourable the lord of his majesty privy council. now, notwithstanding all the relation, examination and intercept of all letter whatsoever come from thence, yet it seem they be so far unsatisfied and desire to know the truth as well for the preservation of the colony, as to give content and do all man right, they send two commissioner strict to examine the unsatisfied and desire to know the truth as well for the preservation of the colony as to give content and do all man right, they send two commissioner strict to examine the true estate of the colony upon, who return after mature deliberation. it please his royal majesty to suppress the course of the court at deputy farrars and that for the present order, the affair of virginia, until he shall make a more full settlement thereof. the lord viscount mandevile, lord precedent of his majesty privy council and also other privy councillor with many understand, knight and gentleman, shall every thursday in the afternoon meet at sir thomas smith in philpot lane where all man who it shall concern may repair to receive such direction and warrant. knight and gentleman shall every thursday in the afternoon meet at sir thomas smith in philpot lane, where all man who it shall concern may repair to receive such direction and warrant for their better security. as more at large, you may see in the proclamation to that effect under the great seal of england, date the 15. of july 1624.. but as for the relation last return, what number they be, how many city, corporation, town and house, cattle and horse they have, what fortification or discovery they have, make or revenge upon the saluage, who be their friend or foe, or what commodity they have, more than tobacco and their present estate or what be present to be put in execution. in that the commissioner be who be their friend or foe, or what commodity they have more than tobacco and their present estate or what be present to be put in execution, in that the commissioner be not yet full satisfy in the one, nor resolve in the other. at this present time, when this go to the press, i must entreat you- pardon i till i be better, assure thus far i have travel in this wilderness of virginia- not be ignorant for all my pain. this discourse will be wrest, toss and turn as many way as there be leaf that i have write too much of some, too little of other and many such like. objection to such i must answer in the company name i be request to do. leaf that i have write too much of some, too little of other and many such like. objection to such i must answer in the company name. i be request to do it. if any have conceal their approve experience from my knowledge, they must excuse i. as for every fatherless or steal relation or whole volume of sofisticated rehearsal, i leave they to the charge of they that desire they. i thank god, i never undertake any thing, yet any can tax i of carelessness or dishonesty and what be he to who i be indebt or troublesome, ah, be these my accuser. but to change case and place with i but 2. year or till they have do, but so much as i it may be. indebt or troublesome, ah be these my accuser. but to change case and place with i but 2.. year or till they have do, but so much as i it may be they will judge more charitable of my imperfection. but here i must leave all to the trial of time, both myself. virginia, preparation, proceed and good event. pray to that great god, the protector of all goodness, to send they as good success as the goodness of the action and country deserve and my heart desire. the five book, the general history of the bermudas, now call the summer isle, from their beginning in the year of our lord, 1593. to this present 1624.. with their proceed, accident and present estate. before we present you the bermudas now call the summer isle, from their beginning in the year of our lord 1593.. to this present 1624.. with their proceed, accident and present estate, before we present you the matter of fact, it be fit to offer to your view the stage whereon they be act. for as geography without history seem a carcase without motion, so history without geography wander as a vagrant without a certain habitation. the description of the iles. those land lie in the huge main ocean and two hundred league from any continent, situate in 32. degree and 25. minute of northerly latitude and distant from england west, south-west about 3300. mile, some twenty mile in length and not past two mile and a half in breadth, environ with rock. 25. minute of northerly latitude and distant from england west, south-west about 3300. mile, some twenty mile in length and not past two mile and a half in breadth environ, with rock which to the northward, westward and southeast extend further than they have be yet well discover. by reason of those rock, the country be natural very strong, for there be but two place and scare two, unless to they who know they well, where ship may safe come in and those now be exceed, well, fortify, but within be room to entertain a royal fleet. the rock in most place appear at a low water, neither be they much cover at a high, for it ebb and flow not past five foot, the shore for most. fleet. the rock in most place appear at a low water, neither be they much cover at a high for it ebb and flow not past five foot. the shore, for most part be a rock, so harden with the sun, wind and sea that it be not apt to be wear away with the wave who violence be also break by the rock before they can come to the shore. it be very uneven, distribute into hill and dale. the mould be of diverse colour, neither clay nor sand, but a mean between the red, which resemble clay, be the worst, the white resemble sand and the black be good but the brown betwixt they both, which they call white because there be mingle with it a which resemble clay, be the worst. the white resemble sand, and the black be good, but the brown betwixt. they both, which they call white because there be mingle with it a white meal, be the best under the mould two or three foot deep and sometime less be a kind of white hard substance which they call the rock. the tree usual fasten their root in it, neither be it, indeed, rock or stone or so hard, though for most part more hard than chalk, nor so white, but pumish-like and spongy, easy receive and contain much water. in some place clay be find under it it seem to be engender with rain water, drain through the earth and draw with it of his substance unto a contain much water in some place, clay be find under it. it seem to be engender with rain. water drain through the earth and draw with it of his substance unto a certain depth where it congeal. the hard kind of it lie under the red ground like quarry as it be thick slate one upon another through which the water have his passage, so that in such place there be scarce find any fresh water for all, or the most part of the fresh water come out of the sea, drain through the sand or that substance, call the rock, leave the salt behind. it become fresh sometime. we dig well of fresh water, which we find in most place and but three or four pace from that substance call the rock, leave the salt behind, it become fresh sometime. we dig well of fresh water, which we find in most place and but three or four pace from the sea side, some further, the most part of they will ebb and flow, as the sea do, and be level or little high than the superficies of the sea and in some place very strange, dark and cumbersome, cave. the clime, temper and fertility, the air be most common, clear, very temperate, moist, with a moderate heat, very healthful and apt for the generation and nourish of all thing. so as many thing transport from hence yield a far great increase and if it be any live thing, it become fat and better by this. generation and nourish of all thing. so as many thing, transport from hence yield a far great increase, and if it be any live thing, it become fat and better. by this mean the country be so replenish with hen and turkey within the space of three or four year that many of they, be neglect, forsake the house and become wild and so live in great abundance. the like increase there be in hog, tame, coney and other cattle, according to their kind. there seem to be a continual spring, which be the cause. some thing come not to that maturity and perfection as be requisite, and though the tree shed their leaf, yet they be always full of green. the corn be the same they have. thing come not to that maturity and perfection as be requisite, and though the tree shed their leaf, yet they be always full of green. the corn be the same. they have in virginia and the west-indies of this and many other thing, without plough or much labour. they have two harvest every year, for they set about march which they gather in july, and again in august which they reap in december, and little slip of figtree and vine do usual bear fruit within the year and sometime in less. but we find not the grape as yet come to any perfection, the like fertility it have in orange and lemon, pomegranate and other thing concern the serenity and beauty of the sky. it may as true. grape as yet come to any perfection, the like fertility it have in orange and lemon, pomegranate and other thing concern the serenity and beauty of the sky. it may as true be say of those land, as ever it be say of the rhodes, that there be no one day throughout the 12. month, but that in some hour thereof the sun look singular and clear upon they, for the temperature it be beyond all other most admirable. no cold there be beyond a english april, nor heat much great than a ordinary july in france, so that frost and snow be never see here, nor stink and infectious mist. very seldom, by reason of the main ocean, there be some wind stir that cool the air. france, so that frost and snow be never see here, nor stink and infectious mist. very seldom, by reason of the main ocean, there be some wind stir that cool the air. the winter they have, observe the time with we, but the long day and night be short than we almost by two hour. tree and fruit, we find it at first all overgrow with weed and plant of several kind, as many tall and goodly cedar, infinite store of palmetoe, number of mulberry, wild olive-tree store with diverse other, unknown both by name and nature, so that as yet they become lose to many useful employment which time and industry no doubt will one day discover, and even already certain of the most notorious of they. nature, so that as yet they become lose to many useful employment which time and industry no doubt will one day discover. and even already, certain of the most notorious of they have get they appellation from their apparent effect as the prickell-peare which grow like a shrub by the ground. the prickell pear with broad, thick leaf, all over-armed with long and sharp dangerous thorn, the fruit be in form not much unlike a small green pear, and on the outside of the same colour, but within blood red and exceed full of juice with grain. not much unlike the pomegranate, the poison weed, and colour after its nature. the poison weed be much in shape, like our english ivy, but be but touch, cause redness, itch. grain, not much unlike the pomegranate, the poison weed. and colour after its nature, the poison weed be much in shape like our english ivy, but be but touch, cause redness, itch and last blister, the which, howsoever, after a while pass away of themselves without further harm. yet because for the time they be somewhat painful, it have get itself a ill name, although questionless of no ill nature. here be also frequent grow a certain tall plant, the red weed, who stalk, be all over cover with a red rind, be thereupon term the red weed, the root whereof be soak in any liquor or but a small quantity of the juice drink alone, procure a very forcible vomit, and yet be general use by the. red weed, the root whereof be soak in any liquor or but a small quantity of the juice drink alone, procure a very forcible vomit, and yet be general use by the people and find very effectual against the pain and distemper of the stomach. the purge bean, a kind of woodbine- there be likewise by the sea- very common to be find- which run upon tree twine, itself like a vine. the fruit somewhat resemble a bean but somewhat flatter, the which any way eat, work excellent in the nature of a purge and though very vehement, yet without all peril, the costive tree. contrary to this, another small tree there be which cause costiveness. there be also a certain plant like a bramble bush, which bear. very vehement yet without all peril. the costive tree. contrary to this, another small tree there be which cause costiveness. there be also a certain plant like a bramble bush, which bear a long yellow fruit, have the shell very hard and within it a hard berry that beat and take inward purge gentle red pepper. there be another fruit, much like our barbery, which be beat or bruise between the tooth, set all the mouth on a extreme heat, very terrible for the time to avoid, which they be swallow down whole and find of the same or better operation than the red pepper and thence borrow the name. in the bottom of the sea there be grow upon the rock a large kind of plant in the same or better operation than the red pepper, and thence borrow the name. in the bottom of the sea there be grow upon the rock a large kind of plant in the form of a vine leaf, but far more spread with vein in colour of a pale red, very strange interlace and weave one into another, which we call the feather, but the virtue thereof be altogether unknown. the sea feather, but only regard for the rarity. now, beside these, natural production, fruit transport, providence and pain, since the plantation have offer diverse other feed and plant which the soil have greed, embrace and cherish, so that at this present 1623. there be great abundance of white, red and yellow colour, potato, tobacco, sugarcanes, indicos, parsnip. feed and plant which the soil have greed, embrace and cherish so that at this present 1623. there be great abundance of white, red and yellow colour, potato, tobacco, sugarcanes, indicos, parsnip, exceed large radish, the american bread, the cassado root, the indian pompion, the water-millon, musk-millon and the most delicate pineapple and papawe. also the english artichoke, pease, etc. brief, whatsoever else may be expect for the satisfaction either of curiosity, necessity or delight. neither have the air, for her part, be want with due supply of many sort of fowl, as the gray and white hearne, the gray and green plover bird, some wild duck and malards, coat and redshanks, sea-wigions, gray-bittern, cormorant, number of small bird like sparrow and robins, which have late be destroy. white hearne, the gray and green plover bird, some wild duck and malards, coat and redshanks, sea-wigions, gray-bittern, cormorant, number of small bird like sparrow and robins which have late be destroy by the wild cat wood-pickars. very many crow which, since this plantation be kill, the rest flee or seldom see except in the most uninhabited place from whence they be observe to take their flight about sun set, direct their course towards the northwest which make many conjecture there be some more land not far off. that way sometime be also see falcon and jar-falcon ospray, a bird like a hobby but because they come seldom they be hold but as passenger. but above all these most deserve observation and respect. be those two sort of. jar-falcon, ospray, a bird like a hobby, but because they come seldom they be hold but as passenger. but above all, these most deserve observation and respect. be those two sort of bird, the one for the tune of his voice, the other for the effect, call the cahow and egg bird which on the first of may, a day, constant observe, fall a lay infinite store of egg near as big as hen egge-bird, upon certain small sandy bay, especial in couper. i will, and although man sit down among they when hundred have be gather in a morning, yet there be have stay among they till they have gather as many more. they continue this course till midsummer, and so tame and fearless you must thrust. gather in a morning, yet there be have stay among they till they have gather as many more. they continue this course till midsummer, and so tame and fearless you must thrust they off from their egg with your hand. then they grow so faint, with lay they suffer, they to breed and take infinite number of their young to eat, which be very excellent meat. the cahow be a bird of the night, cahowe. for all the day she lie hide in hole in the rock where they and their young be also take with as much ease as may be. but in the night, if you but whoop and hollow, they will light upon you that with your hand you may choose the fat and leave. as much ease as may be, but in the night, if you but whoop and hollow, they will light upon you that with your hand you may choose the fat and leave the lean, those they have only in winter. their egg be as big as hen, but they be speckle. the other white. mr norwood have take twenty dozen of they in three or four hour and since there have be such havoc make of they, they be near all destroy till there be a strict inhibition for their preservation. the tropic bird be white, the tropic bird and the presagement, as large as a pullet with one only long feather in her tail and be seldom see far distant from other of the tropic, another small, the tropic bird and the presagement, as large as a pullet with one only long feather in her tail and be seldom see, far distant from other of the tropic. another small bird there be, because she cry, pemblyco they call she, so she be seldom see in the day but when she sing, as too oft she do, very clamorous too. true a prophet she prove of huge wind and boisterous weather. there be a kind of small owl in great abundance, but they be now all slay or flee. some tame duck, goose and pigeon there be, but the two latter prosper not. concern vermin and noisome creature: there be not many of vermine, but only rat and cat. there increase since the plantation, but how? pigeon there be, but the two latter prosper not. concern vermin and noisome creature: there be not many of vermine, but only rat and cat. there increase since the plantation. but how they agree together, you shall hear hereafter the musketas and fly. be also too busy with a certain india bug, call by the spaniard, a cacarootch the, which creep into chest, they eat and defile with their ill-sented dung. also the little ant in summer time be so troublesome. they be force to dry their fig upon high frame and anoint their foot with tar wherein they stick, else they will spoil they all ere they can be dry worm in the earth also there be, but too many, so that to keep they from destroy. tar wherein they stick, else they will spoil. they all ere they can be dry. worm in the earth also there be, but too many, so that to keep they from destroy their corn and tobacco, they be force to worm they every morning, which be a great labour, else all will be destroy. lizard, there be many and very large, but now none, and it be lay. they be destroy by the cat. (@). certain spider, also of very large size, be find hang upon tree but instead of be any way dangerous as in other place, they be here of a most please aspect all over dress as it be with silver, gold and pearl, and their web, in the summer, weave from tree to tree. other place they be here of a most please aspect. all over, dress as it be with silver, gold and pearl, and their web, in the summer, weave from tree to tree, be general, a perfect raw silk, and that as well in regard of substance as colour, and so strong withal that diverse bird big than blackbird be like snipe be often take and snare in they as a net. then what will the silkworm do? be she^ there to feed upon the continual green mulberry ash, but above all the rest of the element, the sea be find most abundant, liberal. hence have they as much excellent fish and as much variety as need be desire, the most of which be unknown to our northern part. the sea be find most abundant, liberal. hence have they as much excellent fish and as much variety as need be desire, the most of which be unknown to our northern part. get there new name either for their shape or condition, as the large rockefish from his like hue and haunt among the rock. the fat hog-fish from his swinelike shape and shout, for this be not the old know. hog-fish with brussel on his back. the delicate amber-fish from his taste and smell. angell-fish, conyfish. the small yellow tail from that natural paint. the great growper from his odd and strange grunt. some of they yet know to the american as the purgoose, the cavallo, the gar-fish, flying-fish and moreraye. the rest be common to other. great growper from his odd and strange grunt. some of they yet know to the american as the purgoose, the cavallo, the gar-fish, flying-fish and moreraye. the rest be common to other continent, as the whale in great number, the shark, the pilot-fish, the seabreame, the oyster and lobster with diverse other twenty tortoise have be take in a day, and some of they will afford half a bushel of egg and suffice to feed forty man at a meal. and thus have you brief epitomise, mother nature. benefit to this little yet dainty spot of earth. neither be it ingenuity to conceal, wherein she incline to the stepdame especial, since the particular be so few, as rather requisite antidote against idleness to rouse up industry the most. earth, neither be it ingenuity to conceal wherein she incline to the stepdame especial, since the particular be so few, as rather requisite antidote against idleness to rouse up industry, the most hurtful thing in those iles than any great cause of much distaste, much less despair. and of those to speak troth there be only two, viz, the wind and the worm, especial in the spring and autumn. and thus, condition, as yet, we will let rest these small land in the midst of this mighty and main ocean, so environ on every side by infinite number of uncertain scatter rock, lie shallow hide under the surface of the water, a league, two, three, four or five to sea, to the which advantager add by art as infinite number of uncertain scatter rock lie shallow hide under the surface of the water, a league, two, three, four or five to sea, to the which advantager add by art, as hereafter you shall hear at large and find describe in the map, it may well be conclude to be the most impregnable place in the world. and although the amber, greece, pearl nor tobacco be of that quantity and certainty to be rely upon to gain wealth, yet by practice and experience they find, by silk, saffron, indigo, madar, sugarcane, wine, oil and such like, great profit may be expect. yet be those hopeless in regard of their conveniency to nourish and maintain themselves and relieve, they shall visit they with wood, water and other necessary. like great profit may be. expect, yet be those hopeless in regard of their conveniency to nourish and maintain themselves and relieve they shall visit they with wood, water and other necessary beside. what a eyesore they be already become to they that have they not, and how dear and precious to they that have they, i think none will deny. but they be well worth the keep. and so we will proceed to the accident that befall the first finder, also the proceed of the first planter and their successor, master norrod thomas sparkes and diverse other. a brief relation of the shipwreck of henry. may how it be suppose they be call the bermud^^. how these isle come by the name of bermuda or the infinite. diverse other, a brief relation of the shipwreck of henry. may, how it be, suppose they be call the bermud^^ how these isle come by the name of bermuda, or the infinite number of black hog, or so fearful to the world that many call they the i will of devil that all man do shun as hell and perdition. i will not expostulate nor trouble your patience with those uncertain antiquity. further than thus, our man find diverse cross piece of spanish money here and there, two or three wrack also. they find, by certain inscription, to be some spanish, some dutch, some french, but the great rumour be that a spanish ship call bermudas, be there, cast away, carry hog to the west-indies that swim a. inscription to be some spanish, some dutch, some french, but the great rumour be that a spanish ship call bermudas be there, cast away, carry hog to the west-indies that swim a shore and there increase. how the spaniard escape be uncertain. but they say from that ship those isle be first, call bermudas, which tilt then for six thousand year, have be nameless, but the first englishman that be ever in, they be one. henry may, a worthy mariner that go with captain lancaster to the east-indies 1591.. and in their return by the west-indies be in some distress, send this henry may for england by one de la barbotier to acquaint the merchant with their estate. the last of november say may we depart from laguna. be in some distress. send this henry may for england by one de la barbotier to acquaint the merchant with their estate. the last of november say may we depart from laguna in hispaniola, and the seventeen of december follow: we be cast away. upon the northwest of the bermuda. the pilot, about noon, make themselves southwards of the isle twelve league and demand of the captain their wine of height as out of all danger which they have. but it seem they be either drink or careless of their charge, for through their negligence a number of good man be cast away. i be but a stranger among fifty and odd frenchman. it please god to appoint i to be one of. they shall be save in. number of good man be cast away. i be but a stranger among fifty and odd frenchman. it please god to appoint i to be one of. they shall be save in this extremity. we make a raft which we tow with our boat. there be but six and twenty of we save, and i see scarce room for the one. half dare not pass in among they till the captain call i along with. he leave the better half to the sea mercy. that day we row till within two hour of night ere we can land be near dead with thirst. every man take his way to seek fresh water at length, by search among many weed, we find some rain water, but in the main can land be near dead with thirst. every man take his way to seek fresh water at length, by search among many weed, we find some rain water, but in the main be many fair bays where we have enough for dig. now it please god. before our ship split, we save our carpenter, tool the building and calk their bark, some nail, sail and tackle wherewith we go round to work and build a bark of eighty tunue in stead of pitch. we make lime mix with tortoise oil and as the carpenter calk, she, i and another pay the seam with this plaster, which be in april, become quick, dry and as hard as a stone. in april it be so hot we fear our water. i and another pay the seam with this plaster which be in april, become quick, dry and as hard as a stone. in april it be so hot we fear our water will fail his return for england. two great chest we make which we calk as our ship, those we stow on each side our main mast, fill they with water and thirty live tortoise. we find many hog but so lean we can not eat they. the top of the palmetaberry be our bread and the juice we get out of the tree we cut down our drink and of the leaf which be more than a ell long we cover our cabens and make our bed and find many of those provision as be relate. cut down our drink and of the leaf which be more than a ell long. we cover our cabens and make our bed and find many of those provision as be relate, but little foul weather. the eleven of, may it please god to set we clear of the. i will after we have live there five month, and the twenty we fall with cape britton, near new find land where refresh ourselves with wood and water and such thing as we can get of the saluage. it seem a good country but we stay not pass four hour before we set sail for the bank of new find land where we meet many ship but not any will take in a man of we until it please. pass four hour before we set sail for the bank of new find land, where we meet many ship but not any will take in a man of we until it, please god. we meet a bark of fawmothe, which receive we for a little time, and with she we take a french ship, wherein i leave captain de la barbotier, my dear friend, and all his company, and in august arrive at falmouth in this honest english bark, 1594.. write by: i, henry may, the first english ship know to have be cast away upon the bermuda, 1609.. from the relation of mr jordan, master john even, master henry shelly and diverse other, you have hear that when captain smith be governor of virginia, there be nine. the bermuda 1609.. from the relation of mr jordan, master john even, master henry shelly and diverse other, you have hear that when captain smith be governor of virginia, there be nine ship send with sir thomas gate and sir george somers and captain nuport with five hundred people to take in the old commission and rectify a new government. they set sail in may and in the height of thirty degree of northerly latitude they be take with a extreme storm, a most desperate estate, by a storm, or rather a part of hurricane, upon the five and twenty of july which, as they write, do not only separate they from the fleet but with the violent work of the sea their ship become so shake, tear. the five and twenty of july, which, as they write, do not only separate they from the fleet, but with the violent work of the sea their ship become so shake, tear and leak, she receive so much water as cover two tire of hogshead above the ballast, that they stand up to the middle with bucket, baricos and kettle to bail out the water. thus bail and pump three day and three night without intermission, and yet the water seem rather to increase, then diminish in so much that be all utter spend with labour, be even resolve, without any hope, to shut up the hatch and commit themselves to the mercy of the sea, which be say to be merciless, or rather to the mercy of be, even resolve, without any hope, to shut up the hatch and commit themselves to the mercy of the sea, which be say to be merciless, or rather to the mercy of almighty god who mercy far exceed all his work, see no sense or hope in man apprehension. but present to sink, some have some good and comfortable water, fetch they and drink one to another as take their last leaf until a more happy and a more joyful meeting in a more bless world, when it please god out of his most gracious and merciful providence, so to direct and guide their ship for her most advantage, the care and judgement of sir george somers. that sir george somers, all this time sit upon the poop. merciful providence. so to direct and guide their ship for her most advantage, the care and judgement of sir george somers. that sir george somers, all this time sit upon the poop scarce take leisure to eat nor sleep, cove the ship to keep she as upright as he can, otherways she must, long ere that needs have founder most wish and happy, descry land whereupon he most comfortable, encourage they to follow their work. many of they be fast asleep. this unlooked for welcome news, as if it have be a voice from heaven, hurri they all above hatch to look for that. they dare scarce believe so that improvident forsake that task which import no less than their life, they give so dangerous advantage to their they all above hatch to look for that? they dare scarce believe so that improvident forsake that task which import no less than their life, they give so dangerous advantage to their greedy enemy, the salt water which still enter at the large breach of their poor wooden castle, as that in gape after life, they have well-nigh swallow their death. sure it be impossible. any shall now be urge to do his best. and although they know it, a evident token of god mercy, that place all man do, so shun. yet they spread all the fail they can to attain they. for not long it be before they strike upon a rock, till a surge of the sea cast she from thence, and so from one the fail they can to attain. they for not long it be before they strike upon a rock, till a surge of the sea cast she from thence, and so from one to another till most lucky at last. so upright betwixt two, as if she have be in the stock. till this they expect, but every blow a death. but now, behold, sudden, the wind give place to a calm, and the billow, which each by overtake she, will in a instant have shiver. she in piece, become peaceable, and still so that, with all conveniency and ease, they unship all their good, victual and person, into their boat and, with extreme joy, even almost to amazedness, arrive in safety, though more than a league from the conveniency and ease, they unship all their good, victual and person, into their boat and, with extreme joy, even almost to amazedness, arrive in safety, though more than a league from the shore, without the loss of a man. yet be they in all one hundred and fifty. yet their deliverance be not more strange in fall so happy upon the land, as their feed and preservation be beyond their hope. for you have hear it have be to the spaniard, more fearful than a utopian purgatory and to all seaman, no less terrible than a enchant den of fury and devil, the most dangerous, unfortunate and forlorn place in the world, and they find it the rich, healthful and pleasant they ever see, as be former say. enchant den of fury and devil, the most dangerous, unfortunate and forlorn place in the world, and they find it the rich, healthful and pleasant they ever see. as be former say sir george somers () be thus safe on shore, they dispose themselves to search the isle for food and water, other to get a shore what they can from the ship. not long, sir george wander, but find such a fish that in half a hour, with a hook and line he take so many as suffice the whole company in some place. they be so thick in the coves and so great they dare not go in left they shall bite they. and these rock fish be so great, two will load a man and be so thick in the coves and so great they dare not go in left they shall bite they and these rock fish be so great, two will load a man and fat. nor better fish can be. mr shelly find a bay near a quarter of a mile over so full of mullet as none of they before have ever see or hear of the like. the next day seek to kill they with fisgig. they stracke so many. the water in many place be red with blood, yet catch not one, but with a net they catch so many as they can. draw a shore with infinite number of pilchard and diverse other sort great craw-fish in a night by make a fire they have take. net they catch so many as they can draw a shore with infinite number of pilchard and diverse other sort great craw-fish in a night by make a fire they have take in great quantity. sir george have twice his hook and line break out of his hand but the three time he make it so strong he catch the same fish which have pull he into the sea. have not his man get hold of he, whereby he have his three hook again be find in her belly. at their first hunt for hog they find such abundance they kill 32. and this hunt and fish be appoint to captain robert walsingham and mr henry shelly for the company in general they report they kill at least. find such abundance they kill 32, and this hunt and fish be appoint to captain robert walsingham and mr henry shelly for the company in general they report they kill at least 500 beside pig and many that be kill by diverse other for the bird in their season the facility to make their of leaf cause, many of they utter forget or desire ever to return from thence. they live in such plenty, peace and ease. but let we remember how the knight begin to resolve in those desperate affair, what mean they m^de to send to virginia many project they have, but at last it be conclude to deck their long boat with their ship hatch, which do with all expedition, they send master raven a. send to virginia. many project they have, but at last it be conclude to deck their long boat with their ship hatch, which do with all expedition. they send master raven, a very sufficient mariner with eight more in she, to virginia to have ship from thence to fetch they away. three week or a month they expect her return, but to this day she be never more hear of all this time be spend in search the isle now, although god still feed they with this abundance of plenty. yet, such be the malice of envy or ambition for all this good service do, by summer such a great difference fall among their commander that they live asunder in this distress, rather as mere stranger, then distress. envy or ambition for all this good service do, by summer such a great difference fall among their commander that they live asunder in this distress, rather as mere stranger. then distress friend. but necessity, so command patience, have the victory. two ship at this time by those several party be a building a marriage and two child bear. in the mean time, two child be bear, the boy be call bermudas, the girl bermuda, and among all those sorrow they have a merry english marriage. the form of those isle you may see at large in the map of mr norwood, where you may plain see no place know, have better wall nor a broad ditch, but have finish and rig their two new cedar ship with in the map of mr norwood, where you may plain see no place, know have better wall nor a broad ditch. but have finish and rig their two new cedar ship with such provision. they save from the sea-aduenturer, they leave among the rock. they call the one the patience, the other the deliverance. they use lime and oil as may do for pitch and tar. sir george summer have in his bark no iron at all, but one bolt in her keel. now have make their provision of victual and all thing ready, they set sail the ten of may 1610.. only leave two man behind. they call christopher carter and edward water, that, for their offence or the suspicion they have of their judgement, flee into. sail, the ten of may 1610.. only leave two man behind. they call christopher carter and edward water, that for their offence, or the suspicion they have of their judgement, flee into the wood and there rather desire to end their day. then stand to their trial and the event of justice for one of their consort be shoot to death and water be tie to a tree also to be execute. have by chance a knife about he and so secret, cut the rope. he run into the wood where they can not find he. there be two saluage, also send from virginia by captain smith, the one call namuntack, the other matchump, but some such difference fall between they that matchump slay namuntack and have make. there be two saluage, also send from virginia by captain smith, the one call namuntack, the other matchump, but some such difference fall between they that matchump slay namuntack and have make a hole to bury he because it be too short. he cut of his leg and lay they by he which murder he conceal till he be in virginia. the four and twenty of the same month they arrive in virginia, at james town. their arrival in virginia, where they find but threescore person, as you may read at large in the history of virginia of the five hundred leave by captain smith, also of the arrival of the lord laware that meet. they thus bind for england. return they back and understand what plenty there. virginia, of the five hundred leave by captain smith, also of the arrival of the lord laware that meet they thus bind for england. return they back and understand what plenty there be of hog and other good thing in the bermuda, be desirous to send thither to supply his necessary occasion. whereupon sir george summer, the best acquaint with the place, who, noble mind, ever regard a general good more than his own end, though above threescore year of age and have mean in england suitable to his rank, offer himself by god help to perform this dangerous voyage again for the bermuda, which be kind accept so. upon the 19 of june he embark in his cedar ship about the burden of thirty ton, and so perform this dangerous voyage, again for the bermuda, which be kind accept. so, upon the 19 of june he embark in his cedar ship, about the burden of thirty ton, and so set sail, sir george s^mmers, his return to the bermuda. much foul and cross weather he have and be force to the north part of virginia where, refresh himself upon this unknown coast, he can not be divert from the search of the bermuda where at last, with his company, he safe arrive. but such be his diligence, with his extraordinary care, pain and industry to dispatch his business, and the strength of his body, not answer the ever memorable courage of his mind, have live so long in such honourable service, the most part of industry to dispatch his business. and the strength of his body not answer the ever memorable courage of his mind, have live so long in such honourable service. the most part of his well belove and virtuous life- god and nature here determine- shall ever remain a perpetual memory of his much bewail. sorrow for his death find his time but short. after he have take the best course he can to settle his estate like a valiant captain, he exhort they with all diligence to be constant to those plantation and with all expedition to return to virginia. in that very place which we now call saint george town, this noble knight die, whereof the place take the name. but his man as man amaze. see the. return to virginia. in that very place which we now call saint george town, this noble knight die, whereof the place take the name. but his man as man. amaze. see the death of he who be even as the life of they all. embalm his body and set sail for england. be the first that ever go to seek those land which have be ever since call summer isle. in honour of his worthy memory, leave three man behind. they that voluntary stay, who name be christopher carter, edward water- there former leave as be say- and edward chard. this cedar ship, at last, with his dead body, arrive at whit-church in dorsetshire, where by his friend he be honourable, bury with many volley of shot and say, and edward chard, this cedar ship at last, with his dead body, arrive at whit-church in dorsetshire, where by his friend he be honourable, bury with many volley of shot and the rite of a soldier, and upon his tomb be bestow this epitaph () saeviet at, and anglialaeta. in english thus, alas, virginia summer, so soon past autumn succeed, and stormy winter blast. yet england, joyful spring with joyful shower, o florida shall bring thy sweet flower. the proceed of the three man, the honour of this resulution belong, principal, to carter, for through his importunity not to leave such a place, abandon chard and water, be move to stay with he and the rest promise w^th all the speed they can again to revisit they. his importunity not to leave such a place, abandon chard and water, be, move to stay with he and the rest, promise w^th all the speed they can again to revisit they but the ship once out of sight. those three lord the sole inhabitant of all those land, begin to erect their little common wealth for a while, with brotherly regency: repair the ground, plant corn and such seed and fruit as they have, build a house etc. then make privy, search among the creuss and corner of those craggy rock what this main ocean, since the world creation, have throw among they. at last they chance upon the great piece of ambergris be ever see or hear of in one lump, a piece of ambergris of. since the world creation have throw among they. at last they chance upon the great piece of ambergris be ever see or hear of in one lump, a piece of ambergris of 80. pound weight, be in weight, fourscore pound, beside diverse other small piece. but now be rich. they grow so proud and ambitious contempt take such place. they fall out for superiority though. but three forlorn man, more than three thousand mile from their native country, and but small hope ever to see it again notwithstanding, they sometime fall from word to blow about mere trifle, in one of which fight one of they be bite with his own dog, as if the dumb beast will reprove they of their folly. at last, chard and water. mere trifle, in one of which fight, one of they be bite with his own dog, as if the dumb beast will reprove they of their folly. at last, chard and water, the two great spirit, must try it out in the field. but carter wise, steal away their weapon affect rather to live among his enemy, then, by be rid of they live alone, and thus those miserable man live full two year so that all their clothes be near wear clean from their back and their hope of any foreign relief as naked as their body. at last they begin to recover their wit, yet in a fashion perhaps will have cost they dear than when they be mad for conclude a tripartite peace of their their body. at last they begin to recover their wit, yet in a fashion perhaps will have cost they dear than when they be mad for conclude a tripartite peace of their marachin war. they resolve to frame as good a boat as they can and therein to make a desperate attempt for virginia or new find land. but no soon be they enter into that resolution. but they descry a sail, stand in for the shore though they neither know what she be nor what she will. they be so over-ioy, with all possible speed they go to meet she and according to their heart desire, she prove a englishman who they safe conduct into their harbour. now you be to understand that, captain matthew somers, how they go to meet she and according to their heart desire she prove a englishman who they safe conduct into their harbour. now you be to understand that, captain matthew somers, how they be supply 1611.. nephew and heir to sir george that return with his dead body, though both he and his company do their utmost in relate all those passage to their countryman and adventurer. their relation be believe, but as traveller tale till it come to be apprehend by some of the virginia company how beneficial it may be and helpful to the plantation in virginia, so that some one hundred and twenty of they buy the pretend right of all the company and have send this ship to make a trial. but first they plantation in virginia so that some one hundred and twenty of they buy the pretend right of all the company and have send this ship to make a trial. but first they have obtain letter patent of the king, most excellent majesty sir thomas smith be elect treasurer and governor here and master richard more to be governor of the isle and colony there. the first beginning of a colony in the summer isle under the command of master richard more, extract out of a plot of master richard norwood and the relation of diuer, other master more. thus find those three man not only well and lusty the arrival of master more but well store with diverse sort of provision, as a acre of corn ready to. master more. thus find those three man, not only well and lusty, the arrival of master more, but well, store with diverse sort of provision, as a acre of corn ready to be gather, number of pumpion and indian bean, 1612.. sir thomas smith, treasurer, many tortoise ready, take good, store of hog flesh, salt and make in flitche of bacon, be very good and so present, land his good and sixty person towards the beginning of july 1612.. upon the south side of smith i will not, long after his arrival, their difference about the ambergris more have some private intelligence of this ambergris. take first chard in examination. he be one of the three, the most masterfull spirit. what ambergris pearl, treasure or other commodity they ambergris more have some private intelligence of this ambergris. take first chard in examination. he be one of the three, the most masterfull spirit. what ambergris, pearl, treasure or other commodity they have, find chard no less witty than resolute, direct answer. not any thing at all, but the fruit of the i will. what his fellow have do, he know not, but if they have, he doubt not, but to find it out, and then he shall know it. certain this he speak only to win time, to swear his consort to secrecy, and he will find the mean how they shall all return in that ship with it all for england, otherwise they shall be deceive of all. till this be effect, they think every hour. will find the mean how they shall all return in that ship with it all for england, otherwise they shall be deceive of all. till this be effect, they think every hour, a age. now for the better conveyance of it aboard, they acquaint it to captain davis, master of the ship, and one master, edwin kendal, that for their secrecy and transportation shall participate with they, without further ceremony. the match be accept and absolute, conclude the plot, lay time and place, set down to have it aboard, but carter be it for fear the governor at last shall know of it to who so oft they have deny it or that the rest shall deceive. he be uncertain, but most certain it be he reveal all. governor at last shall know of it, to who so oft they have deny it, or that the rest shall deceive? he be uncertain, but most certain it be. he reveal all the plot to master more, to get so much wealth he know will please they in england, though it do displease all his company, and to lose such a prize he will not for hazard a mutiny. so first he reveal himself to kendal in fair term, reprove his dishonesty but not be answer according to his expectation. he commit both chard and he to person the next sabboath day, davis, come on shore more also tax with very hard language and many threat to lay. he fast also if he mend not his manner, davis. to person. the next sabboath day, davis, come on shore more also. tax with very hard language and many threat to lay. he fast also if he mend. not his manner, davis, for the present reply little, but go with he to the place of prayer. but in the midst of divine service he go away. command all his seaman to follow. he present aboard where he encourage they to stand to he like man and he will free the prisoner. have all the ambergris for themselves and so be. go, chard, in danger of hang. the governor hear of this resolution. prepare with his company to repulse force with force, so that a general expectance of a civil, uncivil war possess every man. but this threaten gust. the governor hear of this resolution, prepare with his company to repulse force with force, so that a general expectance of a civil, uncivil war possess every man. but this threaten gust pass over more calmly than be expect for davis, have better advise with himself, repent his rashness and desire a reconcilement with the governor. peace thus conclude. kendal be set at liberty, but chard be condemn and upon the ladder to be hang for his obstinacy. yet, upon better consideration, more reprieve he, but keep he a prisoner all the time he stay in the country, which be general think, a very bad reward for his great desert. and that there be more of this. ambergris imbezile then will have content all the finder that never. the country, which be general think a very bad reward for his great desert, and that there be more of this. ambergris imbezile, then, will have content all the finder that never have any consideration at all. the great part, though, more thus recover. yet davis and kendal have so much, either by the ignorance or connivency of the governor, that arrive in england they prepare themselves for a new voyage. at last they two fall out. the company have notice thereof, so torment they both. they give over their voyage and dare not be see a long time after. master moor industry in fortify and plant the governor thus rid of the ship, and those discontent remove his seat from smith. i will to saint georges after. a long time after master moor industry in fortify and plant the governor thus rid of the ship and those discontent remove his seat from smith. i will to saint georges. after he have fit up some small of leave for his wife and family in that valley where now stand their prime town call s george, he begin to apply himself to fortify the country and train his man in the exercise of arm. for although he be but a carpenter, he be a excellent artist, a good gunner, very witty and industrious. he build and lay the foundation of eight or nine fort, call the king castle charles, fort pembroke, fort smith, fort pagits, fort gate, fort warwick castle, saint katherine fort, etc. mount in they. and lay the foundation of eight or nine fort, call the king castle charles, fort pembroke, fort smith, fort pagits, fort gate, fort warwick castle, saint katherine fort, etc. mount in, they all, the ordnance he have. prepare the ground to build house, plant corn and such fruit as they have. a contention of the minister against the governor. be thus busy and, as the necessity of the time require, keep his man somewhat hard at work. master keath his minister, be it by the secret provocation of some drone that grow weary of their task or his affection to popularity, be not certain, but he begin to tax the governor in the pulpit. he do grind the face of the poor, oppress his christian brethren with pharoab. or his affection to popularity be not certain, but he begin to tax the governor in the pulpit he do grind the face of the poor, oppress his christian brethren with pharoab. tax more find this in short time may breed ill blood. call the company together and also the minister, urge they plain, to tell he wherein he have deserve those hard accusation, whereupon, with a universal cry, they affirm the contrary, so that keath down of his knee to ask he forgiveness. but master more kind, take he up. will he to kneel to god and hereafter be more modest and charitable in his speech, notwithstanding two other discontent. so upbraid more with that doctrine and stand to maintain it. he empanel a jury with a god and hereafter be more modest and charitable in his speech, notwithstanding two other discontent so upbraid more with that doctrine and stand to maintain it. he empanel a jury with a great deal of, seem much ado. he will hang they be, condemn. one of they, with the very fear, fall into a dead palsy so that the other be set at liberty and prove after a very good labourer. many conclusion: he try about the sea-venture, the wrack of sir george somers, but he get only for his pain. but two piece of ordnance, two piece w^^hed out of the sea adventure. the first supply have frame a church of timber. it be blow down by a tempest so that he build another in a more. two piece w^^hed out of the sea adventure. the first supply have frame a church of timber. it be blow down by a tempest so that he build another in a more close place with palmeta leave. before this year be expire, the adventerer send they a adviso with thirty passenger and good provision to prepare with all expedition for their defence against the spaniard who they understand ere long will visit they this occasion, he to keep all his man together in that i will, so hard at work that want liberty to go abroad for food, live only on that they have and expect daily to receive from england. they be so over-toiled. many fell sick but none die. very earnest this ship be to have. for food, live only on that. they have and expect daily to receive from england. they be so over-toiled, many fell sick but none die. very earnest this ship be to have all the ambergris which m more perceive be the chief cause of their come and that it be the only loadstone to draw from england. still more supply for all. the express command send from the company. he return this ship, but with the one three part. so from thence she go to virginia and not long after arrive safe in england. but before she return the company send the martha with sixty passenger more. they arrive in june with one master bartlet to survey the island 1613.. the second supply, sir thomas smith, treasurer, and she return, the company send the martha with sixty passenger more. they arrive in june with one, master bartlet, to survey the island, 1613.. the second supply, sir thomas smith, treasurer, and the estate of the colony, with express command for all the ambergris. but more perceive he not, as he will have he and that the company begin to mistrust. he will send no more but another three part, wherewith they return, leave a frenchman to make trial of the mulberry for silk, but he do not bring any thing to perfection. excuse himself, they be not the right mulberry, he expect. about this time they be in hope of a small crop of tobacco, but it be most spoil for want of knowledge to use it. be not the right mulberry he expect. about this time they be in hope of a small crop of tobacco, but it be most spoil for want of knowledge to use it now. in england, master, more become among the merchant, marvellous, distasteful for the detain so long the ambergris which delay they so much abhor. they forthwith dispatch the elizabeth the second time and forty passenger much rebuke more for so long. detain the ambergris for the which have now no more colourable excuse, he deliver it, wherewith the ship go to virginia and thence home in this ship be bring the first potato root, a strange increase of potato which flourish, exceed for a time till by negligence they be almost lose all but two castaway. home in this ship be bring the first potato root, a strange increase of potato which flourish exceed for a time till by negligence they be almost lose all but two castaway root that so wonderful have increase. they be a main relief to all the inhabitant. this ship be not long go but there come two spanish ship, the attempt of two spanish ship, sound with their boat, which attempt to come in but from the king castle master more make but two shot which cause they present depart. mark here the handy work of the divine providence, for they have but three quarter of a barrel of powder and but one shot more, and the powder by carelessness be tumble down under the mussel of the the divine providence, for they have but three quarter of a barrel of powder and but one shot more, and the powder, by carelessness, be tumble down under the mussel of the two piece, be discharge, yet not touch with fire when they be discharge. this fear thus past, appear another, much worse, which be the extremity of famine. in this extemity, god send captain daniel elfrid with a carvel of meal which a little relieve they but bring withal so many rat that within two year, after near ruin, all now though elfrid have deceive his friend fisher of this carvel in the west indies, they revenge fisher injury for elfrid have his passage for england and they make use of all he have some two month. his friend fisher of this carvel in the west indies. they revenge fisher injury for elfrid, have his passage for england and they make use of all he have. some two month after come in the blessing with a hundred passenger and two day after the star, with a hundred and four score more, among which be many gentleman as master low for martial, master barret, master felgate and diverse other but very unproper for what they undertake. within fourteen day after come in the margaret and two frygat and in they one hundred and threescore passenger. also master bartlet come now express to divide the country into tribe and the tribe into share, but master more find no mention, make of any part for himself, nor all. passenger. also, master bartlet come now express to divide the country into tribe and the tribe into share. but master more find no mention make of any part for himself, nor all they with he as he be promise in england, by no mean will admit of any division, nor suffer his man from finish their fortification which be so necessary. it be his main ambition to see that accomplish. but such unkindness grow betwixt this master bartlet and the governor that the rude multitude with all the disdain they can devise, cause bartlet return for england as he come about this time, william millington be draw into the sea by a fish. but never after ever see the neglect of this division be very hardly conceit in. england as he come about. this time, william millington be draw into the sea by a fish. but never after ever see the neglect of this division be very hardly conceit in england, so that master more grow more and more in dislike with the company. a great famine and mortality. sir thomas smith, treasurer notwithstanding, he follow the build of these fort so earnest neglect. plant of corn till their store be near all consume, whereby they become so feeble and weak. some will not, other can not, go abroad to seek relief but statue in their house. and many that go abroad through weakness be subject to be sudden surprise with a disease, call the feauge, which be neither pain nor sickness. but as it be. in their house, and many that go abroad through weakness be subject to be sudden surprise with a disease, call the feauge, which be neither pain nor sickness, but as it be the high degree of weakness, deprive they of power and ability from the execution of any bodily exercise, whether it be work, walk or what else be. thus take, if any present, give they food, many time they straight recover. yet some, after a little rest, will be able to walk. but if they find not present, succour die a strange be of raven, about this time or immediate before, come in a company of raven which continue among they all the time of this mortality and then depart, which for any thing know neither before. about this time or immediate before, come in a company of raven which continue among they all the time of this mortality and then depart which for any thing know neither before nor since be ever see or hear of this with diverse other reason. cause master more to go out to sea to see if he can discover any other land, but he go not far. ere ill weather force he back, and it be a noble adventure of he will undertake to make more perfect all the danger. be about the summer iles. all work abandon to get only victual, thus famine and misery. cause governor more, leave all his work and send they abroad to get what they can. one hundred and fifty of the. work, abandon to get only victual. thus famine and misery cause, governor more, leave all his work and send they abroad to get what they can. one hundred and fifty of the most weak and sick he send to couper. i will where be such infinite number of the bird call cahowe, which be so fearless- they may take so many as they will- and that admire abundance of fish that the extremity of their hunger and their gluttony be such, those heavenly blessing they so consume and waste. by carelessness and surfeit, many of they die upon those silly bird that offer themselves to the slaughter which the governor, understanding, cause. they for change of air to be remove to portroyall and a company of fisher with die upon those silly bird that offer themselves to the slaughter which the governor, understanding, cause they for change of air to be remove to portroyall and a company of fisher with a boat to relieve they with fish. but the gange grow so lazy the poor weakling still die. they that remain kill the cattle they find in the i will feign the heat, cause they to run into the sea and so be drown so that the governor send again for they home. but some obtain leave still to live abroad. one among the rest hide himself in the wood and live only on wilkes and land. crab sit and lusty many month, but most of they be at saint georges ordinary be take one hundred. rest, hide himself in the wood and live only on wilkes and land. crab sit and lusty many month but most of they be at saint georges ordinary be. take one hundred and fifty or two hundred great fish daily for their food. for want of hook and line, the smith make hook of old sword and line of old rope but find all those poor engine also decay. they send one of the two frigate last leave with they for england to tell they of this misery. all which be now attribute to master moor perverseness who at first, when he get the amber-greece have not such a general applause, but now all the worst can possible be suggest be too good for he yet not know. perverseness who at first, when he get the amber-greece, have not such a general applause, but now all the worst can possible be suggest, be too good for he, yet not know for the present how to send a better they let he continue still, though his time be near expire, and with all speed send the welcome fraught with provision where she well arrive and prove herself as welcome in deed as in name. for all those extremity, master lewes hues, write not one of all those threescore that first begin this plantation be dead, which show it be not impossible. but industry may have prevent a great part of the other sluggish carelessness. a supply and m moor, return this ship much refresh this miserable colony. which show it be not impossible. but industry may have prevent a great part of the other sluggish carelessness. a supply and m moor, return this ship much, refresh this miserable colony. but master, more see they send not for he. his time be now expire. understand how bad they repute he in england and that his employment now be more for their own end then any good for himself. resolve direct to return with this ship. have settle all thing in the best order he can, leave the government to the charge of the counsel of six to succeed each other monthly till they have further direction from england. who name be captain miles kendal, captain john mansfield, thomas knight, charles caldycot, edward water and christopher carter? of six to succeed each other monthly till they have further direction from england, who name be captain miles kendal, captain john mansfield, thomas knight, charles caldycot, edward water and christopher carter, with twelve other for their assistance. more thus take leave of those land, arrive in england. much wrangle they have, but at last they confirm he according to promise eight share of land, and so he be dismiss of his charge with show of favour and much friendship. the rule of the six governor, the first thing they do be cast of lot who shall rule first? sir thomas smith, treasurer, which lot light upon master caldicot. this last supply somewhat abate the extremity of their misery and the better in that their fortification be finish. shall rule first, sir thomas smith, treasurer, which lot light upon master caldicot. this last supply somewhat abate the extremity of their misery, and the better in that their fortification be finish they have, the more leisure to go abroad with, that mean be bring to that purpose to fish chard, as you have hear who. all this while more have keep prisoner they set at liberty now by reason of their former misery. little or nothing can be do yet. this governor have thus conclude his month and prepare a frigate and two and thirty man. he embark himself with two other of his fellow counsellor, namely knight and water, for the west-indies to get fruit and plant goat, young cattle and such like. but this poor, man. he embark himself with two other of his fellow counsellor, namely knight and water, for the west-indies to get fruit and plant goat, young cattle and such like. but this poor vessel, whether through ill weather or want of mariner or both, in stead of the indies fall with the canary. where take a poor portugal, the which they man with ten of their own people, as soon after separate from she in a storm and the next day be take by a french pickaroune, so that the frigate, out of hope of her prize, make a second time for the west-indies, where she no soon arrive but founder in the sea. but the man in their boat recover a desolate isle where, after some few month, make a second time for the west-indies, where she no soon arrive but founder in the sea. but the man in their boat recover a desolate isle where, after some few month stay, a english pirate take they in and some of they at last get for england and some few year after return to the summer, iles captain john mansfield his month. the frigate thus go, captain mansfield succeed, then be contrive. a petition as from the generality unto the governor, wherein they supplicate that by no mean they shall resign the government to any shall come from england upon what term soever, until six month after the return of their ship. send to the west-indies about this unwarrantable action. m^ster lewes hues their preacher be so. shall come from england upon what term soever, until six month after the return of their ship. send to the west-indies about this unwarrantable action. m^ster lewes hues, their preacher, be so violent in suppress it that such discontent grow betwixt the governor and he, and division among the company he be arraign, condemn and imprison, but not long detain before release. then the matter fall so hot again to be dispute betwixt he and one master keath, a scotchman that profess scholarship, that make all the people in a great combustion. much ado there be till at last, as they sit in the church and ready to proceed to a judiciary course against master hues, sudden such a extreme gust of wind and weather so ruffle in. till at last. as they sit in the church and ready to proceed to a judiciary course against master hues, sudden such a extreme gust of wind and weather so ruffle in the tree and church, some cry out a miracle, other it be but a accident common in those isle. but the noise be so terrible it dissolve the assembly notwithstanding, master hues be again imprison and as sudden discharge. but those faction be so confuse and their relation so variable that such unnecessary circumstance be better omit then any more dispute. this man month thus end begin master carter. master carter, captain kendal capt mansfield which be altogether spend in quietness, and then captain miles, kendal have the rule who month be also as quiet spend. thus end, begin master carter. master carter, captain kendal, capt mansfield which be altogether spend in quietness, and then captain miles, kendal have the rule who month be also as quiet spend as his predecessor. then captain mansfield begin his second month when the ship call the edwin, arrive with good supply. about this time diverse boat go to sea, be lose and some man drown and many of the company repair to master hues that there may be a council, according to master moor order, of six governor and twelve assistant, whereupon grow as many more such silly brawl as before, which at last conclude with as simple a reconciliation in the interim, happen to a certain number of private person as miserable and lamentable a accident. more such silly brawl as before, which at last conclude with as simple a reconciliation in the interim, happen to a certain number of private person as miserable and lamentable a accident as ever be read or hear of. and thus it be a wonderful accident. in the month of march, a time most subject of all other to such tempest, on a friday, there go seven man in a boat of two or three run to fish the morning. be fair, so eager they be of their journey. some go fast. neither carry they either meat or drink with they, but a few palmeta berry, but be at their fish place some four league from the shore. such a tempest arise, they be quick, drive from the meat or drink with they, but a few palmeta berry, but be at their fish place some four league from the shore. such a tempest arise, they be quick. drive from the sight of land in a overgrow sea. despair of all hope only commit themselves to god. mercy set the boat, drive which way she will. on sunday the storm be somewhat abate. they hoist sail as they think towards the island. in the evening it grow stark calm to that be too weak to use their oar. they lay a drift that night. the next morning, andrew hilliard- for now all his companion, be past strength either to help he or themselves, before a small gale of wind spread his sail again on tuesday, one die. next morning, andrew hilliard, for now all his companion, be past strength either to help he or themselves, before a small gale of wind spread his sail again. on tuesday, one die, who they throw over board. on wednesday, three, and on thursday at night, the six. all these but the last be bury by hilliard in the sea, for so weak he be, grow he can not turn. he over as the rest, whereupon he strip, he rip his belly with his knife, throw his bowel into the water, he spread his body abroad, tilt open with a stick, and so let it lie as a cistern to receive some lucky rainwater, and this god, send h^m present after, so that in one small shower he recover. open with a stick, and so let it lie as a cistern to receive some lucky rainwater. and this god send h^m present after, so that in one small shower he recover about four spoonful of rain water to his unspeakable refreshment. he also preserve near half a pint of blood in a shoe, which he do spare drink of to moist his mouth. two several date, he feed on his flesh to the quantity of a pound. on the eleven day, from his lose the sight of land, two fly fish fall in his boat who warm juicy blood he suck to his great comfort. but within a hour after- to his great comfort, you will not doubt- he once again descry the land, and within four who warm juicy blood he suck to his great comfort. but within a hour after- to his great comfort, you will not doubt- he once again descry the land and within four hour after, be cast upon a rock near to port royal, where his boat be present, split in piece, but himself, though, exream weak, make shift to clamber up so steep and high a rock, as will have trouble the able man in the i will to have. do that by day, he do by night. be thus astride on a rock, the tumble sea have get such possession in his brain that a good while it be before his giddy head will suffer. he to venture upon the forsake it. towards the morning he crawl. sea have get such possession in his brain that a good while it be before his giddy head will suffer he to venture upon the forsake it. towards the morning he crawl a shore and then, to his accomplish joy, descerne where he be and travel half a day without any refreshment than water, whereof, wise and temperate, he stint himself, otherwise certain he have drink his last, in which case he attain a friend house where at the first they take he for a ghost, but at last acknowledge and receive he with joy his story, after some hour of recovery of strength to tell it. hear out with admiration he be not long after convey to the town where he receive his former health and be story after some hour of recovery of strength to tell it, hear out with admiration he be not long after convey to the town where he receive his former health and be live in the year 1622.. treasure find in the summer iles the next news that happen in this time of ease, be that a merry fellow have find some few dollar against the flemish wrack the bruit go currant, the treasure be find, and they all make man much ado there be to prevent the purloin of it before they have it, where, after they have tire themselves with search that they find amount not to above twenty pound starling which be not unlike but to be the remainder of some great store wash from some. they have tire themselves with search that they find amount not to above twenty pound starling which be not unlike but to be the remainder of some great store wash from some wrack not far from the shore. a new governor: choose the company by the edwin. receive news of the revel, be keep in summer isle. resolve to make choice of a new governor. call master daniel tuckar, that a long time have be a planter in virginia in the government of captain smith. all thing be furnish for his voyage. he set sail in the george consort with the edwin, with many passenger which be discover by they in those isle. they suppose they the frigate send to the west indies. but when they understand what, the george consort, with the edwin, with many passenger which be discover by they in those isle. they suppose they the frigate send to the west indies. but when they understand what they be, much preparation they make to resist the new governor. many great ostentation appear on both side, but when the quondam governor do see his man, for most part forsake he all be very well and quiet compound and with much kindness receive and welcome a shore where his commission be no soon read than they accept and acknowledge, he for their governor, the government of captain daniel tuckar, about the mistd of may arrive this governor, sir thomas smith, treasurer, where find the inhabitant? both abhor all exact labour, as also in a manner. the government of captain daniel tuckar about the mistd of may, arrive this governor, sir thomas smith, treasurer, where find the inhabitant? both abhor all exact labour as also, in a manner, disdain and grudge. much to be command by he, it can not but passionate any man live, but at last, according to the virginia order, he set every one be with he at saint georges to his task, to clear ground, fell tree, set corn, square timber, plant vine and other fruit, bring out of england these by their task master, by break a day, repair to the wharf from thence to be employ to the place of their employment till nine of the clock, and then in the afternoon from three till sunset beside meat. day repair to the wharf, from thence to be employ to the place of their employment, till nine of the clock, and then in the afternoon from three till sunset. beside meat, drink and clothes, they have for a time a certain kind of brass money with a hog on the one side, in memory of the abundance of hog be find at their first land. this course, thus square, imitate diverse order use in virginia. captain tuckars proceed by sir tho dale. he begin by they to look into his instruction give by the company, whereupon by one, mr richard norwood, a suruayor send over for that purpose in the time of master moor. he begin to lay out the eight tribe in the main, which be: whereupon by one, mr richard norwood, a suruayor send over for that purpose in the time of master moor, he begin to lay out the eight tribe in the main, which be to consist of fifty share to a tribe and twenty five acer to every share. he also begin to plant some colony man on some of the especial share. he swear also certain of the chief man of every tribe to be bailiff thereof and appoint as many man as he be able for all supply share the good land in the store house he send from thence and disperse it to his workman in general. some boat also begin to be build, but the pinnace call, the thomas suspect may make a escape- be lay. he send from thence and disperse it to his workman in general. some boat also begin to be build, but the pinnace call the thomas suspect may make a escape, be lay up in a dock, be she yet remain. in the begin of the second month of his government, a bark send to the west indies. he direct warrant to all the bailiff for the hold of a general assize at saint georges and appoint master stokes lieutenant of the king castle at the gurnet head. the edwin come with he. he send to the west indies by direction from england to trade with the native for cattle, corn plant and other commodity, a course of great importance which have it be pursue will certain have produce. west indies by direction from england to trade with the native for cattle, corn plant and other commodity, a course of great importance which have it be pursue will certain have produce more hopeful effect for the good of the colony than all the supply and magazine from england have or will in a long time present. after her departure begin the assize execute by his deputy the chief matter handle be the hang one john wood, a french man, the assize for speak many distasteful and mutinous speech against the governor to show the rest, by that example, the power of his authority which, after with his own hand he so oft execute with a bastinado. among the poor sort, many term it a cruelty, not much. by that example, the power of his authority which, after with his own hand, he so oft execute with a bastinado. among the poor sort, many term it a cruelty, not much less than tyranny, but the sequel be more than strange. so it be that five of they- the strange adventure of five man in a boat, see by no mean they can get passage for england, resolve to undergo all hazard, but they will make a escape from such servitude. the chief mariner and plotter of this business be richard sanders and his confederate, william goodwin, a ship carpenter, thomas harison, a joiner, james barker, a gentleman, and henry peewit. these repair to the governor and with, please insinuation, tell he if he will allow they. william goodwin, a ship carpenter, thomas harison, a joiner, james barker, a gentleman, and henry peewit. these repair to the governor and with please, insinuation, tell he if he will allow they but thing necessary, they will build he a boat of two or three ton with a close deck, shall go a fish all weather. the governor, half proud that he have bring his man to so good a pass as he conceive to offer themselves to so necessary a work, instant, with all willingness, furnish they with all thing they can desire and many fair promise to encourage they to perform it with all expedition. have, make choice of a place most fit from molestation. they go forward with that expedition that in a short time fair promise to encourage they to perform it with all expedition. have make choice of a place most fit from molestation. they go forward with that expedition that in a short time she be bring to perfection. by this time the ship that bring the governor be ready to depart. he send a lusty to go fetch his new boat to carry he aboard but arrive at the place where she be build. they can hear no more of she but she be go the last evening to sea to try how she will sail. much search and dispute be where this boat shall be. but at last they find diverse letter in the cabin to this effect, direct to the governor and other their friend that their search and dispute be where this boat shall be. but at last they find diverse letter in the cabin to this effect, direct to the governor and other their friend, that their hard and bad usage be so intolerable and their hope so small ever again to see their country or be deliver from such servitude. they do rather choose to put themselves to that desperate hazard to go for england in which, if they miscarry as it be much to be mistrust, their life and blood shall be require at their hand. be the cause a compass dial. barker have borrow of master hues, to who he write that, as he have oft, persuade they to patience and that god will pay they, though none do he. a compass dial barker have borrow of master hues, to who he write that, as he have oft, persuade they to patience and that god will pay. they though none do. he must now be content with the loss of his dial with his own doctrine. such leisure they find to be merry when in the eye of reason they be march into a most certain ruin. the governor be thus satisfy of their escape. extreme threaten they, no less than a hang, but the storm of the ocean they now. more fear then he good provision by barter they have get from the ship where goodwin, in a bravado, tell the mariner, though he can not be permit to go with they yet, peradventure he may be. provision by barter. they have get from the ship where goodwin in a bravado, tell the mariner though he can not be permit to go with they yet peradventure, he may be in england before they, whereat the master and his mate laugh merry. but have be now under sail three week. the wind so favour they. they feel nothing of what they have cause to fear. then a bluster gale blow in their tooth, put they to much extremity for diverse day, then become more gentle away. they pass prosperous some eight or ten day more till meet a french piccaroune of who they desire succour. he like himself, take from they what he like. leave they not so much as a cross-staff to observe withal and more till meet a french piccaroune of who they desire succour. he, like himself, take from they what he like, leave they not so much as a cross-staff to observe withal, and so cast they off their course. still, they continue till their victual begin to fall to the low ebb and the very knee of their small vessel be half hew away for fire wood. at last, to their infinite joy, they arrive in ireland, where the earl of tomund honourable entertain they and cause the boat to be hang up for a monument. and well she may, for she have sail more than 3300.. mile by a right line through the main sea, without any sight of land, and i think, since god make the world, well she may, for she have sail more than 3300. mile by a right line through the main sea without any sight of land, and i think, since god make the world the like navigation be, never do nor hear of this. fortunate sanders go to the east indies in the rifle. some ship there take it be his chance to buy a old chest for three or four shilling, but because it want a key he repent his bargain and will glad have sell it again for less. a certain time it lay toss to and fro as a thing he little regard, but at last have little to do, he break it open where he find a thousand pound starling or so much gold as buy. and fro as a thing he little regard, but at last have little to do. he break it open where he find a thousand pound starling or so much gold as buy he in england a good estate which leave with his wife. he return again to the east indies. the george set sail. three day after this escape plant from the west indies, the governor seize and confiscate all that those fugitive leave behind they, within a week after return, the edwin from the west indies furnish with fig, pine, sugarcane, plantaine, papane and diverse other plant which be present, replant and since increase into great number, also a indian and a negar, and so much as defray all the charge the governor, thus busy among his. other plant which be present, replant and since increase into great number, also a indian and a negar, and so much as defray all the charge. the governor, thus busy among his plant, make hedge of figtree and pomegranate and several division by palisade for the defence of their guard and keep their cattle for in such husbandry quality he well deserve great commendation. the adventurer to supply, he send with all speed they can, the hopewell, a small bark but a excellent sailer, and in she one captain powel, a excellent mariner. the exploit of captain pow^ll, and well acquaint in the indies where he be, to go trade, after he have land his passenger in the summer isle, but in his journey at the western isle, captain pow^ll and well acquaint in the indies where he be to go trade after he have land his passenger in the summer isle. but in his journey at the western isle meet a brasile man. he like the sugar and passenger so well. he man the carvel with his own man and continue his course. but bethink himself how this will be entertain at the summer isle. he find such doubt. he go direct for the west indies to take time to resolve what to do. arrive there he meet a french rover, one every way as cunning as himself but much more treacherous. a great league of kindness be soon make between they, upon confidence, whereof powel and some of the chief with he be invite. way as cunning as himself but much more treacherous. a great league of kindness be soon make between they upon confidence, whereof powel and some of the chief with he be, invite aboard he be easy, entice and in the midst of their cup both he and his company treacherous, make prisoner and thus be force to give he their prize or hang at the yard arm with all his company. have set they a shore away. go the french man powel ship be but hard by present. fetch they all a board but find his victual near spend and no hope at all to recover his prize. set his portugal on shore and set sail for the summer isle where safe arrive, he declare the whole passage. victual near spend and no hope at all to recover his prize. set his portugal on shore and set sail for the summer isle where safe arrive. he declare the whole passage to the governor, lest some other in tell may make it worse, of which the governor seem well enough to approve. this governor still spend his time in good husbandry. the second assize: although some of the snarl sort here in england who nothing will please write to he, he be fit to be a gardener then a governor some time he spend in dig of a great pond, but that work prove altogether unprofitable. about that time be hold. the second assize. the great matter pass be a proclamation against the spoil of cahowe. but dig of a great pond, but that work prove altogether unprofitable. about that time be hold the second assize the great matter pass be a proclamation against the spoil of cahowe. but it come too late for they be most destroy before a platform he cause to be erect by pagits fort, where a good fort be very necessary. captain powel not have perform his service in the west indies, he condition with the company, be send thither again by this governor and thirteen or fourteen of his best man furnish with all thing necessary. in the mean time, the company understanding that in january, february and march there be many whale for which fish, they send the neptune, a tall ship, well, provide with every thing fit. the mean time, the company, understanding that in january, february and march there be many whale for which fish, they send the neptune, a tall ship, well, provide with every thing fit for that purpose. but before she arrive, captain tuckar, who have bring also with he most provision for that employment, send three good shalop to try what can be do. but whether it be the swiftness of the whale in swim or the condition of the place, certain it be for all their labour and hazard, they can kill none, though they strike many. to begin his second year, he call the three assize the three assize, sir thomas smith, treasurer, where diverse be punish as their fault deserve, three be condemn to die, two be to begin his second year. he call the three assize. the three assize, sir thomas smith, treasurer, where diverse be punish as their fault deserve. three be condemn to die, two be reprieve, but the three be hang the next day. there be also a levy for the repair. two fort, but that labour take not such effect as be intend for want of good direction. but the great god of heaven be angry at somewhat happen in those proceed, cause such a increase of silly rat. the country near devour with rat in the space of two year, so to abound before they regard they that they fill not only those place where they be first land, but swim from place to place, spread themselves into all. of two year so to abound before they regard they that they fill not only those place where they be first land, but swim from place to place, spread themselves into all part of the country insomuch that there be no island but it be pester with they. and some fish have be take with rat in their belly which they catch in swim from i will to i will. their nest they have almost in every tree and in most place their burrow in the ground like coney. they spare not the fruit of the plant or tree nor the very plant themselves, but be they up when they have set their corn. the rat will come by, troop in the night and scratch it out of. plant or tree, nor the very plant themselves, but be they up when they have set their corn, the rat will come by troop in the night and scratch it out of the ground. if by diligent watch any escape till it come to ear, it shall then very hardly escape they, and they become noisome even to the very person of man. they use all the diligence they can for the destroy of. they nourish cat, both wild and tame. for that purpose they use ratsbane and many time set fire on the wood that oft run half a mile before it be extinct. every man be enjoin to set twelve trap and some, of their own accord, have set near a hundred which they ever visit. oft run half a mile before it be extinct. every man be enjoin to set twelve trap and some, of their own accord, have set near a hundred, which they ever visit twice or thrice in a night. they also train up their dog to hunt they, wherein they become so expert that a good dog in two or three hour will kill forty or fity. many other device they use to destroy they but can not prevail, find they still increase against they. nay, they so devour the fruit of the earth that they be destitute of bread for a year or two, so that when they have it afterward they be so wane from it they easy neglect to eat it with their meat beside they. destitute of bread for a year or two, so that when they have it afterward they be so wane from it they easy neglect to eat it with their meat beside. they endeavour so much for the plant tobacco, for present gain, that they neglect many thing. may more have prevail for their good, which cause among they much weakness and mortality since the begin of this vermin. at last it please god, but by what mean? it be not well know, to take they away. a strange confusion of rat, in so much that the wild cat and many dog which live on they be famish and many of they leave the wood, come down to their house and to such place where they use to garbage. wild cat and many dog which live on. they be famish and many of they leave the wood, come down to their house and to such place where they use to garbage their fish and become tame. some have attribute the destruction of they the to increase of wild cat, but that be not likely. they shall be so sudden increase rather, at that time then, four year before, and the chief occasion of this supposition be because they see some company of. they leave the wood and slay themselves for want of food, other by the coldness of winter, which, notwithstanding, be never so great there as with we in march, except it be in the wind beside. the rat want not the feather of young bird. the coldness of winter, which, notwithstanding, be never so great there as with we in march, except it be in the wind beside. the rat want not the feather of young bird and chicken, which they daily kill, and palmeta moss to build themselves warm nest out of the wind, as usual they do. neither do it appear that the cold be so mortal to they see. they will ordinary swim from place to place and be very fat even in the midst of winter. it remain, then, that, as god do sometime effect his will without subordinate and secondary cause, so we need not doubt but that in the speedy increase of this vermin, as also by the preservation of so many of they by such weak without subordinate and secondary cause. so we need not doubt but that in the speedy increase of this vermin, as also by the preservation of so many of they by such weak mean as they then enjoy, and especial in the so sudden removal of this great annoyance, there be join with and beside the ordinary and manifest mean, a more mediate and secret work of god. about this time henry long with seven other, in a extreme storm be cast away, but three of they escape. one of they be ask what he think in the worst of that extremity, answer he think nothing but gallows. claim thy right and it seem. god. well, hear his prayer and reward his ingratitude for he be hang within half. the worst of that extremity answer he think nothing but gallows. claim thy right and it seem god well, hear his prayer and reward his ingratitude for he be hang within half a year after. in that march also, five man go to sea but as yet be never hear of, and three more drown in a boat by hilliards house grow a very fair cedar which by a thunder clap be rend almost to small shiver and a man stand by, he and samuel tanton, most fearful blast, yet neither they the house, not a little child, yet a pair of rack in the house be all tear to fitter the neptune not long after arrive to fish for whale. her fortune prove no better than the. little child, yet a pair of rack in the house. be all tear to fitter. the neptune not long after arrive to fish for whale. her fortune prove no better than the governor. yet some be of opinion profit may be make by they. in may they descry four sail so that man all their fort. they stand two day in arm. the return of m powel from the indies expect what they be. at last they find it. master powel return from the west-indies in the hopewell where miss such trade as he expect these three frigate come in his way. he can not choose but take they meal, hide and munition be their lade. fair weather the governor make with powel till he have get all. three frigate come in his way. he can not choose. but take they meal, hide and munition. be their lade. fair weather the governor make with powel till he have get all the good into his own possession and then call powel to a strict account for do such a unwarrantable act much a do. then be betwixt the taker and receiver, but powel be glad to be. excuse to answer it in england. leave all he have take behind he in the isle, the neptune also return with he. but noble powel lose all his pay and pillage for this year, work for which the company send for to tuckar, so that he also lose his part as well as powel, notwithstanding the governor by this mean. pay and pillage for this year, work for which the company send for to tuckar so that he also lose his part as well as powel, notwithstanding the governor by this mean be strong in ship, fit the carvel with twelve man under the command of edward water, former, speak of and send they to virginia about such business as he have conceive. arrive there, they obtain some goat and and hog and what they can spare, and so return for the summer isle. but whether they can not find the isle for want of skill or beat off by ill weather or the ill will, they bear the governor, it matter not much, but they bear up again for virginia, where they all remain and will return. or beat off by ill weather or the ill will they bear the governor, it matter not much. but they bear up again for virginia, where they all remain and will return no more to summer. iles the governor think to make some use of the hide. a suppose mutiny by m pollard and m rich set some that profess themselves tanner to make trial of their skill, but they lose their labour and spoil the hide also. he call another assize concern a poor fellow, call gabriel, for conceal some speech m pollard and m rich shall use tend to the dis-reputation of the governor and his injustice and cruelty, which be bring within the compass of sedition and mutiny, though a year ago many be call. rich shall use, tend to the dis-reputation of the governor and his injustice and cruelty, which be bring within the compass of sedition and mutiny. though a year ago, many be call in question about it, although every one ordinary have speak as much yet. gabriel, for example, sake be condemn to be hang and be upon the ladder but reprieve the other two, m pollard and m richardo, be imprison, but upon better consideration the fact appear so small and ridiculous. upon their submission they be pardon and restore to their place. the division of the summer isle into tribe by master richard norwood surueyor, according to the direction of the council and company 1618.. the division of the isle into tribe. sir thomas smith, treasurer, as the summer isle into tribe by master richard norwood, surueyor, according to the direction of the council and company 1618.. the division of the isle into tribe, sir thomas smith, treasurer, as they have determine by lot m norwood, take a plot of the i will and divide it with as much faithfulness as he can. assign to every adventurer his share or proportion, as namely: to lay out a large proportion to be call the general land and employ for public use, as for the maintenance of the governor, minister, commander of fort, soldier and such like, and to this end be assign s george island s david island, longbridge island, smith island, cooper island, coney island, nonesuch island part of the main, and sundry other small. such like and to this end be assign s, george island s, david island, longbridge island, smith island, cooper island, coney island, nonesuch island, part of the main and sundry other small iles. the rest be to be divide into eight part, each part to be call a tribe and to have his denomination of some principal person that be adventurer therein. and according, the first tribe to be eastward, be then call bedford tribe, now hamilton, the second smith tribe, the three cavendish, now devonshire, the four pembroke, the five pagits, the six mansil, now warwick, the seven southampton, the eight sands, in the honour of the right honourable the marquis hamilton, sir thomas smith, the earl of devonshire, the earl of pembroke, the lord pagit, the warwick, the seven, southampton, the eight sands, in the honour of the right honourable the marquis hamilton, sir thomas smith, the earl of devonshire, the earl of pembroke, the lord pagit, the earl of warwick, the earl of southampton and sir edwin sands. again, each of those tribe be to be divide into fifty part, call share and every adventurer to have his share in these tribe, as be determine by cast lot in england, the manner of it appear by the map and, more large, by his book of the survey of the country which be in the record of the colony, and then begin this, which be before, as you have hear, but as a unsettle and confuse chaos, to receive a disposition, form and order. be in the record of the colony and then begin this, which be before, as you have hear, but as a unsettle and confuse chaos, to receive a disposition, form and order and become indeed a plantation. the name of the adventurer and their share in every tribe, according to the survey and the best information yet ascertain of any of their alteration. hamilton tribe: james l marquis hamil: 6 share. sir edward harwood: 4 share m. john delbridge: 3 share m john dike: 3 share m. ellis roberts: 2 share m robert phips: 1 share m. ralph king: 1 share m. quick assign: 2 share m. william cannig: 4 share m william cannig: 1 share m. william web: 1 share m. john bernard: assign 2 share m. m ralph king: 1 share m quick: assign 2 share m william cannig: 4 share m william cannig: 1 share m william web: 1 share m john bernard: assign 2 share m elias roberts. jun: 1 share m john gearing: 2 share m cleophas smith: 2 share. robert earl of warwick: 4 share m thomas covell: 3 share m greenwels: assign 1 share m cley: 1 share m powlson: 2 share m john dike: 1.1/2 share. common land for conveniency: 25 share m john dike: 1. 1, 2 share m george thorps: assign 1 share. 2. smith tribe. sir dudley dig: assign 2 share m richard edward: 2 share m william pane: 4 share m robert smith: 2 share m george barkley: assign 5 share. sir samuel sands: smith tribe: sir dudley dig: assign 2 share. m richard edward: 2 share. m william pane: 4 share. m robert smith: 2 share. m george barkley: assign 5 share. sir samuel sands: 1 share. m anthony pennistone: 4 share. sir edwin sands: 5 share. sir thomas smith: 5 share. m richard more: 4 share. m ad brumfield: 2 share m rob johnson alderman: 5 share m john wroth: 3 share m george smith: 4 share. 3. devonshire tribe: m anth penistone: 2 share m john dike: 1 share m john dike: 1 share m john bernard heir: 2 share. robert earl of warwick: 2 share. m francis west: 2 share. will. lord cavendish: 5 share. will earl of devonshire: 5 share m edw luckin: 5 share m edw. heir 2 share. robert, earl of warwick 2 share m francis west 2 share will lord cavendish 5 share will earl of devonshire 5 share m edw luckin 5 share m edw ditchfield 1 share m edw ditchfield 4 share m will nicols 2 share m edw ditchfield 1 share m john fletcher 2 share m gedion delawne 2 share m anth pennistone 3 share m best 2 share m edw luckin 2 share m richard rogers 2 share m will palmer 4 share 4.. pembroke tribe m george smith 4 share. gleab land: 2 share m nicholas hide 1 share. sir laurence hide 1 share m thomas judwyn 2 share will earl of pemb 10 share m richard edward 1 share m harding 1 share m rich. m nicholas hide 1 share. sir laurence hide 1 share. m thomas judwyn: 2 share. will earl of pemb 10 share. m. richard edward 1 share. m harding: 1 share. m rich edward 1 share. m elias roberts: 1 share. m rich edward 1 share. m jacobsons assign 1 share m john farrar 1 share. m nicholas farrar: 1 share. m nicholas farrar 1 share. m will canning 2 share. m richard martin: 2 share. m moris abbot: 2 share. m rich caswell 1 share. m rich caswell 2 share. m vvill caswell 1 share. m rich edward 2 share. m rich caswell 1 share. m rich edward 1 share. m george sands assign 2 share. m will pain 2 share. 5.. pagits tribe m john chamberlain 5. rich edward 2 share m rich caswell: 1 share m rich edward 1 share m george sands assign 2 share m will pain 2 share. 5. pagits tribe m john chamberlain 5 share m tho ayres and 4 share m rich wiseman: 4 share m rich wiseman: 1 share. will lord pagit: 10 share m will palmer 4 share m bagnell: 5 share m john bale: 1 share m wheatley: 4 share m christop barron: 4 share m john wodall: 1 share m john wodall: 1 share m lewis: 2 share m owen arthor assign 2 share m george etheridge: 4 share () 2 share. sir vvill wade: 1 share m john bernard heir: 1 share. 6.. warwick tribe m wheatley: 2 share. cap daniel tuckar: 2 share. share m. george etheridge: 4 share (). 2 share. sir vvill wade: 1 share. m john bernard heir: 1 share. 6. warwick tribe m wheatley: 2 share cap. daniel tuckar: 2 share. m. will felgate: 1 share. rob earl of warwick: 5 share m george smith: 5 share m sam tickner: 2 share. m francis mevell: 1 share m. sephen sparrow: 1 share. m joseph man: 5 share cap. daniel tuckar: 2 share. m elias more: 1 share. doctor anth hunton: 2 share. m. francis moverill: 1 share m rich poulson: 1 share. m math shephard: 1 share. m george tuckar: 10 share. m. ch clitheroe: 1 share. m. george swinow: 2 share m. rich tomlings: 1 share. m francis meverill: 1 share m. john water: 2 share. 1 share m. george tuckar: 10 share m. ch clitheroe: 1 share m. george swinow: 2 share m. rich tomlings: 1 share m. francis meverill: 1 share m. john water: 2 share m. martin bond: 2 share 7.. southamptons tribe, cap dan tuckar: 4 share m. john britton: 1 share m rich chamberland 3 share m. leon harwods assign 1 share m. john banks: 1 share. sir nathanael rich: 12 share. rob earl of warwick: 3 share m. richard more: 6 share m. george scot: 6 share m. edward scot: 6 share m. antho abdy: 6 share. hen earl of southampton: 4 share m. and broumfield: 2 share m. henry timb: 2 share. sir tho hewet: 2 share m. perce 1 share. sir raloh winwood: 2 share 8.. share. hen, earl of southampton, 4 share m and broumfield: 2 share m. henry timb, 2 share. sir tho hewet, 2 share m perce 1 share. sir raloh winwood: 2 share. 8.. sandys tribe: m george barcklies, heir, 5 share. sir edwin sands: 5 share m. jerom hidon, 10 share m tho millin and 2 share m john cuffe, 2 share m robert chamberlain: 2 share m. abr chamberlain: 1 share m george smith: 2 share m robert gore: 3 share. sir edw sackvile: 1 share. sir john davers: 1 share m robert gore: 2 share m. john delbridge: 1 share m. john vvroth, 1 share m john we, heir, 4 share m richard chamberlain: 10 share. touch the common ground in each tribe, as also the overplus. m john delbridge: 1 share. m john vvroth: 1 share. m john we heir: 4 share. m richard chamberlain: 10 share. touch the common ground in each tribe, as also the overplus. you may find that at large in the book of survey among their record. now, though the country be small yet they can not convenient have be dispose and well settle without a true description and a survey of it. and again, every man be settle where he may constant abide. they know their business and fit their household according. then they build no more but substantial house. they clear their ground and plant not only such thing as will yield they their fruit in a few month, but also such as will afford they profit. more but substantial house. they clear their ground and plant not only such thing as will yield they their fruit in a few month but also such as will afford they profit within a few year, so that in a short time the country begin to aspire and near approach unto that happiness and prosperity wherein now it flourish, etc. but to follow the history, upon the best plot of ground can be find the first magazine. the governor prevail so much with the generality. they build a fair house of cedar, which be do he appropriate it to himself, which occasion exceed much distaste about. this time arrive the diana with a good supply of man and provision and the first magazine ever see in those isle. appropriate it to himself, which occasion exceed much distaste about this time arrive the diana with a good supply of man and provision and the first magazine ever see in those isle, which course be not so much commend here as curse and abhor by reason of enhansement of all the inhabitant there. six or seven week this ship stay, then have towards her fraught thirty thousand weight of tobacco which prove good and come to a lucky market, give great encouragement to the adventurer to go lusty forward in their plantation and without such success there be nothing but grudge and repine. but about the appropriation of this new build house many bad discontent grow. betwixt, the oppress colony and the governor, especial, betwixt, he and the. there be nothing but grudge and repine. but about the appropriation of this new build house, many bad discontent grow betwixt the oppress colony and the governor especial, betwixt he and the minister and lewes, who will neither be fear with threat nor imprisonment that their malice continue till they meet in england, of which the minister make the cause so plaive. he, very well and honest it seem, discharge himself now in those time of these endless uncivil broil, two exploit of desperate fugitive, two desperate man and a proper gentlewoman get into a boat and think to make a escape to virginia, as appear by some letter they leave behind. they be never more hear on the very next month after the like be attempt by. and think to make a escape to virginia, as appear by some letter they leave behind. they be never more hear on the very next month after the like be attempt by six other, so desirous they be to be rid of their servitude. but their plot be discover by one of their society. they be apprehend, arraign and condemn to be hang the next day, be lead with halter about their neck to the place of execution. one be hang and the rest reprieve. the diana arrive well in england for all the infinite number of complaint. the arrival of the blessing, the tobacco do help to sweeten all manner of grievance, yet it breed a distaste in the opinion of so many they begin to think. of complaint. the arrival of the blessing, the tobacco, do help to sweeten all manner of grievance, yet it breed a distaste in the opinion of so many they begin to think of another governor, but for that time it be so. qualify by diverse of his friend, they dispatch away the blessing, which arrive in the summer, iles though their general letter be fair and courteous to the governor. yet by the report of the passenger and diverse particular letter from his friend, it be assure he his cruelty and covetousness for all his pain and industry be much dislike, nor be he like to enjoy his house and that land he have plant for himself by the extreme oppression of the commonalty this cause so many. and industry be much dislike. nor be he like to enjoy his house and that land he have plant for himself by the extreme oppression of the commonalty. this cause so many jealousy to arise in his conceit that at last he full resolve to return by this ship that no soon set sail from england than they proceed to the nomination of a new governor. many be present, according to the affection of those that be to give in their voice. but it chief rest betwixt one, captain southwell, and one, mr nathaniel butler, where we will leave they a while to the consideration of the court and company. now, captain tuckar, have institute captain kendal, one of the six governor before speak of for his substitute. we will leave they a while to the consideration of the court. and company now captain tuckar have institute captain kendal, one of the six governor before speak of, for his substitute, return with this ship direct for england as well, to excuse himself of those objection, he suspect, as to get assure he the house and land he have allot for himself lest it may otherwise be dispose of in his absence, collect out of their record by n b and the relation of m pollard and diverse other, the government of captain miles kendal, deputy for captain tuckar. the arrival of two ship, the unexpected return of captain tuckar, cause a demur in the election of the new governor. some persuade these oft change. be so. deputy for captain tuckar. the arrival of two ship, the unexpected return of captain tuckar, cause a demur in the election of the new governor. some persuade these oft change be so troublesome, dangerous and chargeable. it be best to continue, captain kendal, other again stand for captain tuckar, but during the time of these opinion, the gillyflower be dispatch with a supply. now i shall have remember. tuckar be no soon out of the harbour. but he meet master elfred in a ship, call the treasurer, send from virginia to trade by she. he write to his deputy master kendal to have a care of all thing and beware of too much acquaintance with this ship which he suspect be bind for the west-indies. notwithstanding, elfred receive to his deputy master, kendal, to have a care of all thing and beware of too much acquaintance with this ship which he suspect be bind for the west-indies. notwithstanding, elfred, receive what kindness the i will can afford. he promise to revisit they at his return. this do because they will not be governlesse. when his deputiship be expire, there be a general assembly and by that election kendal be confirm to succeed still governor. now they begin to apply themselves to the finish some platform about smith fort and lay the foundation of a church to be build of cedar. till the gillyflower arrive with some private letter to kendal how he be elect governor of those isle for three year during her stay they hold church to be build of cedar. till the gillyflower arrive with some private letter to kendal how he be elect governor of those isle for three year. during her stay they hold their assize where for some few suspect fact three be condemn and the better to terrify. the rest lead to the place of execution. but reprieve diverse of the rest have their fault, pardon. and the gillyflower set sail for new find land. captain butler choose governor. the love and kindness, honesty and industry of this captain kendal have be very much commend by other somewhat dislike. but a angel in those employment can please all man. yet this consideration breed much ill blood as well here as there, so that the company direct, conclude, captain. other somewhat dislike. but a angel in those employment can please all man. yet this consideration breed much ill blood as well here as there. so that the company direct conclude, captain butler shall, with what expedition they can go to be their governor in the interim. they take the opportunity of a ship call the sea-flower bind for virginia, and by she send a preacher and his family with diverse passenger and news of a new governor. this breed a great distaste among many. that still they shall have new officer and stranger for their governor they never hear of and themselves still keep there, whether they will or no, without any preferment. no, nor scarce any of they their inhabit to have any land at all. governor they never hear of and themselves still keep there, whether they will or no, without any preferment. no, nor scarce any of they, their inhabit to have any land at all of their own, but live all as tenant or as other man, poor servant. about this time come in captain kerby with a small bark from the west-indies who have refresh himself, be very kind use by the governor, and so depart not long after a dutch frigate be cast away upon the western shore, yet by the help of the english they save the man, though the ship perish among the rock a little after. one ensign wood be about the load of a piece by thrust a pike into the concavity. grate upon the. the man, though the ship perish among the rock a little after one ensign wood be about the load of a piece by thrust a pike into the concavity, grate upon the shot, or somewhat about the powder strike fire within she and so discharge but wound he cruel and blow he into the sea, though he be get out by some that stand by he, yet he die of those wound within two or three day after captain elfred now come in a second time, but of that we shall say more in the government of captain butler who, present after arrive with a good supply and be kind entertain by captain kendal and all the colony from a relation of tho spark and diverse other, the of captain butler who present after arrive with a good supply and be kind entertain by captain kendal and all the colony from a relation of tho spark and diverse other. the government of captain nathaniel butler. captain butler be arrive the twenty of october, a platform burn and much hurt by a hurricane, 1619.. 1619. some mutter there be how to maintain their election of captain kendal, but better remember themselves that conceit quick dissolve. the next day, kendal, the minister and the counsel go aboard to salute the new governor where, after they have dine with the best entertainment he can give they, they see the redout belong to the king castle by a mischance on fire, whither he repair with all the mean he can. dine with the best entertainment he can give they. they see the redout belong to the king castle by a mischance on fire, whither he repair with all the mean he can to quench it but all the platform and carriage be consume before their face and they can not help it. two day after he go up to the town have his commission public read, make a short speech to the company and so take upon he the government. then present he begin to repair the most necessary defect. the next month come in the garland, send from england six or seven week before he so that be seventeen week in her voyage. it be so tedious and grievous to diverse of the freshwater passenger that such garland send from england six or seven week before he so that be seventeen week in her voyage. it be so tedious and grievous to diverse of the freshwater passenger that such a sickness breed among they. many die as well. sailor as passenger have take the best order he can for their relief: pass through all the tribe and hold his first assize in captain tuckars house at the overplus. towards the last of this month of novemb there arise a most terrible storm or hurricane that blow up many great tree by the root. the warwick that bring the governor be cast away, but the garland rid by. she save herself by cut down her mast. and not long after a second storm no less violent. the warwick that bring the governor be cast away, but the garland rid by she save herself by cut down her mast. and not long after, a second storm, no less violent than the first, wherein the mount, which be a frame of wood build by master more for a watchtower to look out to sea, be blow up by the root and all that winter crop of corn blast and thus be the new governor. welcome with the beginning of the new year, he begin his first piece of fortification, the refortify the king castle upon a rock which flanker the king castle and find the ship, call the treasurer stark, rot and unserviceable. he take nine piece of ordinance from she to serve other use, the. upon a rock which flanker the king castle and find the ship, call the treasurer stark, rot and unserviceable. he take nine piece of ordinance from she to serve other use. the garland, for want of mean, can not make her voyage to virginia as she be appoint, wherefore he entertain she to return to england with all the tobacco they have in the i. will it be january before she depart, in which time she fail not much to have be twice cast away, but those strange and unavoidable mischance rather seem to quicken the governor industry then to dull it have. finish the church. begin by captain kendal. with a infinite toil and labour he get three piece out of the wrack. warwick have a excellent. governor industry. then to dull it have, finish the church, begin by captain kendal. with a infinite toil and labour he get three piece out of the wrack. warwick have a excellent dutch carpinter. he entertain of they that be cast away in the dutch frigate. he employ he in building of boat, whereof they be in exceed great want. in february they discover a tall ship, beat too and again, as it seem, by her work, be ignorant of the coast. some think her a spaniard to view their fort which stand most to that part. she so near approach some english, but the most some dutch man of war. the wind blow to high. they dare not send out a boat, though they much doubt she. part she so near approach some english but the most some dutch man of war. the wind blow to high. they dare not send out a boat though they much doubt she will be foul of their rock. but at last she bear up. rommy for the sea, ambergris find, and we hear of she no more that evening. a lucky fellow it shall seem he be, that find, a piece of ambergris of eight ounce, as he have twice before, which bring to the governor he have ready money for the one half, after three pound a ounce, according to their order of court, to encourage other to look out for more and prevent the mischief ensue by conceal of it the arrival of two dutch frigate. pound a ounce, according to their order of court, to encourage other to look out for more and prevent the mischief ensue by conceal of it. the arrival of two dutch frigate within a few day after they descry, two frigate that come close to the shore and send a letter to the governor, write in italian that they be hollander, have be in the west-indies and desire but to arrive, refresh themselves with wood and water. and so be. go the governor forthwith, send they to understand that be there under his majesty of england to command those isle. he be to carry himself a friend to his friend and a enemy to his enemy. if, therefore, he can show a lawful commission for his, be honest. to command those isle, he be to carry himself a friend to his friend and a enemy to his enemy. if, therefore, he can show a lawful commission for his be honest and noble employ, he and he shall be kind welcome. otherwise they be to adventure at their peril. but his commission be so good he stay there two month and be so well fit with oil and bacon. they be all glad and happy of this dutch captain scoutans arrival, with many thanks to their old friend captain powel that have conduct he thither the colony be exceed in great want and distress, buy the most part of it at reasonable rate. so captain scoutan return to the west-indies and captain powel for his part in. the colony be exceed in great want and distress, buy the most part of it at reasonable rate. so captain scoutan return to the west-indies and captain powel for his part in the low-countries. while these thing be in action, the adventurer in \ england make many a long look for their ship. at last the garland bring they all the news. but the tobacco be so spoil, either in the leak ship or the make up it cause a great suspicion. there can none be good come from those isle. where be they? but perfect in the cure. questionless it will be much better than a great quantity of that they sell for verinas and many a thousand of it in london have be buy and sell. in the cure, questionless, it will be much better than a great quantity of that they sell for verinas, and many a thousand of it in london have be buy and sell by that title. the difference betwixt the minister, the governor, be clear of those distraction- fall upon the restore of the burn redoubt where he cut out a large new platform and mount seven great piece of ordnance upon new carriage of cedar. now, among all those trouble, it be not the least to bring the two minister to subscribe to the book of common prayer, which all the bishop in england can not do. find it high time to attempt some conformity. bethink himself of the liturgy of garnsey and jarse wherein all those particular common prayer, which all the bishop in england can not do, find it high time to attempt some conformity. bethink himself of the liturgy of garnsey and jarse, wherein all those particular they so much stumble at be omit. no soon be this propound, but it be glad embrace by they both, whereupon the governor translate it verbatim out of french into english and cause the elder minister, upon easter day, to begin the use thereof at s george town, where himself most of the council officer and auditory receive the sacrament, the which form they continue during the time of his government. the rebuild the monte, much about this time in such a fair morning that have invite many boat far out to the sea to fish. continue during the time of his government the rebuild the monte, much about this time in such a fair morning that have invite many boat far out to the sea to fish. do rise such a hurricane that much endanger they all, so that one of they with two boy be drive to sea and never more hear of the minister thus agree, a proclamation be publish for keep of the sabbath and all the defective carriage he endeavour to have renew. build a small boat of cedar only to go with oar to be ready upon any occasion to discover any ship and take order. every fort shall have the like also cause number of cedar to be bring from diverse place in float to rebuild the. upon any occasion to discover any ship and take order. every fort shall have the like. also cause number of cedar to be bring from diverse place in float to rebuild the mount which, with a unspeakable toil, be raise seven foot high than before, and a falcon mount at the foot to be always discharge for a warn to all the fort upon the discovery of any ship. and this he call rich mount. this exceed toil and labour. have no cattle but only man strength. cause many petition to the governor that all those general work may cease till they have reap their harvest, in that they be in great distress for victual which he so well answer. their own shame do cause they desist from. general work may cease till they have reap their harvest, in that they be in great distress for victual which he so well answer their own shame do cause. they desist from that importunity and, voluntary, perform as much as he require. find accidental a little cross, erect in a by place, the tomb of sir george summer among a. many of bush understand there be bury the heart and entrail of sir george summer. he resolve to have a better memory for so worthy a soldier than that. so find also a great marble stone, bring out of england. he cause it by mason to be wrought handsome and lay over the place which he environ with a square wall of hew stone tomb like wherein he bring out of england. he cause it by mason to be wrought handsome, and lay over the place which he environ with a square wall of hew stone, tomb like wherein he cause to be grave this epitaph he have compose and fix it upon the marble stone, and thus it be in the year 1611. noble sir george summer, go hence to heaven. who well try, worth that hold he still employ. give he the knowledge of the world so wide. hence it be by heaven decree that to this place he bring new guest and name to mutual grace. at last, his soul and body be to part. he here bequeath his entrail and his heart. upon the six of june begin the second. assize their and name to mutual grace. at last his soul and body be to part. he here bequeath his entrail and his heart. upon the six of june begin the second assize their manner of law reform that reduce they to the direct form use in england, for beside the governor and council they have the bailiff of the tribe, in nature of the deputy lieutenant of the shire in england, for to they be all precept and warrant, direct and according answer and respect. they perform also the duty of justice, of peace within their limit. the subordinate officer to these in every tribe be the constable, headboroughs and churchwarden. these be the trier of the tobacco which, if they allow not to be merchantable, be burn and the subordinate officer to these in every tribe, be the constable, headboroughs and churchwarden, these be the trier of the tobacco which, if they allow not to be merchantable, be burn and these be the executioner of their civil and politic cause for point of war and martial affair. martial officer, they have the governor for lieutenant general, the sergeant, mayor, master of ordinance, captain of company, captain of fort, with their several officer to train and exercise those number under their charge in martial discipline. concern their court for decision of right and justice, the first civil officer and court, though last in constitution, be their general assembly allow by the state in england, in the nature of a parliament, consist of about forty person, viz the first civil officer and court, though last in constitution, be their general assembly, allow by the state in england, in the nature of a parliament consist of about forty person, viz the governor, the counsel, the bailiff of the tribe and two burgess of each tribe, choose by voice in the tribe beside such of the clergy as the governor think most fit, to be hold once a year, as you shall hear more thereof hereafter. the next court be the assize or jail of delivery, hold twice every year in christmas and whitsun week, for all criminal offender and civil cause, betwixt party and party as action of debt, trespass, battery, slander and the like, and these be determine by a jury of twelve man and above. all criminal offender and civil cause betwixt party and party, as action of debt, trespass, battery, slander and the like, and these be determine by a jury of twelve man and above they be also a grand jury to examine matter of great consequence. the last day of the assize may also well be hold a court for hear. the transgression in matter of contempt, mis-behaviour towards any magistrate, riot, seditious speaker, contemner of warrant and such like. there be also, as occasion shall require many matter hear by the governor or his officer, and oft justice do in several place, but those be but as day of hear and as preparative against their court etc. at this last assize eighteen be arraign for criminal cause. the second: justice do in several place. but those be but as day of hear and as preparative against their court etc. at this last assize, eighteen be arraign for criminal cause, the second assize a number very extraordinary, consider the place. but now occasion, by reason of the hard year and the store of ill, choose new comer. of these, some be censure to the whip post, some burn in the hand, but two be condemn to die. yet the one be reprieve, the other hang. this do every man return to his home. many trial they make again about the warwick, but to small purpose. her ordnance be lash so fast they can not be unloose till the rope and deck be rot. yet some few buttes of. make again about the warwick, but to small purpose. her ordnance be lash so fast they can not be unloose till the rope and deck be rot. yet some few buttes of bear be story they get, which, though it have lie six month under water, be very good notwithstanding. the next year they recover five piece of ordnance. a general assembly in manner a parliament. upon the first of august, according to the company instruction from england, begin the general assembly at the town of saint george, which be the first these isle ever have. consist, as be say, of the governor, council, bailiff and burgess and a secretary to who all bill be present and by he open read in the house, also a clerk to consist, as be say, of the governor council, bailiff and burgess and a secretary to who all bill be present and by he open read in the house, also a clerk to record the act. be thirty two in all, fifteen of which be send into england. be by a general consent, receive and enact the title whereof be these follow as for all the reason for they, they will be too tedious to recite their acts. the first be against the unjust sale and let of apprentice and other servant, and this be especial for the right, the undertaker in england. the second concern the dispose of age, disease and impotent person. for it be consider how careless many be in, prefer their friend or send sometime. the right, the undertaker in england. the second concern the dispose of age, disease and impotent person. for it be consider how careless many be in, prefer their friend or send sometime any they can procure to go. such unserviceable people shall be return back at their charge. that send they rather than be burdensome to the poor inhabitant in the iles. the three: the necessary man, the king castle be the key of the. i will that a garrison of twelve able man shall be there, always resident and 3000.. ear of corn and 1000 pound of tobacco pay they by the generality yearly as a pension. the four against the make unmarchantable tobacco and officer swear to make true trial and burn that be naught the. pound of tobacco, pay they by the generality yearly as a pension. the four, against the make unmarchantable tobacco and officer swear to make true trial and burn that be naught. the fist enjoin the erection of certain public bridge and the maintenance of they. the six for a continual supply of victual for all the fort to be preserve till some great occasion to use it. the seven be for two, fix day every year for the assize. the eight command the make of highway and prohibit the passage over man ground and plant field as well to prevent the spoil of garden as conveniency to answer any alarm. the nine for the preserve young tortoise and bird that be careless destroy. the ten provide against vagabond. as well to prevent the spoil of garden as conveniency to answer any alarm. the nine, for the preserve young tortoise and bird that be careless destroy. the ten: provide against vagabond and prohibit the entertainment of other man servant. the eleven: compel the set of a due quantity of corn for every family. the twelve: the care corn be set, enjoin the keep up of their poultry till it be past their reach. the thirteen, for the preservation of sufficient fence and against the sell of mark tree, appoint for bound. the fourteen: grant to a levy for a thousand pound weight of tobacco towards the payment of public work as the bridge and the mount. the fifteen, for the enjoin a acknowledgement and acception of all. a levy for a thousand pound weight of tobacco towards the payment of public work as the bridge and the mount. the fifteen for the enjoin, a acknowledgement and acception of all resident governor and the warrant he to continue, though his time be expire, till the arrival of a legitimate successor from england, to prevent all vomeet and presumptuous election beside it be desire by petition in england, the new governous shall live two month as a private man after his arrival. if his predecessor do stay so long, the better to learn and observe his course. and these be the content of those fifteen act apply, as you may perceive, which the law of england can not take notice of because every climate have somewhat to. his course. and these be the content of those fifteen act apply, as you may perceive, which the law of england can not take notice of, because every climate have somewhat to itself in that kind in particular, for otherwise, as it be conceive, it have be a high impudence and presumption to have meddle with they, or indeed with any such as these law that have, with such great judgement and justice, always provide for no soon be this business over, but the magazine ship be discover. and that night come into the harbour the arrival of the magazine ship, but in a very weak and sickly case, have cast over board twenty or thirty of her people, and so violent be the infection that the most arrival of the magazine ship but in a very weak and sickly case, have cast over board twenty or thirty of her people, and so violent be the infection that the most part of the failer as well as passenger be so sick or dismay or both, that the master confess have they stay at the sea but a week long they have all perish. there arrive with this ship diverse gentleman of good fashion with their wife and family, but many of they crazy by the tediousness of the voyage, howsoever, most of they by the excellent salubrity of the air than which the world have not a better soon after recover. yet some there be that die present after they get ashore, it be certain the the excellent salubrity of the air than which the world have not a better soon after recover. yet some there be that die present after they get ashore. it be certain the quality of the place either to kill or cure quick, as the body be more or less corrupt by this ship. the company send a supply of ten person for the generality, but of such bad condition that it seem they have pick the male out of newgate, the female from bridewell, as the governor find it his best course to grant out the woman to such as be so greedy of wife and will needs have they for better, for worse, and the man he place in the king castle for soldier, but this bad. woman to such as be so greedy of wife and will needs have they for better, for worse. and the man he place in the king castle for soldier, but this bad, weak, sickly supply be disperse for their best relief. by the much employment of his boat in remove they, many of his own man become infect so that for some week they be not able to do he any service at all. strict instruction also they bring for the plant of sugar cane^, for which the island be rocky and dry, be so unproper that few as yet have be see to prosper. yet there be other hold the contrary opinion that there be rain so ordinary, the isle be so moist as produce all their. that few as yet have be see to prosper. yet there be other hold the contrary opinion, that there be rain so ordinary, the isle be so moist as produce all their plant in such infinite abundance. there be no great reason to suspect this. be it right. use more than the r^st 70000.. weight of tobacco: seventy thousand weight of tobacco. be prepare towards her fraught. she return for england no soon. be she go. then come in another send by the company and generalty well condition. but she fail not much to have be cast away among those dangerous and terrible rock by she come also express command they shall entertain no other ship than be direct send from the company. this cause much grudge and cast away among those dangerous and terrible rock. by she come also express command they shall entertain no other ship than be direct send from the company. this cause much grudge and indeed a general distraction and exclamation among the inhabitant to be thus constrain to buy what they want and sell what they have at what price the magazine please, and to debar true man from come to they for trade or relief that be daily receive in all the harbour in england. so long this ship stay, go for fraught and wage the master, not care how long he lie at that rate in a good harbour, the governor be ready to send she away by proclamation, thus end the first year of the government of. not care how long he lie at that rate in a good harbour, the governor be ready to send she away by proclamation. thus end the first year of the government of c butler with the first of the second year. be hold the assize, where all the bailiff be fine for not give a beginning to the build of the bridge, the building of three bridge and other work. there be also a order to restrain the excessive wage, all handicraft man will have, and that the churchwarden shall meet twice a year to have all their presentment make perfect against the assize. the assize do all the able man be train in their arm and then depart to their own home, the town. thus clear he all their presentment, make perfect against the assize. the assize do all the able man be train in their arm and then depart to their own home, the town thus clear, he make certain new carriage for some demi culverin and a large new store-house of cedar for the yearly magazine good, finish warwick fort, begin by master more, and make a new platform at pagits fort, also a fair house of lime and stone for the townes-house. the three bridge appoint by the general assembly be follow with such diligence though they be more than a hundred or a hundred and twenty foot in length, have the foundation and arch in the sea be raise and accomplish so that man or beast with facility may pass they. a hundred or a hundred and twenty foot in length, have the foundation and arch in the sea be raise and accomplish so that man or beast with facility may pass. they at whitsonday be hold the four general assize. at saint georges, the general assize and the proceed where be try twenty, several cause, four or five be whip or burn in the hand for break of house. also, a order be make that the party cast in the trial of any cause shall pay to every of the jurour four penny. moreover, that not past ten leaf at the most shall grow upon a plant of tobacco, and that also in the make it up, a distinction shall diligent be observe, of two kind: a better, past, ten leaf at the most shall grow upon a plant of tobacco, and that also in the make it up, a distinction shall diligent be observe, of two kind, a better and a worse. then they build a strong stone house for the captain of the king, castle and corpse guard and repair what defect they can find in the platform and carriage. captain powel, so oft mention have be in the west-indies for the state of holland, come to a anchor within shot of their ordnance, desire admittance for wood and water, of which he have great need. but the governor will not permit. he so he weigh and depart, whereat the company be so mad it be not possible to constrain they to cease their he have great need, but the governor will not permit he so he weigh and depart, whereat the company be so mad it be not possible to constrain they to cease their exclamation against the company, inhihition till they be weary with exclaim but still for their better defence not think themselves sufficient secure have finish two new platform more. arrive the magazine ship but her master be dead and many of the passenger, the rest for most part very sick and withal. a strange and wonderful report of much complaint make against the governor to the company in england by some of they return in the last year ship but it be eight day before she can get in by reason of ill weather. be force again. the company in england. by some of they return in the last year ship but it be eight day before she can get in by reason of ill weather. be force again to sea so that time they keep every night continual great fire. she may see the isle as well by night as day. but at last she arrive and he plain understand he have more cause a great deal to look for. misconstruction of all his service then a acknowledgement, much less a recompense any better than his predecessor. but it be no new thing to require the best desert with the most vild of ingratitude. a strange deliverance of a spanish wrack the very next day night after the arrival of the magazine ship news. thing to require, the best desert with the most vild of ingratitude. a strange deliverance of a spanish wrack the very next day night after the arrival of the magazine ship news: be bring the governor by a dismay messenger from sands his tribe that one hundred spaniard be land in that part and diverse ship discover at sea, whereupon he present man the fort and instant make thitherward in person with twenty man, determine as he find cause to draw together more strength. by the way, be get thither by the break of the next day in stead of a enemy which he expect, he meet only with a company of poor distress, portugal and spaniard who, in their passage from carthagena in the west-indies, in consort. day, in stead of a enemy which he expect, he meet only with a company of poor distress, portugal and spaniard, who, in their passage from carthagena in the west-indies, in consort with the spanish fleet of, by the same storm that have endanger the magazine ship, lose they, upon those terrible rock, be to the number of seventy person, be strange preserve, and the manner be thus: about sunset, their ship beat among the rock. some twenty of the sailor get into the boat. with what treasure they can leave the captain, the master and all the rest to the mercy of the sea. but a boy not past fourteen year of age, that leap after to have get into the boat, miss that. hope it please. all the rest to the mercy of the sea. but a boy not past fourteen year of age, that leap after to have get into the boat, miss that. hope it, please, god. he get upon a chest. a drift by he, whereon they report he continue two day and be drive near to the clean contrary part of the i will, where he be take up near dead yet well, recover all this night. the ship stick fast the poor distress in. she the next day spy land, make a raft and be those give the alarm. first a shore, about three of the clock in the after noon the morning after about seven of the clock, come in the boat to a place call mangrove bay. the alarm. first a shore about three of the clock in the after noon. the morning, after about seven of the clock, come in the boat to a place call mangrove bay and the same day their carpenter be drive a shore upon a plank near hog-bay. there be a gentlewoman that have stand wet up to the middle upon the raft from the ship to the shore. be big with child and although this be upon the thirteen of september, she take no hurt and be safe. deliver of a boy within three day after the best comfort can be give they in those extremity they have, although some of the base sort, have be rifle, some of they before the governor arrival. also the spanish captain. the best comfort can be give they in those extremity they have, although some of the base sort, have be rifle, some of they before the governor arrival. also, the spanish captain and the chief with he much complain of the treachery of his man to leave he in that manner yet have convey with they the most of the money they can come by, which he easy miss, whereupon he sudden cause all they he accuse to be search and recover to the value of one hundred and forty pound starling which he deliver into the captain hand to be employ in a general purse towards their general charge. during their stay in the isle, some of the better sort, nine or ten week diet at his the captain hand to be employ in a general purse towards their general charge during their stay in the isle, some of the better sort nine or ten week diet at his own table, the rest be billet among the inhabitant at four shilling the week. till they find ship for their passage for which they pay no more than the english pay themselves, and for the passage of diverse of they, the governor be glad to stand bind to the master. some other that be not able to procure such friendship, be so constrain to stay in the isle till by their labour they have get so much as will transport they, and thus they be, preserve, relieve and deliver. in the month ensue arrive the second. stay in the isle till. by their labour they have get so much as will transport. they, and thus they be preserve, relieve and deliver. in the month ensue arrive the second ship and she also have lose her master. how they solemnize the powder treason and the arrival of two ship and diverse of her passenger. in she come two virginian woman to be marry to. some will have they that after they be convert and have child they may be send to their country and kindred to civilize. they, towards the end of this month, come in the three ship with a small magazine, have, sell what she can, carry the rest to virginia, and never do any of those passenger complain either of their good. month come in the three ship with a small magazine have sell what she can, carry the rest to virginia. and never do any of those passenger complain either of their good diet or too good usage at sea. but the clean contrary still occasion many of those extremity. the five of november, the damnable plot of the powder treason, be solemnize with prayer, sermon and a great feast whereto the governor invite the chief of the spaniard where drink the king health it be honour with a quick volley of small shot which be answer from the fort with the great ordnance, and then again conclude with a second volley of small shot. neither be the afternoon without music and dance and at night many huge bonfire. from the fort with the great ordnance and then again conclude with a second volley of small shot. neither be the afternoon without music and dance, and at night many huge bonfire of sweet wood, the spaniard, to express their thankfulness at their departure. the spaniard return and in danger again, 1621.. make a deed of gift to the governor of whatsoever he can recover of the wrack ship. but the ship, as they go out, come so dangerous upon a rock that the poor spaniard be so dismay, swear this place be ominous unto they, especial the woman that desire rather to go a shore and die howsoever than adventure any further in such a labyrinth of danger. but at last she get clear without danger and especial the woman that desire rather to go a shore and die howsoever than adventure any further in such a labyrinth of danger. but at last she get clear, without danger. and well, to england. the other go to virginia, wherein the governor send two great chest fill with all such kind and sort of fruit and plant as their land have as fig, pomegranate, orange, lemon, sugarcane, plantanes, potato, papawe, cassado root, red pepper, the prickell, pear and the like. three english murderer find in the spanish wrack the ship thus dispatch, he go into the main and so out to sea to the spanish wrack. he have be there before present after her ruin, for never have ship a more sudden death be now split in. the main and so out to sea to the spanish wrack. he have be there before, present after her ruin, for never have ship a more sudden death be now split in piece, all under water. he find small hope to recover any thing save a cable and a anchor and two good sacar, but the wind be so high he be force to return, be ten mile from the shore only with three murderer which be know to be the same, captain kendal have sell to captain kerby who ship be take by two man of war of carthagena, the most of his man slay or hang and he be wound, die in the wood. now their pilot be at this service, get thus those three murderer. of war of carthagena, the most of his man slay or hang and he be wound, die in the wood. now their pilot be at this service. get thus those three murderer to their ship and their ship thus to the bermuda, as the spaniard remain. relate to the governor and other have raise three small bulwark at southamptons fort, their assize and other passage, with two curtain and two raviling, which indeed be only the true, absolute piece of fortification in the isle. christmas be come and the prefix day of the assize diverse be whip and burn in the hand. only three young boy for steal be condemn and at the very point of hang, reprieve the governor than send his lieutenant all over the main. whip and burn in the hand only three young boy for steal be condemn and at the very point of hang, reprieve the governor than send his lieutenant all over the main to distribute arm to those be find most fit to use they and to give order for their randezuous which be hang up in the church about this time it chance a pretty secret to be discover: to preserve their corn from the fly or weavell which do in a manner as much hurt as the rat for the year before have make a proclamation that all corn shall be gather by a certain day, because many lazy person run so after the ship to get beer and aquavitae for which they will give any thing. proclamation that all corn shall be gather by a certain day. because many lazy person run so after the ship to get beer and aquavitae, for which they will give any thing, they have. much have be lose for want of gather. this year have a very fair crop. some of the inhabitant- none of the best husband hasty- gather it for fear of the penalty, throw it in great heap into their house unhusked, and so let it lie four or five month, which be think will have spoil it where the good husband husk it and with much labour hang it up where the fly do, so blow on it. they increase to so many weavel. they general complain of great loss. but those good fellow it and with much labour hang it up where the fly do, so blow on it. they increase to so many weavel. they general complain of great loss, but those good fellow that never care but from hand to mouth make their boast that not a grain of they have be touch nor hurt. there be no better way to preserve it then by let it lie in its husk and spare a infinite labour. former have be use. there be also very lucky about this time. find out diverse place of fresh water, of which many of the fort be very destitute and the churchwarden and sideman be very busy in correct. the profaner of the sabbath, drunkard gamester and such like there come also from virginia. many of the fort be very destitute and the churchwarden and sideman be very busy in correct the profaner of the sabbath, drunkard gamester and such like. there come also from virginia, a small bark with many thanks for the present, send they much aquavitae oil, sack and brick. they bring in exchange of more fruit and plant duck, turkey and limestone, of which she have plenty, and so return. during the abode of the stay of this ship the marriage of one of the virginia maid be consummate with a husband fit for she attend with more than one hundred guest and all the dainty for their dinner can be provide. they make also another trial to fish for whale, but it take no more effect than with more than one hundred guest and all the dainty for their dinner can be provide. they make also another trial to fish for whale, but it take no more effect than the former. this be do by the master of the virginia ship that profess much skill that way, but have fraught his ship with limestone, with 20000.. weight of potato and such thing as he desire. return for virginia a strange sodomy april, and may be spend in build a strong new prison and perfect some of the fortification and by the labour of twenty man in fourteen day be get from the spanish wrack four excellent good sacre and mount they at the fort. then begin the general assize where not few than fifty civil twenty man in fourteen day be get from the spanish wrack four excellent good sacre and mount they at the fort, then begin the general assize where not few than fifty civil, or rather uncivil, action be handle and twenty criminal prisoner bring to the bar. such a multitude of such vild people be send to this plantation that he think himself happy his time be so near expire. three of the foul act. be these: the first for the rape of a marry woman which be acquit by a senseless jury, the second for bugger a sow, and the three for sodomy with a boy for which they be hang. during the time of the imprisonment of this buggerer of the sow, a dunghill cock belong to. a sow and the three for sodomy with a boy for which they be hang. during the time of the imprisonment of this buggerer of the sow, a dunghill cock belong to the same man do continual haunt, a pig, of his also, and, to the wonder of all they that see it, who, be many, do so frequent, tread the pig as if it have be one of his hen. that the pig languish and die within a while after. and then the cock resort to the very same sow that this fellow be accuse for. in the very same manner, and as a addition to all this, about the same time, two chicken be hatch, the one whereof have two head, the other crow very loud. for, in the very same manner and as a addition to all this, about the same time, two chicken be hatch, the one whereof have two head, the other crow very loud and lusty. within twelve hour after it be out of the shell, a desperate fellow be to be arraign for steal, a turkey rather than he will endure his trial secret, convey himself to sea in a little boat and never since be ever hear of, nor be he ever like to be without a exceed wonder, little less than a miracle. in june they make another trial about the spanish wrack and recover another sacre, and a murderer also. he cause to be, hew out of the main rock a pair of large stair for they make another trial about the spanish wrack and recover another sacre and a murderer also. he cause to be. hew out of the main rock a pair of large stair for the convenient land of good and passenger, a work much to the beauty and benefit of the town with twenty choose man and two excellent divers. more trial about the wrack. the governor go himself to the wrack warwick, but they can recover but one murderer. from thence he go to the sea-aduenture, the wrack of sir george summer, the hull though two or three fathom in the water. they find unperished and with much a do weigh, a sacre, her sheet anchor, diverse bar of iron and pig of lead which stand the plantation in. three fathom in the water they find unperished and with much a do, weigh a sacre her sheet anchor diverse bar of iron and pig of lead which stand the plantation in very great stead. towards the end of july he go to seek for a wrack they report lay under water with her hatch spike up. but they can not find she but from the spanish wrack lie there by. they weigh three fair sacre more and so return through the tribe to saint george. some be also employ to seek out bed of oyster for pearl. some they find, some seed pearl they get, but out of one little shell above all the rest they get about 120.. small pearl but somewhat defective in their colour. for pearl. some they find. some seed pearl they get, but out of one little shell above all the rest they get about 120.. small pearl, but somewhat defective in their colour. the time of captain butler government draw near a end. the colony present unto he diverse grievance to entreat he to remember to the lord and company in england at his return. also, they appoint two to be join with he with letter of credence to solicit in their behalf. those grievance follow. first they be defraud of the food of their soul. the planter complaint for be not few than one thousand and five hundred people disperse in length twenty mile. they have at that present but one minister nor never have but two. and planter complaint for be not few than one thousand and five hundred people, disperse in length, twenty mile. they have at that present but one minister nor never have but two, and they so shorten of their promise that but only for mere pity they will have forsake they. second: neglect in the safety of their life by want of all sort of munition. three: they have be censure contrary to his majesty law and not allow they the benefit of their book, as they be in england but by captain butler. four: they be frustrate of many of their covenant and most extreme pinch and undo by the extortion of the magazine, for although their tobacco be stint, but at two shilling, sixpence the pound, yet they of many of their covenant and most extreme pinch and undo by the extortion of the magazine. for although their tobacco be stint, but at two shilling sixpence the pound, yet they pitch their commodity at what rate they please. five, their fatherless child be leave in little better condition than slave. for if their parent die in debt, their child be make as bondman till the debt be discharge. these thing be perfect. there grow a great question of one heriot for plot of faction and abuse the governor, for which he be condemn to lose his ear, yet he be use so favourable he lose, but the part of one in all. by this time it be grow past the wont season of the come in. lose his ear, yet he be use, so favourable he lose but the part of one in all. by this time it be grow past the wont season of the come in of ship from england, after a general long and expectation, the return of captain butler, especial of the governor, who commission be near upon expiration, give he cause to wish for a mean of deliverance from so troublesome and thankless a employment as he have hitherto. find it a sail be discover, and long it be not. before she arrive in the king castle-harbour, this bark be set out by two or three private man of the company and have land her supply be to go for virginia by her, the governor receive certain advertisement of. this bark be set out by two or three private man of the company and have land her supply be to go for virginia by her, the governor receive certain advertisement of the carriage and behaviour of the spaniard which he have relieve, as you have hear, the year before that, quite contrary both to his merit, their vow and his own expectation, they make clamour against he the which be second by the spanish ambassador, cause the state to fall in examination about it, whereupon have full, clear their ingratefulness and impudence and be assure of the choice of a successor that be to be expect within five or six week. he be desirous to take the opportunity of this bark and to visit the colony in. of the choice of a successor, that be to be expect within five or six week he be desirous to take the opportunity of this bark and to visit the colony in virginia in his return for england. leave the government to captain felgat, captain stokes, master lewis hewes, master nedom and master ginner. but now his time be full expire and the fortification finish, viz the king castle, wherein be mount upon sufficient platform sixteen piece of ordnance. in charles fort two. in southampton fort five betwixt, which and the castle pass the channel into the harbour, secure by three and twenty piece of good artillery to play upon it. in cowpers isle be pembrocks fort, where be two piece the channel of saint george be guard. the harbour secure by three and twenty piece of good artillery to play upon it, in cowpers isle, be pembrocks fort, where be two piece. the channel of saint george be guard by smith fort and pagits fort, in which be eleven piece of ordnance. saint george town be half a league within the harbour command by warwick fort, where be three great piece and on the wharfe before the governors house, eight more beside the warn piece by the mount, and three in saint katherine, so that in all there be ten fortress and two and fifty piece of ordnance sufficient and serviceable. their form and situation you may see more plain, describe in the map, and to defend those he leave one thousand five hundred person. and fifty piece of ordnance, sufficient and serviceable. their form and situation you may see more plain, describe in the map. and to defend those he leave, one thousand five hundred person with near a hundred boat and the i will well replenish with store of such fruit provision and poultry as be former relate. yet for so depart and other occasion, much difference have be betwixt he and some of the company, as any of his predecessor, which i rather wish be reconcile then, to be a reporter of such unprofitable dissension, for till treachery and faction and avarice be go, till envy and ambition and backbite be none, till perjury and idleness and injury be out and true till that villainy, the worst of all that. and faction and avarice be go till envy and ambition and backbite be none till perjury and idleness and injury be out and true till that villainy, the worst of all that rout, unless those vise banish, be what ever fort you have, a hundred wall together put will not have power to save. master john barnard, send to be governor the lord cave^d^sh treasurer. master nicholas farrar, deputy to supply this place, be send by the noble adventurer john bernard, a gentleman both of good mean and quality, who arrive within eight day after butler departure, with two ship and about one hundred and forty passenger, with arm and all sort of munition and other provision sufficient during the time of his life, which be but six. departure with two ship and about one hundred and forty passenger with arm and all sort of munition and other provision sufficient during the time of his life, which be but six week, in reform, all thing he find defective. he show himself so judicial and industrious as give great satisfaction and do general promise, vice be in great danger to be suppress and virtue and the plantation much advance. but so it happen that both he and his wife die in such short time. they be both bury in one day and one grave and master john harrison choose governor. till further order come from england. what happen in the government of master john harrison? they be still much trouble with a great short worm that devour. master john harrison choose governor till further order come from england. what happen in the government of master john harrison? they be still much trouble with a great short worm that devour their plant. in the night, sir edward sackuil, treasurer, master gabriel, barber deputy, but all the day they lie hide in the ground and though early in the morning they kill so many they will think there be no more. yet the next morning you shall find as many. the caterpillar to their fruit be also as pernicious and the land crab in some place be as thick in their borowe as coney in a warren and do much hurt. beside all this, there happen this year a very heavy disaster for a ship, wherein there place, be as thick in their borowe as coney in a warren and do much hurt. beside all this there happen this year a very heavy disaster for a ship, wherein there have be much swear and blaspheme, use all the voyage and land what she have to leave in those isle jovial frolike in their cup and tobacco, by accident fire the powder that at the very instant blow up the great cabin and some one way and some another. it be a wonder to think how they can be so blow out of the gun-roome into the sea where some be take up, live so pitiful burn their life be worse than so many death. some die, some live, but eighteen be lose at this fatal. gun-roome into the sea where some be take up live so pitiful burn their life be worse than so many death. some die, some live, but eighteen be lose at this fatal blast. the ship also immediate sink with threescore barrel of meal send for virginia and all the other provision in she be thus lose. note now to consider how the spaniard, french and dutch have be lose and preserve in those invincible isle, yet never regard they but as monument of misery, though at this present they all desire they. how sir thomas gate and sir george summer be ready to sink in the sea be save. what a incredible abundance of victual they find. how it be first plant by the english. the strange increase. and sir george summer be ready to sink in the sea, be save. what a incredible abundance of victual they find, how it be first plant by the english. the strange increase of rat and their sudden departure. the five man come from england in a boat. the escape of hilliard and the rest of those accident there happen. a man will think it a tabernacle of miracle and the world wonder that from such a paradise of admiration, who will think, shall spring such wonder of affliction as be only fit to be sacrifice upon the high altar of sorrow, thus to be set upon the high pinnacle of content and present, throw down to the low degree of extremity, as you see have be the yearly the high altar of sorrow, thus to be set upon the high pinnacle of content and present, throw down to the low degree of extremity, as you see have be the yearly succeed of those plantation the which to overcome as it be a incomparable honour, so it can be no dishonour if a man do miscarry by unfortunate accident in such honourable action, the which renown and virtue to attain have cause so many attempt by diverse nation beside we, even to pass through the very amazement of adventure upon the relation of this news, the company have send one, captain woodhouse, a gentleman of good repute and great experience in the war and no less provident than industrious and valiant. then return report: all go well. the company have send one captain woodhouse, a gentleman of good repute and great experience in the war and no less provident than industrious and valiant, then return report: all go well there. it be too true. in the absence of the noble treasurer, sir edward sackvill, now earl of dorset, there have be such complaint betwixt the planter and the company that by command the lord appoint sir thomas smith again treasurer 1624.. sir thomas smith, treasurer and master edward, deputy that since then, according to their order of court, he be also elect where. now we must leave they all to their good fortune and success till we hear further of their fortunate proceed to his friend captain smith, upon his description of new-england. sir your now we must leave they all to their good fortune and success, till we hear further of their fortunate proceed to his friend captain smith, upon his description of new-england. sir, your relation i have read, which show there be reason. i shall honour they and you, and if their meaning i have understand, i dare to censure thus: your project be good and may, if follow doubtless quit the pain with honour, pleasure and a treble gain beside the benefit that shall arise to make more happy our posterity. for will we deign to spare, though it be no more than what ore-fils and surfeit we in store to order nature fruitfulness a while in that rude garden, you new-england style, with present good, there be hope. though it be no more than what ore-fils and surfeit we in store to order nature fruitfulness a while in that rude garden, you new-england style. with present good there be hope in after-day, thence to repair what time and pride decay in this rich kingdom and the spacious west be still more with english blood possess. the proud iberian shall not rule those sea to check our ship from sail where they please, nor future time make any foreign power become so great to force a bind to our much good. my mind foretell will follow hence with little labour and with less expense. thrive therefore thy design. who ere envy england, may joy in england colony virginia seek her virgin sister. good be bless in such follow. hence, with little labour and with less expense, thrive therefore, thy design, who ere envy england. may joy in england, colony virginia seek her virgin sister. good be bless in such happy neighbourhood, or whatsoever fate please to permit, be thou still honour for first move it, george whither lincol. to that worthy and generous gentleman, my very good friend captain smith, may fate thy project prosper. that thy name may be eternize with live. fame though foul detraction. honour will pervert and envy. ever wait upon desert, in spite of pelias, when his hate lie cold, return as jason with a fleece of gold. then after-age shall record thy praise that a new-england to this i will do raise, and when thou die as all that. lie cold, return as jason with a fleece of gold, then after-age shall record thy praise that a new-england to this i will do raise. and when thou die, as all that live must die thy fame, live here thou with eternity. r gunnell to his worthy captain, the author. oft thou have lead. when i bring up the rear in bloody war where thousand have be slay, then give i leave in this some part to bear, and as thy servant, here to read my name. it be true, long time thou have, my captain, be in the fierce war of transiluania. long ere that thou america have see or lead waste captive in virginia, thou that to pass the world four part, do deem no more. be in the fierce war of transiluania. long ere that thou america, have see, or lead waste captive in virginia. thou that, to pass the world four part, do deem no more than it be to go to bed or drink, and all thou yet have do thou do esteem as nothing this do cause i think that thou i have see so oft approve in danger and thrice captive, thy valour still have free art, yet preserve to convert those stranger by god thy guide. i trust it be decree for i i not commend but much admire thy england, yet unknown to passer by-h for it will praise itself in spite of i thou it. it thou to all posterity, your true friend and soldier ed. but much admire thy england, yet unknown to passer by-h, for it will praise itself in spite of i thou it. it thou to all posterity, your true friend and soldier, ed robinson. to my honest captain, the author, malignant time, what can be say or do, but shall be censure and traduce by some this worthy work which thou have buy so dear. ne thou, nor it detractor, need to fear thy word by deed. so long thou have approve of thousand, know thou not, thou be belove, and this great plot will make thou ten time more know and belove than ere thou be before. i never know a warrior yet, but thou from wine, tobacco, debt, die oath, so free. i call thou warrior, and ten time more know and belove than ere thou be before. i never know a warrior yet, but thou, from wine, tobacco, debt, die oath, so free. i call thou warrior and i make the bold. for many a captain now be never soldier. some such may swell at this, but to their praise when they have do like thou, my muse shall raise their due desert to worthy yet to come to live like thou. admire till day of doom, your true friend, sometime your soldier tho carlton, new england, the most remarqueable part thus name by the high and mighty prince charles, prince of great britain, the portraictuer of captain john smith, admiral of new england, these be the line that show thy face, but those name by the high and mighty prince charles, prince of great britain, the portraictuer of captain john smith, admiral of new england. these be the line that show thy face, but those that show thy grace and glory. bright be thy faire-discovery and fowle-overthrowe of savage much. civilise by thou best show thy spirit and to it glory wyn. so thou be brass without, but gold within. if so, in brass too soft smith, act to bear, i fix thy fame to make brass steel out. wear thou as thou be, virtue go^^^ davies, heref hony s a scale of league. observe and describe by captain john smith, 1614 london, print by geor low, the six book, the general history of new-england. concern this history you be to s a scale of league. observe and describe by captain john smith, 1614 london. print by geor low the six book, the general history of new-england. concern this history, you be to understand the letters-patent grant by his majesty in 1606.. for the limitation of virginia do extend from 34. to 44. which be divide in two part, namely the first colony and the second. the first be to the honourable city of london and such as will adventure with they to discover and take their choice where they will betwixt the degree of 34. and 41.. the second be appropriate to the city of bristol, exeter and plymouth, etc. and the west part of england and all those that will adventure and join with they and they. 41. the second be appropriate to the city of bristol, exeter and plymouth etc. and the west part of england and all those that will adventure and join with they. and they may make their choice any where, betwixt the degree of 38. and 44. provide there shall be at least 100 mile distance betwixt these 2. colony, each of which have law, privilege and authority for the government and advance their several plantation alike. now this part of america have former be call norumbega, virginia, nuskoncus, cannada and such other name as those that range the coast please, but because it be so mountainous, rocky and full of isle, few have adventure, much to trouble it. but as be former relate, notwithstanding that honourable patron of virtue, the coast, please, but because it be so mountainous, rocky and full of isle, few have adventure. much to trouble it. but as be former relate, notwithstanding that, honourable patron of virtue, sir john popham, lord chief justice of england in the year 1606.. procure mean and man to possess it and send captain george popham for precedent, captain rawley gilbert for admiral, sir francis popham, treasurer, captain edward harlow, master of the ordnance, captain robert davis, sargeant-maior, captain elis best, marshal, master, seaman, secretary, captain james davis to be captain of the fort, master gome carew, chief searcher, all those be of the council who, with some hundred more, be to stay in the country. they set sail from plymouth the last of may and fall with carew, chief searcher, all those be of the council who, with some hundred more, be to stay in the country. they set sail from plymouth the last of may and fall with monahigan the eleven of august at sagadahock 9 or 10. league southward they plant themselves at the mouth of a fair, navigable river, but the coast all thereabouts most extreme, stony and rocky. that extreme freeze winter be so cold they can not range nor search the country, and their provision so small they be glad to send all but 45. of their company back again. their noble precedent: captain popham die and not long after arrive two ship, well, provide of all necessary to supply they and some small time after another, by who understanding? back again. their noble precedent, captain popham die and not long after arrive two ship well, provide of all necessary to supply. they, and some small time after another by who understanding of the death of the lord chief justice and also of sir john gilbert who land there, the precedent rawley gilbert be to possess, according to the adventurer direction, find nothing but extreme extremity. they all return for england in the year 1608.. and thus this plantation be begin and end in one year and the country esteem as a cold, barren, mountainous, rocky desert, notwithstanding the right honourable henry earl of south-hampton and those of the i will of wight, employ captain edward harlow to discover a, i will suppose, about cape cod, but they desert, notwithstanding the right honourable henry earl of south-hampton and those of the i will of wight, employ captain edward harlow to discover a, i will suppose, about cape cod. but they find their plot, have much abuse, they for fall with monahigan. they find only cape cod, no, i will, but the main there. they detain three saluage aboard they call pechmo, monopet and pekenimne. but pechmo leap over board and get away and not long after, with his consort, cut their boat from their stern, get she on shore and so fill she with sand and guard she with bow and arrow. the english lose she. not far from thence they have three man sore wound with arrow, anchor at the i will of nohone, the. sand and guard she with bow and arrow. the english lose she. not far from thence they have three man sore wound with arrow anchor at the i will of nohone. the saluage in their canowes assault the ship till the english gun make they retire. yet here they take sakaweston that after he have live many year in england go a soldier to the war of bohemia at capawo. they take and epenow, but the people at agawom use they kind. so with five saluage they return for england. yet sir francis popham send diverse time one captain williams to monahigan only to trade and make fish, but for any plantation. there be no more speech for all this, as i like virginia well, though not their. time one captain williams to monahigan only to trade and make fish, but for any plantation. there be no more speech for all this. as i like virginia well, though not their proceed, so i desire also to see this country and spend some time in try what i can find for all those ill rumour and disaster from the relation of captain edward harlow and diverse other. my first voyage to new england, 1614, in the month of april 1614, at the charge of capt marmaduke roydon, capt george langam, mr john buley and mr william skelton, with two ship from london, i chance to arrive at monahigan. an i will of america in 434. of northerly latitude, out plot be there to take whale for which william skelton. with two ship from london, i chance to arrive at monahigan, an i will of america in 434.. of northerly latitude, out plot be there to take whale, for which we have one, samuel cramton, and diverse other expert in that faculty, and also to make trial of a mine of gold and copper. if those fail, fish and fur be then our refuge to make ourselves saviour. howsoever. we find this whalefishing a costly conclusion. we see many and spend much time in chase. they but can not kill any. they be a kind of jubarte and not the whale that yield fin and oil as we expect for our gold. it be rather the master device to get a voyage that project it than kind of jubarte and not the whale that yield fin and oil as we expect for our gold. it be rather the master device to get a voyage that project it than any knowledge he have at all of any such matter. fish and fur be now our guard, and by our late arrival and long linger about the whale, the prime of both those season be past ere we perceive it. we think that their season serve at all time, but we find it otherwise, for by the midst of june the fish fail. yet in july and august some be take, but not sufficient to defray so great a charge as our stay require. of dry fish. we make about forty thousand of corfish, about seven. in july and august some be take, but not sufficient to defray so great a charge as our stay require. of dry fish we make about forty thousand of corfish, about seven thousand. the commodity i get amount to 1500.. pound, while the sailor fish, myself with eight other of, they may best be spare, range the coast in a small boat. we get for trifle near eleven thousand beaver skin, one hundred martin, as many otter and the most of they within the distance of twenty league. we range the coast both east and west much further, but eastward our commodity be not esteem. they be so near the french who afford they better, with who the saluage have such commerce that only by trade they make. much further, but eastward our commodity be not esteem they be so near the french who afford they better, with who the saluage have such commerce that only by trade they make, exceed great voyage though they be, without the limit of our precinct, during the time we try those conclusion, not know the coast nor saluage habitation. with these fur, the train, oil and corfish, i return for england in the bark where, within six month after our departure from the down we safe arrive back. the best of this fish be sell for 5. li the hundred, the rest by ill usage, betwixt three pound and 50. shilling. the other ship stay to fit herself for spain with the dry fish which be sell at maligo. li the hundred, the rest by ill usage, betwixt three pound and 50. shilling. the other ship stay to fit herself for spain with the dry fish which be sell at maligo at forty rial the quintall, the treachery of master hunt. each hundred weigh two quintal and a half, but one thomas hunt, the master of this ship, when i be go, think to prevent that intent, i have to make there a plantation, thereby to keep this abound country still in obscurity that only he and some few merchant more may enjoy whole the benefit of the trade and profit of this country. betray four and twenty of those poor saluage aboard his ship and most dishonest and inhumane for their kind usage of i and benefit of the trade and profit of this country, betray four and twenty of those poor saluage aboard his ship and most dishonest and inhumane for their kind usage of i and all our man. carry they with he to maligo and there for a little private gain sell those silly saluage for rial of eight. but this vild act keep he ever after from any more employment to those part now, because at this time i have take a draught of the coast and call it new england. yet so long he and his consort drown that name with the echo of cannaday and some other ship from other part also that upon this good return the next year go thither. that at last. i present this. drown that name with the echo of cannaday and some other ship from other part also, that upon this good return, the next year go thither, that at last. i present this discourse with the map to our most gracious prince charles. humble entreat, his highness, he will please to change their barbarous name for such english as posterity may say. prince charles, be their godfather which, for your better understanding both of this discourse and the m^p, peruse this schedule which will plain show you the correspondency of the old name to the new. as his highness name they, how prince charles call the most remarkable place in new england, the rest of the name in the map be place that have no name we do know. his highness name. they, how prince charles, call the most remarkable place in new england. the rest of the name in the map be place that have no name we do know. but to continue the history succeed as near with the day and year as may be return in the bark as be say aspersion against new england, it be my ill chance to put in at plymouth where impart those my purpose to diverse, i think, my friend who, as i suppose, be interest in the dead patent of this unregarded country, i be so encourage and assure to have the manage their authority in those part during my life and such large promise that i engage myself to undertake it for they arrive at london. so encourage and assure to have the manage their authority in those part during my life, and such large promise that i engage myself to undertake it for they arrive at london, though some malicious person suggest there be no such matter to be have in that so bid abandon country, for if there have, other can have find it so well as i. therefore, it be to be suspect i have rob the french man in new france or cannada and the merchant, see i forth, seem not to regard it. yet i find so many promise i such assistance that i entertain michael cooper, the master of the bark that return with i and other of the company, how he deal with other or other with. many promise i such assistance that i entertain michael cooper, the master of the bark that return with i and other of the company. how he deal with other or other with he i know not, but my public proceed give such encouragement that it become so well apprehend by some few of the virginia company as those project for fish only be so well like they furnish couper with four good ship to sea before they at plymouth have make any provision at all for i, but only a small bark set out by they of the i will of wight, some of plymouth and diverse gentleman of the west country, captain hobson, his voyage to capawuk. a little before i return from new england in search of the i will of wight, some of plymouth and diverse gentleman of the west country, captain hobson, his voyage to capawuk, a little before i return from new england in search for a mine of gold about a, i will call capawuck, southward from the shovel of cape james, as they be inform by a savage call epenew that have delude they, as it seem, thus to get home. see, they keep he as a prisoner in his own country and before his friend be, a man of so great a stature he be show up and down london for money as a wonder, and it seem of no less courage and authority then of wit, strength and proportion, for so well he have contrive his business. up and down london for money as a wonder. and it seem of no less courage and authority then, of wit, strength and proportion, for so well he have, contrive his business, as many report he intend to have, surprise the ship, but see, it can not be effect to his like. before they all, he leap overboard, many shot they make at he think they have, slay he, but so resolute they be to recover his body, the master of the ship be wound and many of his company, and thus they lose he and not know more what to do. return again to england with nothing, which so have discourage all your west country man. they neither regard much their promise, and as little either i. not know more what to do, return again to england with nothing, which so have discourage all your west country man. they neither regard much their promise and as little either i or the country. till they see the london ship go and i in plymouth, according to my promise, as hereafter shall be relate, the londoner send four good ship to new england. i must confess i be behold to the setter forth of the four ship that go, with couper in that they offer i that employment if i will accept it and i find still my refusal incur some of their displeasure who love and favour i exceed desire, and though they do censure i opposite to their proceed, they shall yet still in all. find still my refusal, incur some of their displeasure. who love and favour i exceed desire, and though they do censure i opposite to their proceed, they shall yet still, in all my word and deed, find it be their error, not my fault, that occasion their dislike for have engage myself in this business to the west country. i have be very dishonest to have break my promise. nor will i spend more time in discovery or fish till i may go with a company for a plantation, for i know my ground. yet every one to who i tell they or that read this book can put it in practice, though it may help any that have see or not see to know much of those. one to who i tell they or that read this book can put it in practice, though it may help any that have see or not see to know much of those part. and though they endeavour to work i out of my own design, i will not much envy their fortune, but i will be sorry. their intrude ignorance shall, by their defailment, bring those certainty to doubtfulness. so that the business prosper, i have my desire, be it by whosoever, that be true, subject to our king and country. the good of my country be that i seek, and there be more, then enough for all, if they can be content, the situation of new england. new england be that part of america in the ocean. be that i seek and there be more then enough for all, if they can be content, the situation of new england. new england be that part of america in the ocean sea opposite to albion, in the south sea, discover by the most memorable sir francis drake in his voyage about the world. in regard whereof this be style. new england be in the same latitude, new france of it be northwards, southwards be virginia and all the adjoin continent, with new granado, new spain, new andolosia and the west-indies. now, because i have be so oft ask such strange question of the goodness and greatness of those spacious tract of land, how they can be thus long unknown or not possess by the spaniard and many. so oft ask such strange question of the goodness and greatness of those spacious tract of land, how they can be thus long unknown or not possess by the spaniard, and many such like demand. i entreat your pardon if i chance to be too plain or tedious in relate my knowledge for plain man satisfaction. note of florida. florida be the next adjoin to the indies which unprosperous be attempt to be plant by the french, a country far big than england, scotland, france and ireland, yet little know to any christian. but by the wonderful endeavour of ferdinando de soto, a valiant spaniard who write in this age, be the best guide, know to search those part. note of virginia. virginia be no isle as many. wonderful endeavour of ferdinando de soto, a valiant spaniard who write in this age, be the best guide. know to search those part. note of virginia. virginia be no isle, as many do imagine, but part of the continent adjoin to florida, who bound may be stretch to the magnitude thereof without offence to any christian inhabitant. for from the degree of thirty to forty eight, his majesty have now enlarge his letter patent the coast, extend southwest and north-east about sixteen or seventeen hundred mile, but to follow it aboard the shore may well be three thousand mile at the least, of which twenty mile be the most give entrance into the bay of chisapeacke, where be the london plantation, within which be a country as you. three thousand mile at the least, of which twenty mile be the most, give entrance into the bay of chisapeacke, where be the london plantation, within which be a country, as you may perceive by the map, of that little i discover, may well suffice three hundred thousand people to inhabit. but of it and the discovery of sir ralph lie and master heriot, captain gosnold and captain waymouth, they have write so large that posterity may be better by the fruit of their labour. but for diverse other that have range those part since especial this country now call new england, within a ken sometime of the shore, some touch in one place, some in another, i must entreat they, pardon i for omit they, or if this country now call new england, within a ken sometime of the shore, some touch in one place, some in another. i must entreat they, pardon i for omit they, or, if i offend in, say that their true description be conceal or never be well, observe or die with the author so that the coast be yet still, but even as a coast unknown and undiscovered. i have have six or seven, several plot of those northern part, so unlike each to other, or resemblance of the country as they do i no more good than so much waste paper, though they cost i more. it may be it be not my chance to see the best, but lest other may be deceive as i be. or than so much waste paper, though they cost i more. it may be it be not my chance to see the best, but lest other may be, deceive as i be or, through dangerous ignorance, hazard themselves as i do, i have draw a map from point to point. i will to i will, and harbour to harbour, with the sound, sand, rock and landmark as i pass close aboard the shore in a little boat, although there be many thing to be observe which the haste of other affair do cause i to omit. for be send more to get present commodity than knowledge of any discovery for any future good. i have not power to search as i will, yet it will serve to direct any. be send more to get present commodity than knowledge of any discovery for any future good. i have not power to search as i will, yet it will serve to direct, any shall go that way to safe harbour and the saluage habitation, what merchandise and commodity for their labour they may find. this follow discourse shall plain demonstrate. thus you may see, of these three thousand mile observation, so^ presumptuous, ignorant director, more than half be yet unknown to any purpose. no, not so much as the border of the sea be yet certain discover. as for the goodness and true substance of the land, we be for most part yet altogether ignorant of they, unless it be those part about the bay of chisapeack and sagadahock. as for the goodness and true substance of the land, we be for most part yet altogether ignorant of they, unless it be those part about the bay of chisapeack and sagadahock, but only here and there where we have touch or see a little the edge of those large dominion which do stretch themselves into the main god do know how many thousand mile, whereof we can yet no more judge than a strange that sail betwixt england and france can describe the harbour and danger by land, here or there in some river or bay. tell thereby the goodness and substance of spain, italy, germany, bohemia, hungaria and the rest. nay, there be many have live forty year in london and yet have scarce be ten. bay. tell thereby the goodness and substance of spain, italy, germany, bohemia, hungaria and the rest, nay, there be. many have live forty year in london and yet have scarce be ten mile out of the city, so be there. many have be in virginia many year and in new england many time that do know little more than the place they do inhabit or the port where they fish. and when they come home they will undertake they know all virginia and new england as if they be but two parish or little land. by this you may perceive how much they err that think. every one that have be in virginia or new england understand or know what either of they be, or that the spaniard this you may perceive how much they err that think every one that have be in virginia or new england understand or know what either of they be, or that the spaniard know one half quarter of those large territory they possess. no, not so much as the true circumference of who large dominion may equalise the goodness and greatness of america for any thing. yet know it be strange with what small power he do range in the east-indies and few will understand the truth of his strength in america. where have so much to keep with such a pamper force? they need not great fear his fury in summer isle virginia or new england, beyond who bound america do stretch many thousand mile into the freeze. keep with such a pamper force, they need not great fear his fury in summer isle virginia or new england beyond who bound america do stretch many thousand mile into the freeze part, whereof one master hutson, a english mariner, do make the great discovery of any christian i know where he unfortunate be, leave by his cowardly company for his exceed desert to end and die a most miserable death for africa. have not the industrious portugal range, she unknown part who will have seek for wealth among those fry region of black brutish negars where, notwithstanding all their wealth and admirable adventure and endeavour, more than one hundred and forty year they know not one, three part of those black habitation. but it be not a. where, notwithstanding all their wealth and admirable adventure and endeavour, more than one hundred and forty year they know not one, three part of those black habitation. but it be not a work for every one to manage such a affair as make a discovery and plant a colony. it require all the best part of art, judgement, courage, honesty, constancy, diligence and industry to do but near well. some be more proper for one thing then another, and therein best to be employ. and nothing breed more confusion than misplace and misemploy man in their undertake. columbus court, pitzara, zoto, magilanus and the rest serve more than a prenticeship to learn how to begin their most memorable attempt in the west-indies which, to the wonder of all, undertake columbus court, pitzara, zoto, magilanus and the rest serve more than a prenticeship to learn how to begin their most memorable attempt in the west-indies, which, to the wonder of all age, successful. they effect when many hundred of other, far above they in the world opinion be instruct, but by relation come to shame and confusion in action of small moment who doubtless, in other matter be both wise, discreet, generous and courageous. i say not this to detract any thing from their incomparable merit, but to answer those questionless question that keep we back from imitate the worthiness of their brave spirit that advance themselves from poor soldier to great captain, their posterity to great lord, their king to be one of the great potentate. back from imitate the worthiness of their brave spirit that advance themselves from poor soldier to great captain, their posterity to great lord, their king, to be one of the great potentate on earth and the fruit of their labour, his great power, glory and renown the description of new england, that part we call new england, be betwixt the degree of forty one and forty five, the very mean, betwixt the north pole and the line, but that part. this discourse speak of stretch, but from penobscot to c^pe cod, some seventy five league by a right line, distant each from other, within which bound i have see at least forty several habitation upon the sea coast and sound about five and twenty excellent, good harbour in. a right line, distant each from other, within which bound i have see at least forty, several habitation upon the sea coast and sound about five and twenty excellent, good harbour in many, whereof there be anchorage for five hundred sail of ship of any burden, in some of they for one thousand and more than two hundred, isle overgrow with good timber of diverse sort of wood, which do make so many harbour as require a long time than i have to be. well, observe the principal country or government, the principal habitation. northward we be at be pennobscot. southward, along the coast and up the river, we find mecadacut, segocket, pemaquid, nuscoucus, sagadahock, aumoughcowgen and kenebeke, and to those country belong the people of segotago paghhuntanuck. be at, be pennobscot. southward, along the coast and up the river, we find mecadacut, segocket, pemaquid, nuscoucus, sagadahock, aumoughcowgen and kenebeke. and to those country belong the people of segotago, paghhuntanuck, pocopassum, taughtanakagnet, warbigganus, masherosqueck, wawrigweck, mos^oquen, wakcogo, pasharanack, etc. to these be ally in confederacy, the country of ancocisco, accomynticus, passataquack, aggawom and naemkeck. all these, for any thing i can perceive, differ little in language, fashion or government, though most of they be lord of themselves. yet they hold the bashabe of penobscot, the chief and great among they. the next i can remember by name be mattahunt, two pleasant isle of grove garden and corn field, a league in the sea from the main, then totant massachuset, topent, secassaw, totheet, nasnocomacack, accomack, patuxet, massasoyt. remember by name be mattahunt, two pleasant isle of grove garden and corn field, a league in the sea from the main, then totant massachuset, topent secassaw, totheet nasnocomacack, accomack, patuxet, massasoyt, pakanokick, then cape cod, by which be pawmet and the i will nawset of the language and alliance of, they of the other be call massachusets and differ somewhat in language, custom and condition for their trade and merchandise. to each of their principal family or habitation they have diverse town and people belong and by their relation and description, more than twenty several habitation and river that stretch themselves far into the country, even to the border of diverse great lake where they kill and take most of their otter from pennobscot to sagadaboc. this habitation and river that stretch themselves far into the country, even to the border of diverse great lake where they kill and take most of their otter from pennobscot to sagadaboc. this coast be mountainous and isle of huge rock but overgrow for most part with most sort of excellent good wood for build house, boat, bark or ship, with a incredible abundance of most sort of fish, much fowl and sundry sort of good fruit for man use. betwixt, sagadahock and sowocatuck- there be but two or three sandy bay, but betwixt that and cape james very many especial the coast of the massachusets be so indifferent mix with high clay or sandy cliff in one place and the tract of large long ledge of diverse sort. james, very many especial the coast of the massachusets, be so indifferent mix with high clay or sandy cliff in one place and the tract of large, long ledge of diverse sort and quary of stone in other place. so strange divide with tinctured vein of diverse colour as freestone for building, slate for tyl, smooth stone to make furnasses and forge for glass and iron and iron over sufficient convenient to melt in. they but the most part so resemble the coast of devonshire. i think most of the cliff will make such limestone. if they be not of these quality, they be so like they may deceive a better judgement than i. all which be so near adjoin to those other advantage i observe in these. they be not of these quality, they be so like they may deceive a better judgement than i. all which be so near adjoin to those other advantage. i observe in these part that if the ore prove as good- iron and steel in those part as i know it be within the bound of the country, i dare engage my head. have but man skilful to work, the simple there grow to have all thing belong to the building and rig of ship of any proportion and good merchandise for their fraught within a square of ten or fourteen league. and it be no hard matter to prove it within a less limitation, and sure by reason of those sandy cliff and cliff of rock, a proof. of ten or fourteen league and it be no hard matter to prove it within a less limitation and sure, by reason of those sandy cliff and cliff of rock, a proof of a excellent clime, both which we see so plant with garden and corn field and so well inhabit, with a goodly strong and well proportion. people beside the greatness of the timber grow on they the greatness of the fish and the moderate temper of the air, for of five and forty, not a man be sick, but two that be many year disease before they go. notwithstanding our bad lodging and accidental diet, who can but approve this? a most excellent place, both for health and fertility and of all the four part of. disease before they go. notwithstanding our bad lodging and accidental diet, who can but approve this? a most excellent place both for health and fertility, and of all the four part of the world i have yet see not inhabit, can i have but mean to transport a colony? i will rather live here then any where, and if it do not maintain itself, be we but once indifferent. well fit, let we starve the main staple from hence to be extract for the present staple commodity, present to produce the rest, be fish, which howbeit may seem a mean and a base commodity. yet who will, but true, take the pain and consider the sequel, i think will allow it well worth the labour, it be strange. may seem a mean and a base commodity. yet who will but true, take the pain and consider the sequel i think will allow it well worth the labour. it be strange to see what great adventure the hope of set forth man of war to rob the industrious innocent will procure, or such massy promise in gross though more be choke then well feed with such hasty hope. observation of the hollander. but who do not know that the poor hollander chief, by fish at a great charge and labour in all weather in the open sea, be make a people so hardy and industrious? and by the vent this poor commodity to the easterling? for as mean which be, wood, flax, pitch, tar, resin, cordage and open sea, be make a people so hardy and industrious, and by the vent, this poor commodity to the easterling for as mean which be wood, flax, pitch, tar, resin, cordage and such like, which they exchange again to the french, spaniard, portugal and english etc. for what they want, be make so mighty, strong and rich as no state but venice of twice their magnitude, be so well furnish with so many fair city, goodly town, strong fortress and that abundance of ship and all sort of merchandise as well of gold, silver, pearl, diamond, precious stone, silk, velvet and cloth of gold as f^sh, pitch, wood or such gross commodity. what voyage and discovery, e^st and west, north and south, yea, about the world make they. precious stone, silk, velvet and cloth of gold as f^sh, pitch, wood or such gross commodity. what voyage and discovery, e^st and west, north and south, yea, about the world, make they. what a army by sea and land have they long maintain, in despite of one of the great prince of the world. and never can the spaniard, with all his mine of gold and silver, pay his debt, his friend and army, half so true, as the hollander still have do by this contemptible trade of fish, diverse i know, may allege many other assistance, but this be the chief mine and the sea the source of those silver stream of all their virtue, which have make they now the very miracle of industry, the only. assistance, but this be the chief mine and the sea the source of those silver stream of all their virtue which have make they now the very miracle of industry, the only pattern of perfection for these affair, and the benefit of fish be that that turn all their sphere to this height of plenty, strength, honour and exceed great admiration. note herring, cod and ling, be that triplicity that make their wealth and multiplicity such as it be and from which few will think it they shall draw so many million yearly, as they do as more in particular in the trial of new england you may see, and such a incredible number of ship that breed they, so many sailor, mariner, soldier and merchant, never to as more, in particular in the trial of new england you may see, and such a incredible number of ship that breed they so many sailor, mariner, soldier and merchant, never to be wrought out of that trade and fit for any other, i will not deny. but other may gain as well as they that will use it, though not so certain nor so much in quantity, for want of experience. and this herring they take upon the coast of england and scotland, their cod and ling upon the coast of iceland and in the north sea, if we consider what gain the hamburgan, the biskinner and french make by fish, nay, but how many thousand this fifty or sixty year have be maintain by new find. north sea, if we consider what gain the hamburgan, the biskinner and french make by fish, nay, but how many thousand this fifty or sixty year have be maintain by new find land where they take nothing but small cod, whereof the great they make corfish and the rest be hard dry, which we call poore-iohn, will amaze a man with wonder. if then from all those part such pain be take for this poor gain of fish, especial by the hollander that have but little of their own for build of ship and set they to sea, but at the second three, four or five hand draw from so many p^r^s of the world ere they come together to be use in those voyage, if these i to sea, but at the second, three, four or five hand draw from so many p^r^s of the world ere they come together to be use in those voyage. if these, i say, can gain, why shall we more doubt than they but do much better that may have most of all those thing at our door for take and make. and here be no hard landlord to rack we with high rent or extort fine, nor tedious plea in law to consume we with their many year disputation for justice, no multitude to occasion such impediment to good order as in popular state. so free have god and his majesty bestow those blessing on they will attempt to obtain they, as here every man may be master. impediment to good order, as in popular state. so free have god and his majesty bestow those blessing on they will attempt to obtain. they, as here, every man may be master of his own labour and land note or the great part, if his majesty royal meaning be not abuse, and if he have nothing but his hand, he may set-up his trade and by industry quick, grow rich, spend but half that time well, which in england we abuse in idleness, worse or as ill. here be ground as good as any lie in the height of forty one, forty two, forty three, etc. which be as temperate and as fruitful as any other parallel in the world. example of the altitude comparative, as for example: the height of forty one, forty two, forty three, etc. which be as temperate and as fruitful as any other parallel in the world. example of the altitude comparative as, for example, on this side, the line west of it in the south sea, be albion, discover as be say by sir francis drake, east from it, be the most temperate part of portugal, the ancient kingdom of galizia, bisky, navarre, arragon, cattilonia, castillia the old and the most moderate of castillia the new, and valentia, which be the great part of spain. in spain which, if the history be true, in the roman time abound no less with gold and silver mine than now, the west-indies, the roman then use the spaniard to work in those mine. if the history be true, in the roman time abound no less with gold and silver mine than now the west-indies. the roman then use the spaniard to work in those mine, as now the spaniard do the indian in france. in france, the province of gascony, langadooke province, dolphin, pyamont and turyne be in the same parallel, which be the best and rich part of france. in italy, the province of genua, lombary and verona, with a great part of the most famous state of venice, the dukedom of bononia, mantua, ferrara, ravenna, bolognia, florence, pisa, sienna, urbine, ancona and the ancient city and country of rome, with a great part of the kingdom of naples. in slavonia, istria and dalmatia, with the kingdom of albania. in pisa, sienna, urbine, ancona and the ancient city and country of rome, with a great part of the kingdom of naples. in slavonia, istria and dalmatia, with the kingdom of albania. in greece, in grecia, those famous kingdom of macedonia, bullulgaria, thessalia, thracia or romania, where be seat the most pleasant and plentiful city in europe, constantinople. in asia, in asia in the same latitude, be the temperate part of anatolia, armenia, persia and china, beside diverse other large country and kingdom, in those most mild and temperate region of asia, beyond the line southward, in the same height, be the rich of gold mine, chy and baldinia and the mouth of the great river of plate, etc. for all the rest of the world in that height. the same height be the rich of gold mine, chy and baldinia, and the mouth of the great river of plate, etc. for all the rest of the world in that height be yet unknown. beside these reason, i own eye that have see a great part of those city and their kingdom as well as it can find no advantage they have in nature but this: they be beautify by the long labour and diligence of industrious people and art. this be only as god make it when he create the world. therefore, i conclude, if the heart and entrail of those region be seek, if their land be culture, plant and manure by man of industry, judgement and experience, what hope be there or what need? if the heart and entrail of those region be seek, if their land be culture, plant and manure by man of industry, judgement and experience, what hope be there? or what need they doubt have the advantage of the sea? but it may equalise any of these famous kingdom in all commodity, pleasure and condition, see even the very hedge do natural afford we such plenty as no ship need return away empty and only use but the season of the sea, fish will return, a honest gain beside all other advantage. her treasure have yet never be open, nor her original waste consume nor abuse. and whereas it be, say the hollander, serve the easterling themselves, the particular staple commodity that may be have by industry and never be open, nor her original waste consume nor abuse. and whereas it be, say the hollander, serve the easterling themselves the particular staple commodity that may be have by industry and other part that want with herring, ling and wet cod. the easterling a great part of europe with sturgeon and caviar, as the black sea do, grecia, podolia, sagovia, anatolia and the hellespont cape blank, spain, portugal and the levant with and puttargo, new foundland, the most part of the chief southern port in europe with a thin poore-iohn, which have be so long so much over-laied with fisher as the fish decay so that many, oft time be constrain to return with a small fraught. norway and poland afford pitch and tar, mast and yard. so much over-laied with fisher as the fish decay so that many oft time be constrain to return with a small fraught. norway and poland afford pitch and tar, mast and yard. sweathland and russia iron and ropes. france and spain canvas, wine, steele, iron and oil. italy and greece silk and fruit. i dare bold say, because i have see natural grow or breed in those part the same material that all these be make of. they may as well be have here, or the most part of they, within the distance of seventy league for some few age as from all those part use but the same mean to have they that they do, but sure in virginia their most tender and dainty fruit or commodity. for some few age, as from all those part use but the same mean to have they that they do. but sure, in virginia their most tender and dainty fruit or commodity will be as perfect as they by reason of the heat, if not in new england, and with all those advantage. first, the ground be so fertile. the nature of the ground approve that questionless. it be capable of produce any grain, fruit or seed you will sow or plant grow in the region aforenamed. but it may be not to that perfection of delicacy because the summer be not so hot and the winter be more cold. in those part we have yet try near the sea side than we find in the same height. delicacy, because the summer be not so hot and the winter be more cold in those part. we have yet try near the sea side than we find in the same height in europe or asia. yet i make a garden upon the top of a rocky. i will in three and forty degree and a half four league from the main in may, that grow so well as it serve we for salad. in june and july. all sort of cattle may here be breed and feed in the isle or peninsulaes, secure for nothing in the interim, till they increase, if need be observe the season. i dare undertake to have corn enough from the saluage for three hundred man, for a few trifle and if in the interim till they increase, if need be observe the season. i dare undertake to have corn enough from the saluage for three hundred man, for a few trifle, and if they shall be untoward, as it be most certain they will, thirty or forty good man will be sufficient to bring they all in subjection and make this provision if they understand what to do. two hundred whereof may eight or nine month in the year be employ in help the fisherman, till the rest provide other necessary fit to furnish we with other commodity. in march, april, may and half june here be cod in abundance. in may the season for fish approve june, july and august, mullit and sturgeon who roe, do make caviar. commodity in march, april, may and half june. here be cod in abundance in may, the season for fish, approve june, july and august. mullit and sturgeon, who roe, do make caviar and puttargo herring. if any desire they i have take many out of the belly of cod, some in net, but the saluage compare the store in the sea with the hair of their head and sure there be a incredible abundance upon this coast. in the end of august, september, october and november you may have cod again to make core-fish or poore-iohn hake you may have when the cod fail in summer, if you will fish in the night, which be better than cod now each hundred you take here be as good as. hake you may have when the cod fail in summer, if you will fish in the night, which be better than cod. now, each hundred you take here be as good as two or three hundred in new find land, so that half the labour in hook split and tour be save and you may have your fish at what market you will, before they have any in new find land, where their fish be chief, but in june and july, where it be here in march, april, may, september, october and november, as be say, so that by reason of this plantation the merchant may have their fraught both out and home, which yield a advantage worth consideration. your core-fish you may, in like manner transport as so that, by reason of this plantation, the merchant may have their fraught both out and home, which yield a advantage worth consideration. your core-fish, you may, in like manner, transport as you see, cause to serve the port in portugal as lisbon, auera, porta port and diverse other or what market you please, before your islander return, they be tie to the season in the open sea and you have a double season and fish before your door. may every night sleep quiet ashore, with good cheer and what fire you will, or when you please, with your wife and family, they only, and their ship in the main ocean that must carry and contain all they use beside their fraught. the mullit here be in that. please, with your wife and family, they only, and their ship in the main ocean that must carry and contain all they use beside their fraught, the mullit here be in that abundance. you may take they with net sometime by hundred, where at cape blank they hook they. yet those be but a soot and a half in length. these two, three or four, as oft i have measure which make i suspect they be some other kind of fish, though they seem the same both in fashion and goodness much salmon some have find up the river as they have pass and here the air be so temperate. employment for poor people and fatherless child as all these at any time may be, preserve now young. up the river as they have pass, and here the air be so temperate. employment for poor people and fatherless child, as all these at any time may be, preserve now young boy and girl, saluage or any other, be they never. such idlers may turn, carry or return a fish without either shame or any great pain. he be very idle that be past twelve year of age and can do so much, and she be very old that can spin a thread to make engine to catch a fish. the facility of the plantation for their transportation, the ship that go there to fish may transport the first who, for their passage, will spare the charge of double man their ship, which they must do in. for their transportation. the ship that go there to fish may transport the first who, for their passage, will spare the charge of double man their ship, which they must do in new find land to get their fraught, but one three part of that company be only proper to serve a stage, carry a barrow and turn, poore-iohn notwithstanding, they must have meat, drink, clothes and passage so well as the rest. now, all i desire be but this: that those that voluntary will send ship shall make here the best choice they can or accept, such as shall be present they to serve they at that rate, and their ship return, leave such with i, with the value of that they shall receive, come home in. accept such as shall be present they to serve they at that rate and their ship return, leave such with i, with the value of that they shall receive, come home in such provision and necessary tool, arm bedding, apparel, salt net, hook line and such like as they spare of the remain who, till the next return, may keep their boat and do they many other profitable office provide. i have man of ability to teach they their function and a company fit for soldier to be ready upon any occasion because of the abuse that have be offer the poor saluage and the liberty that both french and english or any that will have to deal with they as they please, who disorder will be hard. that have be offer the poor saluage and the liberty that both french and english or any that will have to deal with they as they please. who disorder will be hard to reform and the long the worse. now such order with facility may be take, with every port, town or city with free power to convert the benefit of their fraught to what advantage they please and increase their number as they see occasion. who ever as they be able to subsist of themselves, may begin the new town in new england in memory of their old. which freedom be confine but to the necessity of the general good. the event, with god help, may produce a honest, a noble and a profitable emulation present commodity. of their old, which freedom be confine, but to the necessity of the general good. the event, with god help, may produce a honest, a noble and a profitable emulation. present commodity, salt upon salt, may assure be make, if not at the first in pond, yet till they be provide this may be use. then the ship may transport cow, horse, goat, course, cloth and such commodity as we want, by who arrival may be. make that provision of fish to fraught the ship, that they stay not, and than if the sailor go for wage it matter not. it be hard if this return defray not the charge, but care must be have they arrive in the spring, or else that provision be make for they wage, it matter not. it be hard if this return defray not the charge, but care must be have they arrive in the spring, or else that provision be make for they against winter, of certain red berry call kermes, kermes which be worth ten shilling the pound, but of these have be sell for thirty or forty shilling the pound may yearly be gather a good quantity. musquasse^ of the muskrat may be well raise gain worth their labour that will endeavour to make trial of their goodness of bever, otter and martin, black fox and fur of price. bever may yearly be have six or seven thousand, and if the trade of the french be prevent, many more, 25000.. this year be bring from those northern. and fur of price. bever may yearly be have six or seven thousand and if the trade of the french be prevent, many more: 25000.. this year be bring from those northern part into france, of which trade we may have as good part as the french if we take good course of mine of gold and silver, copper and probability of lead mine, crystal and alum. i can say much if relation be good. assurance it be true. indeed, i make many trial according to the instruction i have which do persuade i i need not despair but that there be metal in the country. but i be no alchemist nor will promise more than i know which be who will undertake the rectify of a iron. not despair, but that there be metal in the country. but i be no alchemist nor will promise more than i know which be who will undertake the rectify of a iron forge if those that buy meat and drink coal over and all necessary at a dear rate, gain where all these thing be to be have for take up, in my opinion, can lose of wood. see there be such plenty of all sort wood. if those that build ship and boat buy wood at so great a price as it be in england, spain, france and holland and all other provision for the nourishment of man life live well by their trade, when labour be all require to take these necessary without any other tax. spain, france and holland and all other provision for the nourishment of man life, live well by their trade. when labour be all require to take these necessary without any other tax, what hazard will be here but to do much better? and what commodity in europe do more decay than wood? for the goodness of the ground, let we take it fertile or barren, or as it be see it, be certain it bear fruit to nourish and feed man and beast, as well as england and the sea, those several sort of fish i have, relate thus see. all good thing for man. sustenance may, with this facility, be have by a little extraordinary labour, till that transport be increase and all necessary for ship only. have relate. thus see, all good thing for man. sustenance may with this facility be have by a little extraordinary labour, till that transport be increase, and all necessary for ship only for labour, to which may add the assistance of the saluage, which may easy be have if they be discreet, handle in their kind towards fish plant and destroy wood. what gain may be raise if this be follow, when there be but once man to fill your store house, dwell there, you may serve all europe better and far cheap than can the island fisher or the hollander cape-blanke or newfound land, who must be at much more charge than you may easy be conjecture by this example. two thousand will fit out a ship. island fisher or the hollander cape-blanke or newfound land, who must be at much more charge than you may easy be conjecture by this example: two thousand will fit out a ship of 200. ton and one of 100 tun. a example of the g^^^s. upon every year or six month return if of the dry fish they both make, fraught that of 200. and go for spain. sell it but at ten shilling a quintal, but common it give fifteen or twenty especial when it come first, which amount to 3. or 4000 pound, but say but ten which be the low, allow the rest for waste. it amount at that rate to 2000, which be the whole charge of your two ship and the equipage than say but ten, which be the low, allow the rest for waste. it amount at that rate to 2000, which be the whole charge of your two ship and the equipage, than the return of the money and the fraught of the ship for the vintage or any other voyage. be clear gain with your ship of one hundred ton of train oil and corfish, beside the bever and other commodity, and that you may have at home within six month, if god please to send but a ordinary passage. then save half this charge by the not stay of your ship, your victual overplus of man and wage with her fraught thither with necessary for the planter. the salt be there make, as also may the net. the not stay of your ship, your victual overplus of man and wage, with her fraught thither with necessary for the planter, the salt be there make. as also may the net and line within a short time. if nothing may be expect but this, it may in time equalise your hollander gain, if not exceed. they have their fraught always ready against the arrival of the ship. this will so increase our ship and sailor and so encourage and employ a great part of our idler and other that want employment fit their quality at home, where they shame to do that, they will do abroad. that can they but once taffe the sweet fruit of their own labour. doubtless many thousand will be advise by good. home, where they shame to do, that they will do abroad. that can they but once taffe the sweet fruit of their own labour. doubtless many thousand will be advise by good discipline to take more pleasure in honest industry. then, in their humour of dissolute idleness, a description of the country in particular and their situation. but to return a little more to the particular of this country, which i intermingle thus with my project and reason, not be so sufficient yet acquaint in those part, to write full the estate of the sea, the air, the land, the fruit, their rock, the people, the government, religion, territory, limitation, friend and foe, but, as i gather from their niggardly relation, in a break language during the time. air, the land, the fruit, their rock, the people, the government, religion, territory, limitation, friend and foe, but as i gather from their niggardly relation in a break language during the time i range those country etc. the most northern part i be at be the bay of pennobscot, which be east and west, north and south more than ten league, but such be my occasion i be constrain to be satisfy of they. i find in the bay that the river run far up into the land and be well inhabit with many people, but they be from their habitation either fish among the isle or hunt the lake and wood for dear and bever. the bay be full of great isle of one, two, six or they be, from their habitation either fish among the isle or hunt the lake and wood for dear and bever. the bay be full of great isle of one, two, six or eight mile in length, which divide it into many fair and excellent good harbour. on the east of it be the tarrentine, their mortal enemy, where inhabit the french, as they report, that live with those people as one nation or family. and northwest of pennobscot be mecaddacut, at the foot of a high mountain, a kind of fortress against the tarrentine, adjoin to the high mountain of pennobscot, against who foot do beat the sea? but over all the land, isle or other impediment you may well see they fourteen or eighteen, league from their the high mountain of pennobscot, against who foot do beat the sea, but over all the land, isle or other impediment, you may well see they fourteen or eighteen league from their situation. segocket be the next than nuskoucus, pemmaquid and sagadahock up this river. where be the western plantation? be aumoughcawgen and diverse other. where be plant some corn field along this river? thirty or forty mile i see nothing but great high cliff of barren rock, overgrow with wood. but where the saluage dwell there the ground be excellent, salt and fertile. westward of this river be the country of aucocisco, in the bottom of a large, deep bay full of many great isle which divide it into many good harbour. sawocotuck be the next in. this river be the country of aucocisco, in the bottom of a large, deep bay full of many great isle which divide it into many good harbour. sawocotuck be the next, in the edge of a large sandy bay which have many rock and isle but few good harbour but for bark i yet know. but all this coast to pennobscot and as far as i can see, eastward of it, be nothing but such high, craggy, clifty rock and stony isle that i wonder such great tree can grow upon so hard foundation. it be a country rather to affright, then delight one, and how to describe a more plain spectacle of desolation or more barren, i know not yet be those rocky isle so furnish with. a country, rather to affright, then delight one, and how to describe a more plain spectacle of desolation, or more barren, i know not yet be those rocky isle so furnish with good wood, spring fruit, fish and fowl, and the sea, the strange fishpond i ever see that it make. i think, though, the coast be rocky and thus affrightable. the valley and plain and interior part may well, notwithstanding, be very fertile, but there be no country so fertile, have not some part barren. and new-england be great enough to make many kingdom and country be it all inhabit as you pass the coast still westward, and passataquack be two convenient harbour for small bark and a good country within their craggy cliff. augoan be the. country, be it all inhabit as you pass the coast. still westward and passataquack be two convenient harbour for small bark and a good country within their craggy cliff. augoan be the next. this place may content a right, curious judgement, but there be many sand at the entrance of the harbour and the worst be it be embay, too far from the deep sea. here be many rise hill and on their top and descent be many corn field and delightful grove. on the east be a i will of two or three league in length, the one half plain marish ground fit for pasture or salt pond, with many fair high grove of mulberry tree and garden. there be also okes, pine, walnut and other wood. length the one half plain marish ground fit for pasture or salt pond, with many fair high grove of mulberry tree and garden. there be also okes, pine, walnut and other wood to make this place a excellent habitation. be a good and safe harbour. nai^mkeck, though it be more rocky ground for augoan, be sandy, not much inferior, neither for the harbour nor any thing i can perceive. but the multitude of people from hence do stretch into the sea. the fair headland tragabigzanda, now call cape, a front with the three isle we call the three turk. head to the north of this, do enter a great bay where we find some habitation and corn field. they report a fair river and at least 30. habitation. the three turk head to the north of this, do enter a great bay where we find some habitation and corn field. they report a fair river and at least 30. habitation do possess this country, but because the french have get their trade i have no leisure to discover it. the isle of mattahunt be on the west side of this bay, where be many isle and some rock that appear a great height above the water, like the pyramid in egypt, and among they many good harbour. and then the country of the massachusit, which be the paradise of all those part, for here be many isle plant with corn grove, mulberry, savage garden and good harbour. the coast be for the most part high clayey. which be the paradise of all those part. for here be many isle plant with corn grove, mulberry, savage garden and good harbour. the coast be for the most part high clayey, sandy cliff, the sea coast. as you pass show you all along large corn field and great troop of well proportion people. but the french have remain here near six week, leave nothing for we to take occasion to examine the inhabitant relation, viz if there be three thousand people upon those isle and that the river do pierce many day journey the entrails of that country. we find the people in those part very kind, but in their f^ry no less valiant, for upon a quarrel we fight with forty or fifty of they till. of that country. we find the people in those part very kind, but in their f^ry no less valiant, for upon a quarrel we fight with forty or fifty of they till they have spend all their arrow. and then we take six or seven of their canowes, which towards the evening they ransom for beaver skin and at fall out there. but with one of they, he with three other cross the harbour in a canow to certain rock whereby we must pass. a indian slay another shot and there let fly their arrow for our shot till we be out of danger. yet one of they be slay and another shot through his thigh. then come you to accomacke a excellent, good harbour, good land, and our shot till we be out of danger. yet one of they be slay and another shot through his thigh. then come you to accomacke: a excellent, good harbour, good land and no want of any thing but industrious people. after much kindness, we fight also with they, though some be hurt, some slay. yet within a hour after they become friend, cape cod be the next present itself, which be only a headland of high hill overgrow with shrubby pine, hurt and such trash, but a excellent harbour for all weather. this cape be make by the main sea on the one side and a great bay on the other in form of a sickle. on it do inhabit the people of pawmet, and in the bottom by the main sea on the one side and a great bay on the other in form of a sickle on it, do inhabit the people of pawmet and in the bottom of the bay they of towards the south and south-west of this cape be find a long and dangerous of rock and sand. but so far as i incercle it i find thirty fathom water and a strong currant which make i think there be a channel about this. where be the best and great fish to be have winter and summer in all the country? but the saluage say there be no channel but that the shoales begin from the main at pawm^t to the i will of nawset and so extend beyond their knowledge. the country, but the saluage say there be no channel but that the shoales begin from the main at pawm^t to the i will of nawset and so extend beyond their knowledge into the sea. the next to this be capawucke and those abound country of copper, corn, people and mineral which i go to discover this last yee^e. but because i miscarry, by the way, i will leave they till god please. i have better acquaintance with they, the massachusets they report sometime have war with the bashabe of pennobscot and be not always friend with they of and their alliance, but now they be all friend and have each trade with other, so far as they have society on each other frontier, for they make no. with they of and their alliance. but now they be all friend and have each trade with other, so far as they have society on each other frontier, for they make no such voyage as from pennobscot to cape cod, seldom to massachset. in the north, as i have say, they have begin to plant corn, whereof the south part have such plenty as they have what they will from they of the north and in the winter much more plenty of fish and foul. but both winter and summer have it in one part or other. all the year be the mean and most indifferent temper, betwixt heat and cold of all the region, betwixt the line and the pole, but the fur northward be much better. other all the year be the mean and most indifferent temper. betwixt heat and cold of all the region. betwixt the line and the pole, but the fur northward be much better and in much more plenty. then southward, the remarkable isle and mountain for land mark be these. the land mark the high isle be sorico in the bay of pennobscot, but the three isle and the isle of matinack be much further in the sea. merynacus be also three plain isle but many great rock. monahigan be a round high, i will, and close by it. betwixt, which be a small harbour where we ride in. dameril isle be such another sagadahocke be know by satquin and four or five isle in their mouth, smith isle. by it. betwixt, which be a small harbour where we ride in. dameril isle be such another. sagadahocke be know by satquin, and four or five isle in their mouth. smith isle be a heap together, none near they against accomintycus. the three turk head be three isle see far to seaward. in regard of the head-land, the chief headland be only cape tragabigzanda and cape cod, now call cape james and cape a^ne. the chief mountain they of pennobscot, the twinkle mountain of acocisco, the great mountain of sassanow and the high mountain of m^ss^c^uset, each of which you shall find in the map, their place, form and almond. the water be most pure. proceed from the entrail of rocky mounta^^es. the herb and fruit be of. each of which you shall find in the map their place, form and almond. the water be most pure, proceed from the entrail of rocky mounta^^es. the herb and fruit be of many sort and kind: herb and fruit, as alkermes, curran, mulberry vine respises, gooseberry, plum, walnut, chessenut, small (@) pumpion, gourd, strawberry, bean, pease and maize, a kind or two of flax wherewith they make net line and rope, both small and great, very strong for their quantity. wood, oak be the chief wood, of which there be great difference in regard of the soil where it grow: fir, pine, walnut, chestnut, birtch, ash, elm, cyprus, cedar, mulberry, plum tree, hazel, saxefras and many other sort, bird, eagle, grip, diverse sort of hawk, craine, goose, brant. soil where it grow, fir, pine, walnut, chestnut, birtch, ash, elm, cyprus, cedar, mulberry, plum tree, hazel, saxefras and many other sort. bird, eagle, grip, diverse sort of hawk, craine, goose, brant, cormorant, duck, crane, swan, sheldrake, teal, meawe, gull, turkey, dive-doppers and many other sort. who name i know not? fish whale, grompus, porkpisce, turbut, sturgeon, cod, hake, haddock, cole, cuske or small ling shark, mackerell, herring, mullit, base, pinnack, cunner, perch, eel, crab, lobster, mustel, wilks, oyster, clamp, periwinkel and diverse other etc. beast, moos- a beast big than a stag, dear red and fallow bever, wolf, fox, both black and other, aroughcunds, wild cat, bear, o^t^rs, m^^tins, fitch, musquassus and diverse other sort of vermin who name i kn^w not all these and diverse other. fallow, bever, wolf, fox, both black and other, aroughcunds, wild cat, bear, o^t^rs, m^^tins, fitch, musquassus and diverse other sort of vermin who name i kn^w. not all these and diverse other good thing do here for want of use, still increase and decrease, with little diminution whereby they grow to that abundance. you shall scarce find any bay, shallow shore or cove of sand where you may not take many clamp or lobster or both, at your pleasure and in many place load your boat if you please. nor isle where you find not fruit, bird, crab and mi^stels or all of they for take at a low water. cod, cuske, scare, turbut, mackerell or such like be take plentiful in diverse sandy bay. store of mullit. bird, crab and mi^stels or all of they for take at a low water. cod, cuske, scare, turbut, mackerell or such like be take plentiful in diverse sandy bay store of mullit base and diverse other sort of such excellent fish as many as their net can hold. no river where there be not plenty of sturgeon or salmon or both, all which be to be have in abundance. observe but their season. but if a man will go at christmas to gather cherry in kent, though there be plenty in summer, he may be deceive. so here these plenty have each their season. as i hau^ express, we for the most part have little but bread and vinegar, and though the most part of july, when the so here, these plenty have each their season, as i hau^ express. we for the most part have little but bread and vinegar, and though the most part of july, when the fish decay, they wrought all day, lay abroad in the isle all night and live on what they find yet be not sick. but i will wish none long put himself to such plunge, except necessity constrain it. yet worthy be that person to starve that here can live if he have sense, strength and health. for there be no such penury of these blessing in any place, but that one hundred man may, in two or three hour, make their provision for a day, and he that have experience to manage these affair with forty. blessing in any place, but that one hundred man may, in two or three hour, make their provision for a day. and he that have experience to manage these affair with forty or thirty honest, industrious man may well undertake, if they dwell in these part, to subject the saluage and feed daily two or three hundred man with as good corn, fish and flesh as the earth have of those kind, and yet make that labour but their pleasure. a note for man that have great spirit and small mean, provide that they have engine that be proper for their purpose. who can desire more content that have small mean or but only his merit to advance his fortune then to tread and plant that ground he that be proper for their purpose. who can desire more content that have small mean or but only his merit to advance his fortune, then, to tread and plant that ground he have, purchase by the hazard of his life? if he have but the taste of virtue and magnanimity, what to such a mind can be more pleasant than plant and build a foundation for his posterity? get from the rude earth by god blessing and his own industry without prejudice to any? if he have any grain of faith or zeal in religion, what can he do, less hurtful to any or more agreeable to god, then? to seek to convert those poor saluage to know christ and humanity who labour with discretion will triple require. can he do less hurtful to any or more agreeable to god? then, to seek to convert those poor, saluage, to know christ and humanity who labour with discretion will triple require thy charge and pain. what so true suit with honour and honesty as the discover thing unknown, erect town, people, country, inform the ignorant, reform thing unjust. teach virtue and gain to our native mother country, a kingdom to attend. she find employment for those that be idle because they know not what to do, so far from wrong any as to cause posterity to remember thou and remember thou ever. honour that remembrance with praise. consider what be the beginning and end of the monarchy of the chaldean, the syrian, the grecian and roman. but to remember thou and remember thou ever. honour that remembrance with praise. consider what be the beginning and end of the monarchy of the chaldean, the syrian, the grecian and roman, but this one rule, what be it, they will not do for the good of their common weal or their mother city, for example, rome. what make she such a monarchesse? but only the adventure of her youth, not in riot at home but in danger abroad, and the justice and judgement out of their experience. when they grow age, what be their ruin and hurt. but this? the excess of idleness, the fondness of parent, the want of experience in magistrate, the admiration of their undeserved honour, the contempt of true merit, their unjust jealousy, their hurt. but this, the excess of idleness, the fondness of parent, the want of experience in magistrate, the admiration of their undeserved honour, the contempt of true merit, their unjust jealousy, their politic incredulity, their hypocritical seem goodness and their deed of secret lewdness, final in fine, grow only formal temporist. all that their predecessor get in many year, they lose in a few day. those, by their pain and virtue, become lord of the world. they, by their case and vice, become slave to their servant. this be the difference betwixt the use of arm in the field and on the monument of stone. the golden age and the leaden age, prosperity and misery, justice and corruption, substance and shadow, word and deed, experience and imagination make in the field and on the monument of stone. the golden age and the leaden age, prosperity and misery, justice and corruption, substance and shadow, word and deed, experience and imagination make common weal and mar common weal, the fruit of virtue and the conclusion of vice. then who will live at home, idle, or think in himself any worth, to live only to eat, drink and sleep and so die? or by consume that careless his friend get worthy, or by use that miserable that maintain virtue honest, or for be descend noble and pine with the vain vaunt of great kindred in penury, or to maintain a silly show of bravery. toil out thy heart, soul and time base by shift trick, card and dice, or with the vain vaunt of great kindred in penury, or to maintain a silly show of bravery. toil out thy heart, soul and time base by shift trick, card and dice or by relate news of other man action shark here and there for a dinner or supper. deceive thy friend by fair promise and dissimulation in borrow where thou never mean to pay. offend the law, surfeit with excess burden thy country, abuse thyself, despair in want and then cozen thy kindred, yea, even thy own brother, and wish thy parent death. i will not say damnation to have their estate, though thou see what honour and reward the world yet have for they that will seek they and worthy deserve they. i will be sorry to. say damnation to have their estate, though thou see what honour and reward the world yet have for they that will seek they and worthy deserve they. i will be sorry to offend or that any shall mistake my honest meaning, for i wish good to all. hurt to none, but rich man for the most part, be grow to that dotage through their pride in their wealth, as though there be no accident can end it or their life. and what hellish care do such take to make it their own misery and their country spoil, especial when there be most need of their employment. draw by all manner of invention from the prince and his honest subject, even the vital spirit of their power and estate. spoil, especial when there be most need of their employment. draw by all manner of invention from the prince and his honest subject, even the vital spirit of their power and estate, as if their bag or brag be so powerful a defence, the malicious can not assault they, when they be the only bait to cause we not only to be assault but betray and murder in our own security ere, we will perceive it a example of secure covetousness. may not the miserable ruin of constantinople, their impregnable wall, riches and pleasure last take by the turk, which be then but a bit in comparison of their mightiness. now, remember we of the effect of private covetousness, at which time the good emperor hold himself rich. by the turk, which be then, but a bit in comparison of their mightiness. now remember we of the effect of private covetousness, at which time the good emperor hold himself rich enough to have such rich subject, so formal, in all excess of vanity, all kind of delicacy and prodigality, his poverty when the turk besiege the citizen who merchandize, thought be only to get wealth. little conceive the desperate resolution of a valiant expert enemy leave the emperor, so long to his conclusion, have spend all he have to pay his young, raw discontent soldier that sudden he, they and their city be all a prey to the devour turk and what they will not spare for the maintenance of they who adventure their life to. soldier that sudden he, they and their city be all a prey to the devour turk and what they will not spare for the maintenance of they who adventure their life to defend they do serve only their enemy to torment they, their friend and country and all christendom to this present day. let this lamentable example remember you that be rich, see there be such great thief in the world to rob you, not grudge, to lend some proportion to breed they that have little yet willing to learn how to defend you, for it be too late when the deed be. do the roman estate have be worse than this for the mere covetousness and extortion of a few of they so move the rest that? be too late when the deed be. do the roman estate have be worse than this, for the mere covetousness and extortion of a few of they so move the rest that not have any employment but contemplation. their great judgement grow to so great malice as themselves be sufficient to destroy themselves by faction. let this move you to embrace employment for those who education, spirit and judgement want, but your purse, not only to prevent such accustom danger, but also to gain more thereby than you have. and you, father, that be either so foolish, fond or so miserable, covetous or so wilful, ignorant or so negligent, careless as that, you will rather maintain your child in idle wantonness till they grow your master or become. foolish, fond, or so miserable, covetous, or so wilful, ignorant or so negligent, careless as that, you will rather maintain your child in idle wantonness till they grow your master or become so base, unkind that they wish nothing but your death, so that both sort grow dissolute. and although you will wish they any where to escape the gallow and ease your care, though they spend you one, two or three hundred pound a year, you will grudge to give half so much in adventure with they to obtain a estate which, in a small time but with a little assistance of your providence, may be better than your own. but if a angel shall tell you any place yet unknown can afford such fortune, you will. time, but with a little assistance of your providence may be better than your own. but if a angel shall tell you any place yet unknown can afford such fortune, you will not believe it, no more than columbus be believe there be any such land as be now the well know abound america. much less such large region be yet unknown as well in america as in africa and asia. and i have not be so ill breed, but i have taste of plenty, and pleasure as well as want and misery. the author condition, nor do necessity yet or occasion of discontent, force i to these endeavour. nor be i ignorant. what small thanks i shall have for my pain, or that many will have the nor do necessity yet or occasion of discontent force i to these endeavour. nor be i ignorant what small thanks i shall have for my pain, or that many will have the world imagine they to be of great judgement. that can but blemish these, my design, by their witty objection and detraction. yet i hope my reason, with my deed, will so prevail with some that i shall not want employment in these affair to make the most blind see his own senselessness and incredulity. hope that gain will make they affect that. which religion, charity and the common good can it be but a poor device in i to deceive myself much more, the king and state, my friend and country with these inducement which see charity and the common good, can it be but a poor device in i to deceive myself much more. the king and state, my friend and country, with these inducement which see his majesty have give permission, i wish all sort of worthy, honest, industrious spirit will understand, and if they desire any further satisfaction i will do my best to give it, not to persuade they to go only, but go with they, not leave they there, but live with they there. i will not say but by ill provide and undue manage such course may be take, may make we miserable enough, but if i may have the execution of what i have project, if they want to eat, let they eat or never digest i. may be take, may make we miserable enough, but if i may have the execution of what i have project, if they want to eat, let they eat or never digest i if i perform what i say i desire. but that reward out of the gain may suit my pain, quality and condition. and if i abuse you with my tongue, take my head for satisfaction. if any dislike at the year end defray their charge. by my consent they shall free return. i fear not want of company, sufficient be it, but know what i know of these country and by the proof of that wealth i hope yearly to return, if god please, to bless i from such accident as be beyond my power in i know of these country and by the proof of that wealth i hope yearly to return, if god please, to bless i from such accident as be beyond my power in reason to prevent. for i be not so simple to think that ever any other motive than wealth will ever erect there a common wealth or draw company from their ease and humour at home to stay in new-england to effect my purpose. and lest any shall think the toil may be insupportable, the planter, pleasure and profit though these thing may be, have by labour and diligence, i assure myself there be who delight extreme in vain pleasure, that take much more pain in england to enjoy it than i shall do here to gain. by labour and diligence. i assure myself there be who delight extreme in vain pleasure, that take much more pain in england to enjoy it than i shall do here to gain wealth sufficient, and yet i think they shall not have half such sweet content. for our pleasure here be still gain in england, charge and loss here nature and liberty. afford we that free which in england we want, or it cost we dear. what pleasure can be more than be tire with any occasion, a shore in plant, vine, fruit or herb in contrive their own ground to the pleasure of their own mind, their field, garden, orchard, building, ship and other work etc. to recreate themselves before their own door in their own boat? contrive their own ground to the pleasure of their own mind, their field, garden, orchard, building, ship and other work etc. to recreate themselves before their own door in their own boat upon the sea, where man, woman and child with a small hook and line by angle may take diverse sort of excellent fish at their pleasure. and be it not pretty sport to pull up two penny, six penny and twelve penny as fast as you can, hale and veer a line. he be a very bad fisher can kill in one day with his hook and line one, two or three hundred cod which dress and dry if they be sell there for ten shilling a hundred, though in england they will give more than. his hook and line one, two or three hundred cod which, dress and dry, if they be, sell there for ten shilling a hundred, though in england they will give more than twenty. may not both servant master and merchant be well content with this gain? if a man work but three day in seven, he may get more than he can spend, unless he will be exceed excessive. now that carpenter, mason, gardiner, tailer, smith, sailer, forger or what other, may they not make this a pretty recreation, though they fish but a hour in a day to take more than they can eat in a week, or if they will not eat it because there be so much better choice yet, sell it or change it. a day to take more than they can eat in a week, or if they will not eat it because there be so much better choice yet, sell it or change it with the fisherman or merchant for any thing you want and what sport do. yield a more, please, content and less hurt and charge, then angle with a hook and cross the sweet air from i will to i will, over the silent stream of a calm sea wherein the most curious may find profit, pleasure and content. thus, though, all man be not fisher, yet all man whatsoever may, in other matter, do as well, for necessity do in these case. so rule a common wealth and each in their several function as their labour. fisher. yet all man whatsoever may in other matter do as well, for necessity do in these case. so rule a common wealth, and each in their several function as their labour, in their quality, may be as profitable because there be a necessary mutual use of all. for gentleman, employment for gentleman, what exercise shall more delight? they then range daily these unknown part, use fowl and fish for hunt and hawk, and yet you shall see the wild hawk give you some pleasure in see. they stoop six or seven time after one another a hour or two together at the skult of fish in the fair harbour as those a shore at a foul, and never trouble nor torment yourselves with watch mew, feed and a hour or two together at the skult of fish in the fair harbour, as those a shore at a foul and never trouble nor torment yourselves with, watch, mew, feed and attend. they nor kill horse and man with run and cry. see you, not a hawk for hunt also. the wood, lake and river afford not only chase sufficient for any that delight in that kind of toil or pleasure, but such beast to hunt that beside the delicacy of their body for food, their skin. be so rich as they will recompeuce thy daily labour with a captain pay. employment for labourer, for labourer, if those that sow hemp, rape, turnup parsnip, carrot, cabbage and such like give twenty, thirty, forty, fifty shilling yearly for. daily labour with a captain, pay employment for labourer for labourer. if those that sow hemp, rape, turnup parsnip, carrot, cabbage and such like give twenty, thirty, forty, fifty shilling yearly for a acre of land and meat, drink and wage to use it and yet grow rich when better or at least as good ground may be, have and cost nothing but labour, it seem strange to i. any such shall grow poor. my purpose be not to persuade child from their parent, man from their wife, nor servant from their master. only such as with free consent may be spare, but that each parish or village in city or country that will but apparel their fatherless child of thirteen or fourteen year of age or young. with free consent, may be spare, but that each parish or village in city or country that will but apparel their fatherless child of thirteen or fourteen year of age or young marry people that have small wealth to live on here by their labour may live exceed. well, provide always that first there be a sufficient power to command they house to receive they mean to defend they and meet provision for they, for any place may be over-laine and it be most necessary to have a fortress ere this grow to practice and sufficient master of all necessary mecanicall quality to take ten or twelve of they for apprentice. the master by this may quick grow rich. these may learn their trade themselves to do the master of all necessary mecanicall quality to take ten or twelve of they for apprentice. the master by this may quick grow rich. these may learn their trade themselves to do the like to a general, and a incredible benefit for king and country, master and servant. example of the spaniard. it will be a history of a large volume to recite the adventure of the spaniard and portugal, their affront and defeat, their danger and misery which, with such incomparable honour and constant resolution, so far beyond belief, they have attempt and endure in their discovery and plantation. as may well condemn we of too much imbecility, sloth and negligence, yet the author of these new invention be hold as ridiculous for a long time as now. discovery and plantation. as may well condemn we of too much imbecility, sloth and negligence, yet the author of these new invention be hold as ridiculous for a long time as now be other that do but seek to imitate their unparallelled virtue. and though we see daily their mountain of wealth spring from the plant of their generous endeavour, yet be our sensuality and untowardness such the cause of our defailment and so great that we, either ignorant, believe nothing or so curious contest to prevent we know not what future event that we either so neglect or oppress and discourage the present, as we spoil all in the make crop, all in the bloom and build upon fair sand rather than upon rough rock, judge that so neglect or oppress and discourage the present as we spoil all in the make crop, all in the bloom, and build upon fair sand rather than upon rough rock. judge that we know not, govern that we have not. fear that which be not, and for fear some shall do too well, force such, against their will, to be idle or as ill, and who be he. have judgement, courage and any industry or quality with understanding will leave his country, his hope at home, his certain estate, his friend. pleasure, liberty and the preferment sweet england do afford to all degree, be it not to advance his fortune by enjoy his desert who? prosperity once appear will encourage other, but it must be cherish as a sweet england do afford to all degree, be it not to advance his fortune by enjoy his desert. who prosperity once appear will encourage other. but it must be cherish as a child till it be able to go and understand itself and not correct, nor oppress above it. strength ere it know wherefore a child can neither perform the office nor deed of a man of strength, nor endure that affliction he be able. nor can a apprentice at the first perform the part of a master. and if twenty year be require to make a child a man, seven year limit a apprentice for his trade, if scarce a age be sufficient to make a wise man, a statesman and common a man, die ere he. a child, a man, seven year limit, a apprentice for his trade. if scarce a age be sufficient to make a wise man, a statesman and common a man, die ere he have learned to be discreet. if perfection be so hard to be obtain, as of necessity, there must be practice as well as theoric. let no man, then, condemn this paradox opinion to say that half seven year be scarce sufficient for a good capacity to learn, in these affair, how to carry himself. and who ever shall try, in these remote place, the erect of a colony shall find, at the end of seven year, occasion enough to use all his discretion and, in the interim, all the content, reward, gain and hope will be. erect of a colony shall find, at the end of seven year, occasion enough to use all his discretion and in the interim, all the content, reward, gain and hope will be necessary require to be give to the beginning till it be able to creep, to stand and go, and to encourage desert by all possible mean, yet time enough to keep it from run. for there be no fear^ it will grow too fast or ever to any thing except liberty, profit, honour and prosperity. there find more bind the planter of those affair in devotion to effect it. then bondage, violence, tyranny, ingratitude and such double deal as bind free man to become slave and honest man turn knave which have ever be the ruin. in devotion to effect it, then bondage, violence, tyranny, ingratitude and such double deal as bind free man to become slave and honest man turn knave which have ever be the ruin of the most popular commonweal and be very unlikely ever well to begin anew. who see not what be the great good of the spaniard, the bliss of spain, but these new conclusion in search those unknown part of this unknown world, by which mean he even into the very secret of all his neighbour and the most part of the world. and when the portugal and spaniard have find the east and west-indies, how many do condemn themselves that do not accept of that honest offer of noble columbus who, upon our neglect, bring they. the portugal and spaniard have find the east and west-indies, how many do condemn themselves that do not accept of that honest offer of noble columbus who, upon our neglect, bring they to it, persuade ourselves. the world have no such place as they have find, and yet, ever since we find, they still from time to time have find new land, new nation and trade, and still daily do find both in asia, africa and america, so that there be neither soldier nor mechanic, from the lord to the beggar, but those part, afford they all employment and discharge their native soil of so many thousand of all sort, that else by their sloth, pride and imperfection will long ere. this have trouble their neighbour or have. all employment and discharge their native soil of so many thousand of all sort that else, by their sloth, pride and imperfection will long ere this have trouble their neighbour or have eat the pride of spain itself. now he know little that know not. england may well spare many more people than spain and be as well able to furnish they with all manner of necessary and see for all they have. they cease not still to search for that they have not and know not. it be strange we shall be so dull as not maintain that which we have and pursue that we know, sure. i be sure many will take it ill to be abridge of the title and honour of their predecessor when not maintain that which we have and pursue that we know sure. i be sure many will take it ill to be abridge of the title and honour of their predecessor when, if but true, they will judge themselves. look how inferior they be to their noble virtue, so much they be unworthy of their honour and live which never be ordain for show and shadow, to maintain idleness and vice, but to make they more able to abound in honour by heroical deed of action, judgement, piety and virtue, what be it, both in their purse and person, they will not do for the good of their commonwealth which may move they present to set out their spare child in these generous design. religion above all thing. purse and person, they will not do for the good of their commonwealth, which may move they present to set out their spare child in these generous design. religion above all thing shall move we, especial the clergy, if we be religious to show our faith by our work in convert those poor saluage to the knowledge of god. see what pain the spaniard take to bring they to their adultered faith. honour might move the gentry, the valiant and industrious, and the hope and assurance of wealth. all if we be that we will seem and be account. or be we so far inferior to other nation, or our spirit so far deject from our ancient predecessor, or our mind so upon spoil, piracy and such villainy. and be account, or be we so far inferior to other nation, or our spirit so far deject from our ancient predecessor, or our mind so upon spoil, piracy and such villainy as to serve the portugal, spaniard, dutch, french or turk as to the cost of europe? too many do, rather than our god, our king, our country and ourselves, excuse our idleness and our base complaint by want of employment, when here be such choice of all sort and for all degree in the plant and discover these. north part of america. my second voyage to new england in the year of our lord 1615.. i be employ by many, my friend of london, my second voyage to new england, and sir ferdinando gorges, a noble. voyage to new england in the year of our lord, 1615.. i be employ by many, my friend of london my second voyage to new england, and sir ferdinando gorges, a noble knight and a great favourer of those action who persuade the reverend dean of exeter, doctor sutliffe and diverse merchant of the west to entertain this plantation. much labour i have take to bring the londoner and they to join together, because the londoner have most money and the western man be most proper for fish, and it be near as much trouble but much more danger to fail from london to plymouth, then from plymouth to new england, so that half the voyage will thus be save. yet by no mean i can prevail. so much more danger to fail from london to plymouth, then from plymouth to new england, so that half the voyage will thus be save. yet by no mean i can prevail, so desirous they be both to be lord of this fish. now, to make my word more apparent by my deed to begin a plantation for a more ample trial of those conclusion i be to have stay there, but with sixteen man, who name be, i confess i can have. wish they as many thousand have all other provision be in like proportion. nor will i have have so few. can i have have mean for more yet? will god have please? we have safe arrive, i doubt not, but to have perform more than i. will i have have so few? can i have have mean for more yet? will god have, please? we have safe arrive? i doubt not, but to have perform more than i promise, and that many thousand ere this will have be there ere now the ground and plot for our plantation. the main assistance next, god, i have to this small number be my acquaintance among the saluage, especial with dohoday, one of their great lord, who have live long in england and another call tantum, i carry with i from england and set on shore at cape cod by the mean of this proud savage, i do not doubt but quick to have get that credit among the rest of the saluage and their alliance to shore at cape cod, by the mean of this proud savage, i do not doubt, but quick to have get that credit among the rest of the saluage and their alliance, to have have as many of they as i desire, in any design i intend, and that trade also they have, by such a kind of exchange of their country commodity which, both with ease and security, may then have be use with he and diverse other. i have conclude, to inhabit and defend they against the tarentine, with a better power than the french do, they who tyranny do enforce they to embrace my offer with no small devotion, and though many may think i more bold than wise in regard of their power, dexterity, treachery. do they who tyranny do, enforce they to embrace my offer with no small devotion. and though many may think i more bold than wise in regard of their power, dexterity, treachery and inconstancy have so desperate assault and betray many other, i say, but this, because with so many i have many time- do much more in virginia, then i intend here, when i want that experience virginia, teach i that. to i it seem no more danger than ordinary, and though i know myself the mean of many thousand who, apprehensive inspection, can pierce beyond the bound of my ability into the hide thing of nature, art and reason. yet i entreat such give i leave to excuse myself of so much imbecility as to say: beyond the bound of my ability into the hide thing of nature, art and reason. yet i entreat such give i leave to excuse myself of so much imbecility as to say that in these eighteen year which i have be conversant with these affair, i have not learned there be a great difference betwixt the direction and judgement of experimental knowledge and the superficial conjecture of variable relation, wherein rumour, humour or misprision have such power that oft time one be enough to beguile twenty, but twenty not sufficient to keep one from be deceive. therefore, i know no reason but to believe my own eye before any man, imagination that be, but wrest from the conceit of my own project and endeavour. but i honour with therefore, i know no reason but to believe my own eye before any man, imagination that be but wrest from the conceit of my own project and endeavour. but i honour with all affection the counsel and instruction of judicial direction or any other honest advertisement so far, to observe, as they tie i not to the cruelty of unknown event, the mean use to prevent it, and these be the inducement that thus draw i to i to neglect all other employment and spend my time and best ability in these adventure, wherein, though, i have have many discouragement by the ingratitude of some, the malicious slander of other, the falseness of friend, the treachery of coward and slowness of adventurer. now you be to remember how. have have many discouragement by the ingratitude of some, the malicious slander of other, the falseness of friend, the treachery of coward and slowness of adventurer. now you be to remember how i set sail and return, as i return first from new england, at plymouth, i be promise four good ship ready, prepare to my hand the next christmas, and what condition and content. i will desire to put this business in practice and arrive at london. four more be offer i with the like courtesy, but to join the londoner and they in one be most impossible, so that january, with two hundred pound in chash for adventure and six gentleman well furnish, i go from london to the four ship be promise i at plymouth. be most impossible. so that january, with two hundred pound in chash for adventure and six gentleman well furnish, i go from london to the four ship. be promise i at plymouth, but i find no such matter, and the most of those that have make such great promise by the bad return of the ship go for gold and their private emulation be extinct and qualify notwithstanding, at last, with a labyrinth of trouble though, the great of the burden lay-on. i and a few of my particular friend. i be furnish with a ship of two hundred ton and another of fifty, but ere i have sail one hundred and twenty league, she break all her mast pump each watch five or six thousand stroke only. of two hundred ton and another of fifty. but ere i have sail one hundred and twenty league, she break all. her mast pump each watch five or six thousand stroke. only her spret-saile remain to spoon before the wind. till we have reaccommodated a jury-mast to return for plymouth or founder in the sea. my vice-admiral be lose, not know of this, proceed her voyage, my reimbarkement, encounter with pirate and imprisonment by the french. now, with the remainder of those provision, i get out again in a small bark of sixty tun, with thirty man for this of two hundred and provision for seventy, which be the sixteen before name, and fourteen other sailor for the ship. with those i set sail, again the four and man for this of two hundred, and provision for seventy, which be the sixteen before name, and fourteen other sailor for the ship. with those i set sail again the four and twenty of june, where, what befall i, because my action and write, be so public to the world envy, still seek to scandalize my endeavour and see no power but death can stop the chat of ill tongue nor imagination of man mind. lest my own relation of those hard event may by some constructor be make doubtful, i have think it best to insert the examination of those proceed take by sir lewis stukley, a worthy knight and vice-admiral of devonshire, which be as follow: the examination of daniel baker, late steward to captain john. insert the examination of those proceed take by sir lewis stukley, a worthy knight and vice-admiral of devonshire, which be as follow: the examination of daniel baker, late steward to captain john smith, in the return of plymouth, take before sir lewis stukley, knight the eight of december 1615.. the effect, in brief, be this be: chase by one fry, a english pirate, edward chamber, the master, john miller, his mate, thomas digby, the pilot, and diverse other, importune he to yield much swagger. we have with they more than the pirate who agree upon such fair condition as we desire, which if they break he vow to sink rather than be abuse. strange, they think it that a bark of threescore tun with four gun shall stand. fair condition, as we desire, which if they break he vow to sink rather than be abuse. strange they think it that a bark of threescore tun with four gun shall stand upon such term. they be eighty expert seaman in a excellent ship of one hundred and forty tun and thirty six, cast piece and murderer. but when they know our captain, so many of they have be his soldier, and they but late run from tunis where they have steal this ship, want, victual and in combustion among themselves will have yield all to his protection, or waft we any whither. but those mutiny occasion we to reject their offer, which afterward we all repent for. at fiall we meet two french pirate, the one of his protection or waft we any whither, but those mutiny occasion we to reject their offer, which afterward we all repent for. at fiall we meet two french pirate, the one of two hundred tun, the other thirty. no disgrace will cause our mutineer fight till the captain offer to blow up the ship rather than yield till he have spend all his powder so that together by the ear we go and at last get clear of they for all their shot at flower. we be again chase with four french man of war, the admiral one hundred and forty tun and ninety man. well arm the rest, good ship and as well provide much parley we have, but vow they be rochiler and have a commission. admiral one hundred and forty tun and ninety man, well arm the rest good ship and as well provide much parley. we have but vow they be rochiler and have a commission from the king, only to secure true man and take portugal, spaniard and pirate and, as they request our captain, go to show his commission, which be under the broad seal. but neither it nor their vow they so much respect but they keep. he rifle our ship, man, she with french man and disperse we among their fleet. within five or six day they be increase to eight or nine sail. at last they surrender we, our ship and most of our provision, the defect they promise the next day to supply and do notwithstanding. they be increase to eight or nine sail at last. they surrender we, our ship and most of our provision, the defect they promise the next day to supply, and do notwithstanding, there be no way but our mutineer will, for england though, we be as near new england till the major part resolve with our captain to proceed. but the admiral send his boat for our captain. they espy a sail present, give chase whereby our mutineer find a opportunity in the night, run away and thus leave our captain, in his cap, bretches and waistcoat, alone among the french man. his clothes, arm and what he have, our mutineer share among they and, with a false excuse, feign for fear lest he shall turn man of. waistcoat alone among the french man, his clothes, arm and what he have, our mutineer share among they. and with a false excuse, feign for fear lest he shall turn man of war, they return for plymouth fifteen of. we be land-man, not know what they do. daniel cage, edward staling, walter chisell, david cooper, robert miller and john partridge, upon oath, affirm this for truth before the vice-admiral. a double treachery. now the cause why the french detain i again be the suspicion this chamber and minter give they that i will revenge myself upon the bank or in new find land of all the french i can there encounter and how i will have fire the ship. have they not over-persuaded i and that if i the bank or in new find land of all the french i can there encounter, and how i will have fire the ship. have they not over-persuaded i and that if i have, but again my arm i will rather sink by they than they shall have from i, but the value of a biscuit and many other such like tale, to catch but opportunity in this manner to leave i. and thus they return to plymouth and perforce with the french man. i thus proceed, a fleet of nine french man of war and fight with the spaniard, be a fleet of eight or nine sail, we watch for the west-indies fleet till ill weather separate we from the other eight. still we spend our time about. with the spaniard, be a fleet of eight or nine sail. we watch for the west-indies fleet till ill weather separate we from the other eight. still, we spend our time about the isle of the where, to keep my perplex thought from too much meditation of my miserable estate, i write this discourse- think to have send it to you- of his majesty council by some ship or other, for i see their purpose be to take all they can. at last, we be chase by one, captain barra, a english pirate, in a small ship with some twelve piece of ordnance, about thirty man and near all starve. they fight by courtesy relief of we who give they such fair promise as at last they betray. ship with some twelve piece of ordnance, about thirty man, and near all starve. they fight by courtesy relief of we who give they such fair promise as at last they betray captain wollistone, his lieutenant and four or five of his man aboard, we and then provide to take the rest. perforce. now my part be to be prisoner in the gun-roome and not to speak to any of they upon my life. yet have barra knowledge what i be. then barra perceive well those french intent. make ready to fight and wollistone as resolute regard, not their threat which cause we demur upon the matter long some sixteen hour, and then return they again, captain wollistone and all their prisoner, and some victual also upon a regard, not their threat which cause we demur upon the matter long, some sixteen hour, and then return they again, captain wollistone, and all their prisoner, and some victual, also upon a small composition. but while we be, barter thus with they, a carvel before our face, get under the castle of, from whence they beat we with their ordnance, a prize of fish. the next we take be a small english man of pool from new find land, the great cabin at this present be my prison, from whence i can see they pillage these poor man of all that they have and half their fish. when he be go, they sell his poor clothes at the main mast by a outcry which scarce give each man. poor man of all that they have and half their fish. when he be go they sell his poor clothes at the main mast by a outcry which scarce. give each man seven penny a piece, a scotch prize. not long after we take a scot fraught from saint michael to bristol, he have better fortune than the other for have but take a boat load of sugar, marmelade, sucket and such like. we descry four sail. after who we stand, who, forling their main sail, attend we to fight, but our french spirit be content only to perceive they be english red cross within a very small time after we chase 4. spanish ship that come from the indies. we fight with they four or five hour. only to perceive they be english red cross within a very small time after we chase. 4.. spanish ship that come from the indies we fight with they four or five hour, tear their sail and side with many a shot, betwixt wind and weather, yet not dare to board they lose. they for which all the sailor ever after hate the captain as a profess coward, a prize worth 36000 crown. a poor caruill of brasile be the next we chase and after a small fight, thirteen or fourteen of her man be wound, which be the better half we take. she with three hundred and seventy chest of sugar, one hundred hide and thirty thousand rial of eight. the next be a ship of holland which be the better half. we take she with three hundred and seventy chest of sugar, one hundred hide and thirty thousand rial of eight. the next be a ship of holland which have lose her consort in the straits of magilans, go for the south sea, she be put roomy she. also, these french man with fair promise, cunning, betray, to come aboard they to show their commission and so make prize of all, the most of the dutchman, we take aboard the admiral and man, she with frenchman that within two or three night after run away with she for france, the wound spaniard, we set on shore on the i will of tercera. the rest we keep to sail the carvel, a prize worth 300000 crown. run away with she for france, the wound spaniard. we set on shore on the i will of tercera. the rest we keep to sail the carvel, a prize worth 300000 crown. within a day or two after we meet a west-indies man of war of one hundred and sixty tun. a fore noon we fight with she and then take she with one thousand one hundred hide fifty chest of cutchancle, fourteen coffer of wedge of silver, eight thousand rial of eight and six coffer of the king of spain treasure beside the good pillage and rich coffer of many rich passenger. two month they keep i in this manner to manage their fight against the spaniard and be a prisoner when they take any english. now and rich coffer of many rich passenger. two month they keep i in this manner to manage their fight against the spaniard, and be a prisoner when they take any english. now, though, the captain have oft break his promise, which be to put i on shore, the isle or the next ship he take. yet at the last he be content. i shall go in. the carvel of sugar for france himself seem as resolve to keep the sea. but the next morning we all set sail for france, and that night we be separate from the admiral and the rich prize by a storm, within two day after we be hail by two west-indies man. but when they see we waise they for the king of. from the admiral and the rich prize by a storm, within two day after we be hail by two west-indies man. but when they see we waise they for the king of france, they give we their broad side, shoot through our main mast and so left we have. live now this summer among those french man of war. with much ado we arrive at the gulion, not far from rotchell, where, in stead of the great promise they always feed i with of double satisfaction and full content, and ten thousand crown be general, conclude i shall have. they keep i five or six day prisoner in the carvel, accuse i to be he that burn their colony in new france to force i to give they. i shall have. they keep i five or six day prisoner in the carvel, accuse i to be he that burn their colony in new france to force i to give they a discharge before the judge of the admiralty and stand to their courtesy for satisfaction or lie in prison or a worse mischief. indeed, this be in the time of combustion. that the prince of candy be with his army in the field and every poor lord or man in authority as little king of themselves for this injury be do i by they that set out this voyage, not by the sailor, for they be cheat of all as well as i, by a few officer aboard and the owner on shore. but to prevent that set out this voyage, not by the sailor, for they be cheat of all as well as i, by a few officer aboard and the owner on shore, but to prevent this choice, my escape from the french man in the end of such a storm that beat they all under hatch, i watch my opportunity to get a shore in their boat, whereinto, in the dark night i secret get, and with a half pike that lie by, i put a drift for rat ile, but the currant be so strong and the sea so great, i go a drift to sea till it, please god, the wind so turn with the tide that, although i be all this fearful night of gust and rain in so great i go a drift to sea till it, please god, the wind so turn with the tide that, although i be all this fearful night of gust and rain in the sea, the space of twelve hour when many ship be drive ashore and diverse split and be with skull and bayl, the water tire, i expect each minute will sink. i at last i arrive in a oozy. i will by charowne, where certain fowler find i near drown and half dead with water, cold and hunger. my boat i pawn to find mean to get to rotchell, where i understand our man of war and the rich prize, wherein be the cap call poyrune and the thirty thousand rial of eight we take in. mean to get to rotchell, where i understand our man of war and the rich prize, wherein be the cap call poyrune and the thirty thousand rial of eight we take in the carvel be split. the captain drown and half his company the same night, within six or seven league of that place, from whence i escape in the little boat, by the mercy of god, far beyond all man reason or my expectation, arrive at rotchell. what law i have? upon my complaint to the judge of the admiralty, i find many good word and fair promise, and ere long. many of they that escape drown, tell i the news they hear of my own death. these i arrest. their several examination do so confirm my and fair promise. and ere long. many of they that escape drown tell i the news they hear of my own death. these i arrest, their several examination do so confirm my complaint. it be hold proof sufficient, all which be perform according to their order of justice from under the judge hand. i present it to sir thomas edmond than ambassador at bordeaux, where it be my chance to see the arrival of the king, great marriage bring from spain. here, it be my good fortune to meet my old friend, master crampton, that no less grieve at my loss. then, willing to his power, do supply my want, and i must confess i be more beholden to the french man that escape, drown in the man. less grieve at my loss, then, willing to his power, do supply my want. and i must confess i be more beholden to the french man that escape drown in the man of war, madam chanoye at rotchell and the lawyer of bordeaux, than all the rest of my countryman. i meet in france, of the wrack of the rich prize, some three thousand six hundred crown worth of good, come ashore and be save with the carvel which i do my best to arrest. the judge promise i shall have justice. what will be the conclusion? as yet i know not. but under the colour to take pirate and the west-indie man, because the spaniard will not suffer, the french to trade in the west-indies any good. conclusion? as yet i know not, but under the colour to take pirate and the west-indie man, because the spaniard will not suffer, the french to trade in the west-indies any good. from thence though they take, they upon the coast of spain be lawful prize, or from any of his territory out of the limit of europe. and as they betray i though i have the broad-seale, so do they rob and pillage twenty sail of english man. more beside they, i know, not of the same year, my return for england, leave thus my business in france, i return to plymouth to find they have thus bury i among the french, and not only bury i, but with so much infamy as such treacherous coward can. business in france. i return to plymouth to find they have thus bury i among the french, and not only bury i, but with so much infamy as such treacherous coward can suggest to excuse their villainy, the chieftain of this mutiny that i can find i lay by the heel. the rest, like themselves, confess the truth, as you have hear now how i have or can prevent these accident. have no more mean. i rest at your censure. but to proceed to the matter, yet must i sigh and say how oft have fortune in the world. think i bring slavery freedom and turn all diverse newfoundland. i have hear at the first be hold as desperate a fish as this i project for new england. in the world think i bring slavery freedom and turn all diverse newfoundland. i have hear at the first be hold as desperate a fish as this i project for new england, placentia and the bank, never also as doubtful to the french. but for all the disaster happen i the business be the same. it be and the five ship go from london, whereof one be report more than three hundred ton, find fish so much that neither iceland man nor newfoundland man i can hear of have be there will go any more to either place if they may go thither so that upon the good return of my vice-admiral, the success of my vice-admiral this year, be go 4 or 5 sail and from london either place, if they may go thither, so that upon the good return of my vice-admiral, the success of my vice-admiral this year be go 4 or 5 sail, and from london as many, only to make voyage of profit where, from plymouth, as if all the english have be there till my return, put all their return together they will scarce make one a savour of near a dozen i can nominate, except one send by sir francis popam, though there be fish sufficient, as i be persuade, to fraugh yearly four or five hundred sail, or as many as will go for this fish stretch along the sea coast from cape james to newfoundland, which be seven or eight hundred mile at the least and have sail, or as many as will go for this fish stretch along the sea coast from cape james to newfoundland, which be seven or eight hundred mile at the least, and have his course in the deep and by the shore all the year long, keep their haunt and feed as the beast of the field and the bird of the air. but all man be not such as they shall be, that have undertake those voyage. all the roman be not scipioc, nor carthagenian hanibal, nor all the genw^ses columbuss, nor all the spaniard courtese, have they dive no deep in the secret of their discovery, then we or stop at such doubt and poor accidental chance they have never be, remember as they be yet have. have. they dive no deep in the secret of their discovery, then we or stop at such doubt and poor accidental chance they have never be remember as they be. yet have they no such certainty to begin as we. but to conclude, adam and eve do first begin this innocent work to plant the earth to remain to posterity, but not without labour, trouble and industry. no, and his family begin again the second plantation, and their seed, as it still increase, have still plant new country, and one country another, and so the world. to that estate it be, but not without much hazard, travel, mortality, discontent and many disaster. have those worthy father and their memorable offspring not be more diligent, for we now in to that estate it be, but not without much hazard: travel, mortality, discontent and many disaster. have those worthy father and their memorable offspring not be more diligent for we now, in these age, than we be to plant that yet be unplanted for the after liver? have the seed of abraham, our saviour, christ and his apostle, expose themselves to no more danger to teach the gospel than we, even we ourselves, have at this present. be as savage and as miserable as the most barbarous savage, yet uncivilize. the hebrew and lacedaemonian, the goth, the grecian, the roman and the rest, what be it, they will not undertake to enlarge their territory. every their subject resist their enemy those that be the founder of those great. the grecian, the roman and the rest, what be it. they will not undertake to enlarge their territory. every their subject, resist their enemy, those that be the founder of those great monarchy and their virtue be no silver idle, golden pharisee, but industrious iron, steel publican. they regard more provision and necessary for their people than jewel riches, ease or delight for themselves. riches be their servant, not their master. they rule as father, not as titant. their people as child, not as slave. there be no disaster can discourage they and let none think they encounter, not with all manner of encumbrance and what have ever be the work of the great prince of the earth, but plant of country and civilise barbarous and inhuman nation. they encounter, not with all manner of encumbrance and what have ever be the work of the great prince of the earth, but plant of country and civilise barbarous and inhuman nation to civility and humanity. who eternal action fill our history last, the portugal and spaniard who, everliving action before our eye will testify with they our idleness and ingratitude to all posterity and the neglect of our duty in our piety and religion. we owe our god, our king and country and want of charity to those poor saluage who country we challenge, use and possess, except we be but make to use and mar what our forefather make, or but only tell what they do, or esteem ourselves too good to take the like pain. and possess, except we be, but make to use and mar what our forefather make or but only tell what they do or esteem ourselves too good to take the like pain. be it. virtue in they to provide that do maintain we, and baseness in we to do the like for other. sure no, then see we be not bear for ourselves, but each to help other and our ability be much alike at the hour of our birth and the minute of our death. see our good deed or our bad, by faith in christ merit be all we have to carry our soul to heaven or hell. see honour be our life ambition and our ambition after death to have a honourable memory of our christ merit be all we have to carry our soul to heaven or hell. see honour be our life ambition and our ambition after death to have a honourable memory of our life. and see, by no mean we will be abate of the dignity and glory of our predecessor. let we imitate their virtue to be worthy their successor. to conclude with lucretius, its want of reason or its reason, want which doubt the mind and judgement. so do daunt that those beginning make man not to grant. john smith write this with his own hand here. follow a brief discourse of the trial of new england, with certain observation of the hollander use and gain by fish and the present estate of that happy plantation begin. hand. here follow a brief discourse of the trial of new england, with certain observation of the hollander use and gain by fish and the present estate of that happy plantation begin, but by sixty weak man in the year of our lord 1620.. and how to build a fleet of good ship to make a little navy royal by the former author. he say that it be more than four and forty year ago- m d^e his report, and it be more than forty year ago since he write it- that the herring buss out of the low country under the king of spain be five hundred beside one hundred french man and three or four hundred sail of fleming, the coast of wales and lancashire be of the low country under the king of spain be five hundred beside one hundred french man and three or four hundred sail of fleming. the coast of wales and lancashire be use by 300 sail of stranger ireland at beltamore fraught yearly three hundred sail of spaniard, where king edward the six intend to have make a strong castle because of the straight to have tribute for fish, black rock. be yearly fish by three or four hundred sail of spaniard, portugal and biskiner. the hollander raise yearly by herring, cod and ling the benefit of fish, as mr gentleman and other report. thirty thousand pound english and french by saltfish, poore-iohn, salmon and pilchard, three hundred thousand pound hambrough and the sound for sturgeon, lobster and of fish, as mr gentleman and other report. thirty thousand pound, english and french, by saltfish, poore-iohn, salmon and pilchard. three hundred thousand pound, hambrough and the sound for sturgeon, lobster and eel. one hundred thousand pound, cape blank for tunny and mullit by the biskiner and spaniard. thirty thousand pound that the duke of medina receive yearly tribute of the fisher for tunny, the record of holland and other learned observer and porgos more than ten thousand pound. lubeck have seven hundred ship, hambrough six hundred. emden, late, a fisher town, one thousand four hundred, who custom by fish have make they so powerful as they be. holland and zealand, not much great than yorkshire, have thirty wall town, four hundred village and twenty thousand sail of. who custom by fish have make they so powerful as they be. holland and zealand, not much great than yorkshire, have thirty wall town, four hundred village and twenty thousand sail of ship and hoy, three thousand six hundred be fisherman, whereof one hundred be doggers, seven hundred pink and well-boat, seven hundred fraud-boat, britter and tode-boat with thirteen hundred buss beside, three hundred that yearly fish about yarmouth where they sell their fish for gold, and fifteen year ago they have more than a hundred and sixteen thousand sea-faring-man. these fish ship do take yearly two hundred thousand last of fish, twelve barrel to a last which amount to 300000. pound by the fisher man price that 14. year ago do pay for their ten, three hundred. two hundred thousand last of fish, twelve barrel to a last, which amount to 300000. pound by the fisher man price that 14. year ago. do pay for their ten, three hundred thousand pound which vent in pumerland, sprustia, denmark, lefeland, russia, swethland, germany, netherlands, england, or else where, etc. make their return in a year about threescore and ten hundred thousand pound, which be seven million. and yet in holland there be neither matter to build ship nor merchandise to set they forth. yet by their industry they as much increase as other nation decay. but leave these uncertainty as they be, of this i be certain that the coast of england, scotland and ireland, the north sea with island and the sound newfoundland and cape blank. but leave these uncertainty as they be. of this, i be certain that the coast of england, scotland and ireland, the north sea with island and the sound, newfoundland and cape blank do serve all europe as well, the land, town as port and all the christian ship with these sort of staple fish which be transport from whence it be take many a thousand mile: viz, herring, salt fish, poore-iohn, sturgeon, mullit, tunny, porgos, caviar, buttargo. now see all these sort of fish, or the most part of they may be have in a land more fertile, temperate and plentiful of all necessary for the build of ship, boat and house and the nourishment of man, the season be so proper and the fish so near the. more fertile, temperate and plentiful of all necessary for the build of ship, boat and house and the nourishment of man. the season be so proper and the fish so near the habitation. we may there make that new-england have much advantage of the most of those part to serve all europe far cheap than they can who at home have neither wood, salt nor food, but at great rate at sea nothing but what they carry in their ship a hundred or two hundred league from the habitation. but new-englands fish be near land where be help of wood, water, fruit, fowl, corn or other refresh needful, and the tercera medera, canary, spain, portugal, provaue, savoy sicilia and all italy as convenient market for our dry fish. be help of wood, water, fruit, fowl, corn or other refresh needful. and the tercera medera, canary, spain, portugal, provaue, savoy, sicilia and all italy as convenient market for our dry fish, green fish, sturgeon, mullit, caviar and buttargo, as norway, swethland, l^^tuania or germany for their herring, which be hear also in abundance. for take they return. but wood, pitch, tar, soap-ash, cordage, flax, wax and such like commodity. we wine, oil, sugar, silk and such merchandise as the strait offoord whereby our profit may equalise they beside the increase of ship and mariner. and for proof hereof, in the year of our lord, 1614, you have read how i go from london. also the next year, 1615.. how four good ship go from london and i for proof hereof. in the year of our lord, 1614. you have read how i go from london, also the next year, 1615.. how four good ship go from london and i with two more from plymouth, with all our accident success, and return in the year 1616.. ere i return from france, the londoner, for all their loss by the turk, send four ship more. four more also go from plymouth. after i return from france, i be persuade again to go to plymouth with diverse of my friend with one hundred pound for our adventure beside our charge. but we find all thing as untoward as before and all their great promise, nothing but air yet to prepare the voyage against the next year. have acquaint. adventure beside our charge. but we find all thing as untoward as before and all their great promise, nothing but air yet to prepare the voyage against the next year, have acquaint a great part of the nobility with it and ashamed to see the prince. his highness, till i have do some what worthy his princely view. i spend that summer in visit the city and town of bristol, exeter, bastable, bodnam, perin, foy, milborow, saltash, dartmouth. my suit to the country, absom, tattnesse and the most of the gentry in cornwall and devonshire, give they book and map. show how in six month the most of those ship have make their voyage, and some in less, and with what good success. by which incitation they seem. they book and map show how, in six month, the most of those ship have make their voyage, and some in less, and with what good success. by which incitation they seem so well content as they promise, twenty sail of ship shall go with i next year, and in regard of my pain, charge and former loss, the western commissioner, in behalf of themselves and the rest of the company, and they hereafter that shall be join to, they contract with i by article, indent under our hand, to be admiral of that country during my life and in the renew of their letters-patent, so to be nominate half the fruit of our endeavour to be they, the rest our own be. thus, engage now the business. my life and in the renew of their letters-patent. so to be nominate half the fruit of our endeavour to be they, the rest our own be. thus engage now the business be make plain and likely to prosper. some of they will not only forget i and their promise, but also obscure i as if i have never be acquaint in the business. but i be not the first. they have deceive. there be four good ship prepare at plymouth, but by reason of their disagreement the season so waste as only two go forward. the one be of two hundred ton, return well fraught to plymouth and her man in health within five month. the other, of fourscore ton, go for elbow with dry fish and the one be of two hundred ton, return well fraught to plymouth and her man in health within five month. the other of fourscore ton, go for elbow with dry fish and make a good return in this voyage. edward rowcroft, alias stallings, a valiant soldier that have be with i in virginia and be with i also when i be betray by the french, be send again in those ship and have some wrong offer he there by a french man. he take he and as he write to i go with he to virginia with fish to trade with they for such commodity as they may spare. he have not pass ten or twelve man and know both those country well. yet he promise i the. with fish to trade with they for such commodity as they may spare. he have not pass ten or twelve man and know both those country well. yet he promise i the next spring to meet i in new-england, but the ship and he both perish in virginia. this year again, diverse ship intend to go from plymouth, so disagree, there go but one of two hundred ton who stay in the country about six week, which with eight and thirty man and boy have her fraught which she sell at the first penny for 2100.. beside the fur, so that every poor sailer that have but a single share have his charge and sixteen pound ten shilling for his seven month work. master thomas di^m-ire, a understanding. beside the fur so that every poor sailer that have but a single share have his charge and sixteen pound ten shilling for his seven month work. master thomas di^m-ire, a understanding and industrious gentleman that be also with m^ among the french man have live about a year in newfoundland, return to plymouth, go for new-england in this ship, so much approve of this country that he stay there with five or six man in a little boat. find two or three french man among the saluage who have lose their ship, augment his company with who he range the coast to virginia where he be kind, welcome and well, refresh thence return to new-england again, where have be a year in his back. return to virginia. with who he range the coast to virginia where he be kind, welcome and well, refresh thence return to new-england again, where have be a year in his back. return to virginia, he be so wound by the saluage he die upon it. let not man attribute these, their great adventure and untimely death, to unfortunatenesse, but rather wonder how god do so long, preserve they with so small mean, to do so much. leave the fruit of their labour to be a encouragement to those our poor undertake and as warning for we not to undertake such great work with such small mean, and this for advantage, as they write unto i that god have lay this country open for we and slay the most part of undertake such great work with such small mean, and this for advantage as they write unto i that god have lay this country open for we and slay the most part of the inhabitant by civil war and a mortal disease. for where i have see one hundred or two hundred saluage, there be scarce ten to be find, and yet not any one of they touch with any sickness, but one poor french man that die they say this plague upon they thus sore fall it be because they please not tantum well, from the west country to make trial this year only to fish be go six or seven sail, three of which, i be certain inform, make so good a voyage that every sailer that west country to make trial this year only to fish be go. six or seven sail, three of which, i be certain, inform make so good a voyage that every sailer that have a single share have twenty pound for his seven month work, which be more than in twenty month he shall have get. have he go for wage any where? now, although these former ship have not make such good voyage as they expect by send opinionate, unskilful man that have not experience, diligence to save that they take, nor take that there be, which now patience and practice have bring to a reasonable kind of perfection, in despite of all detractor and calumniation the country yet have satisfy. all the defect have be in their which now patience and practice have bring to a reasonable kind of perfection in despite of all detractor and calumniation, the country yet have satisfy. all the defect have be in their use or abuse it. not in itself, nor i, but adieu, desert for fortune, make provision for knave and fool and man of base condition, my suit to the city now. all these proof and this relation i now call new-englands trial. i cause two or three thousand of they to be print, one thousand with a great many map, both of virginia and new-england i present to thirty of the chief company in london, at their hall desire, either general or particular, they that will, to embrace it, and by the use of a stock, new-england. i present to thirty of the chief company in london at their hall desire, either general or particular they that will, to embrace it and by the use of a stock of five thousand pound to ease they of the superfluity of the most of their company that have but strength and health to labour. near a year i spend to understand their resolution, which be to i a great toil and torment then to have be in new-england about my business, but with bread and water and what i can get there by my labour but inconclusion, see nothing will be effect. i be content as well with this loss of time and charge as all the rest. a plantation in new-england. upon these inducement some. labour but inconclusion, see nothing will be effect. i be content as well with this loss of time and charge as all the rest. a plantation in new-england, upon these inducement, some few well dispose, gentleman and merchant of london and other place provide two ship, the one or a hundred and threescore ton, the other of threescore and ten. they leave the coast of england the two and thirty of august with about a hunred and twenty person, but the next day the lesser ship spring a leak that force their return to plymouth where discharge she and twenty passenger with the great ship and one hundred passenger beside sailor. they set sail again the six of september and the nine of november fall with cape james. discharge, she and twenty passenger with the great ship and one hundred passenger beside sailor. they set sail again the six of september and the nine of november fall with cape james, but be pester. nine week in this leak, unwholesome ship, lie wet in their cabin. most of they grow very weak and weary of the sea. then, for want of experience, range two and again six week before they find a place they like to dwell on force, to lie on the bare ground without coverture. forty of they die and threescore be leave in very weak estate at the ship, come away about the five of april, follow and arrive in england the six of may. though the harbour be good, the shore be so. in very weak estate at the ship, come away about the five of april, follow and arrive in england the six of may. though the harbour be good, the shore be so shallow, they be force to wade a great way up to the knee in water and use that that do they. much hurt and little fish they find, but whaile and a great kind of muftell, so fat that few do eat of they. that be not sick. these misery occasion some discord and give some appearance of faction, but all be so reconcile that they unite themselves by common consent under their hand to a kind of combination of a body politic by virtue whereof to enact and constitute law and ordinance and officer from. that they unite themselves by common consent under their hand, to a kind of combination of a body politic, by virtue whereof to enact and constitute law and ordinance and officer from time to time as shall be think most convenient for their general good. sixteen or seventeen day, they can do little for want of their shallop, which be amend their first journey by land. yet, captain miles standish unto who be join in council? william bradfor, stephen hopkins and edward tilly go well, arm a shore, and by that time they have go a mile, meet five or six indian that flee into the wood. we trace they by the footing, eight or ten mile. than the night approach, we make a fire by which we mile meet five or six indian that flee into the wood. we trace they by the footing, eight or ten mile, than the night approach. we make a fire by which we lay that night and the next morning follow the saluage by their tract, think to find their habitation. but by the way, we find a dear among many, fair spring of water where we refresh ourselves. then we go a shore and make a fire that they at the ship may perceive where we be, and so march to a place where we suppose be a river. by the way, we see many vine, saxefras, haunt of dear and foul, and some fi^ty acre of plain ground have be plant by the indian. where be some? be a river. by the way, we see many vine, saxefras, haunt of dear and foul, and some fi^ty acre of plain ground have be plant by the indian, where be some of their grave. from thence we follow a path that bring we through three or four field have be plant that year. in one grave we dig, we find a basket or two of indian corn, so much as we can carry, we take with we. the rest we bury as we find it, and so proceed to the place we intend. but we find it not such a harbour as we expect, and so we return till the night, cause we take up our lodging under a tree where it rain six or seven hour. find it not such a harbour as we expect, and so we return till the night, cause we take up our lodging under a tree where it rain six or seven hour. the next morning, as we wander, we pass by a tree where a young sprig be bow down over a bough and some acorn strew under it which be one of their gin to a catch a deer, and as we be, look at it, bradford be. sudden catch by the leg in a noose rope, make as artificial as we. as we pass we see a lease of buck spring, some partridge and great flock of wild goose and duck, and so we return, well weary, to our ship, master jones, our master with four. we see a lease of buck spring, some partridge and great flock of wild goose and duck, and so we return, well weary, to our ship, master jones, our master with four and thirty man, their first journey by shallop also go up and down in the frost and snow, two or three day in the extremity of the cold, but can find no harbour, only among the old grave. we get some ten bushel of corn, some bean and a bottle of oil, and have we not thus haply find it? we have have no corn for seed, so that place we ever call cornhill. the next day, master jones with the corn and our weak man return to the ship, but eighteen of we quarter there. corn for seed, so that place we ever call cornhill. the next day master jones with the corn and our weak man return to the ship. but eighteen of we quarter there that night and in the morning follow the path we find in the snow, in a field, a great hill or grave, then the rest dig it. we find first a mat. under that a board three quarter long, paint and carve with three tyns at the top, like a croner. between the mat also be bowl, tray and dish and such trash at length we find a fair new mat and under that two bundle, the one biggar, the other less. in the great we find a great quantity of fine red powder like a length we find a fair new mat and under that two bundle, the one biggar, the other less. in the great we find a great quantity of fine red powder, like a kind of imbalmement, and yield a strong but no offensive smell. with the bone and skull of a man that have fine yellow hare still on it and some of the flesh unconsumed, a knife, a pack-needle and two or three old iron thing be bind up in a sailor canvas cassock, also a pair of cloth breeches. in the less bundle we find likewise of the same powder and the bone and head of a little child about the leg and other part of it be bind string and bracelet of white bead there be. likewise of the same powder and the bone and head of a little child. about the leg and other part of it be bind string and bracelet of white bead. there be also a little bow and some other odd knack, the pretty, we take and cover again the corpse as they be, not far from thence be two of their house where be a great deal of their miserable household stuff which we leave as we find and so return to our boat and lay aboard that night. many argument we have to make here, our plantation or not. in the interim accident, mistress white be bring to bed of a young son which be call perigrine, and a sailer shoot at a whale his piece fly. our plantation or not. in the interim accident, mistress white be bring to bed of a young son which be call perigrine, and a sailer, shoot at a whale his piece fly in piece stock and all. yet he have no hurt. a foolish boy discharge his father piece hard by half a barrel of powder and many people by it. it please god it escape fire, so that no hurt be do, but to make a more certain discovery where to seat ourselves. captain standish, their second journey by water to find a place to plant in master carver, william branford, edward winsloe, john tilly, edward tilly with diverse other to the number of seventeen, upon the six of december, set sail and have sail. six or plant in master carver, william branford, edward winsloe, john tilly. edward tilly with diverse other, to the number of seventeen, upon the six of december, set sail and have sail. six or seven league we espy. eight or ten saluage. about a dead still follow the shore. we find two or three more cast up by the ill weather. many we see in the water. therefore we call it grampus bay ship may ride well in it but all the shore be very shallow, slat of sand. at last seven or eight of. we go a shore. many field we see where the saluage have inhabit and a burial place encompass with a palizado. so we return to our shallop. in the night we hear a hideous cry. shore, many field we see where the saluage have inhabit and a burial place encompass with a palizado. so we return to our shallop. in the night we hear a hideous cry and howl of wolf and fox. in the morning, as we be ready to go into our shallop, one of our man be in the wood come, run, cry indian, indian and with all their arrow fly among we. some of our man be in the boat and their arm a shore so well it chance their first fight with the saluage. captain, standish with two or three more, discharge their piece till the rest be ready. one savage more stout than the rest, keep under a tree till he have shoot three or four arrow. with two or three more, discharge their piece till the rest be ready. one savage more stout than the rest, keep under a tree till he have, shoot three or four arrow and endure. three or four musket shoot, but at last they all flee. this be about break of day in the morning when they see we, and we not they, the description of their place to plant in. have the wind fair, we sail along the coast 8. or 10. league, think to have get to a harbour where one of our company have be within 8. league of cape cod, for neither crick nor harbour in this bay we can find, and the wind so increase, our rudder break and our mast fly overboard. that be within 8. league of cape cod, for neither crick nor harbour in this bay we can find, and the wind so increase, our rudder break and our mast fly overboard that we be in danger to be cast away. but at last it, please god, we be in a harbour we know, not think it, one we be acquaint with. this we find to be a i will where we ride that night and have well view the land about it and found the bay to be a good harbour for our ship compass, with good land and in it two fair isle where there be, in their season, innumerable store of all sort of fish and foul good water, much plain land which have be plant. good land and in it two fair isle where there be, in their season, innumerable store of all sort of fish and foul good water, much plain land which have be plant. with this news we return to our ship and with the next fair wind, bring she thither be, but within the sight of cape cod. in the mean time, goodwife alderton be deliver of a son, another boy bear in new-england, their first plantation, but dead bear. upon the 28. of december, so many as can go to work upon the hill where we purpose to build our platform for our ordnance, which do command all the plain and the bay and from whence we may see far into the sea and be easy impail. so purpose, to build our platform, for our ordnance, which do command all the plain and the bay and from whence we may see far into the sea and be easy impail. so in the afternoon we go to measure out the ground and divide our company into 19 family, allot to every person half a paul in breadth and three in length, and so we cast lot where every man shall lie, which we stake out. think this proportion enough at the first to impale for lodging and garden. two: fair lake, francis billington, from the top of a tree see a great water some three mile from we in the land. go with the master mate and find it. two: great lake of fresh water, the big, top of a tree, see a great water some three mile from we in the land. go with the master mate and find it. two great lake of fresh water, the big five or six mile in circuit and a- i will in it of a cable length square. the other three mile in compass full of fish and foul, and two brook issue from it which will be a excellent help in time for we. where they see seven or eight indian house, two man lose themselves in the wood but no people, four be send a mile or two from our plantation. two of they straggle into the wood be leave for come to a lake of water. they find a great deer, have a mastiff. send a mile or two from our plantation. two of they straggle into the wood be leave for come to a lake of water. they find a great deer, have a mastiff bitch and a spanell with they. they follow so far they can not find the way back. that afternoon it rain and do freeze and snow at night. their apparel be very thin and have no weapon but two sickle nor any victual, nor can they find any of the saluage habitation. when the night come they be much perplex that they have no other bed then the earth, nor coverture then the sky, but that they hear, as they think, two lion roar a long time together, very nigh. they so not know what to other bed, then the earth, nor coverture, then the sky, but that they hear, as they think, two lion roar a long time together, very nigh they. so, not know what to do, they resolve to climb up into a tree, though that will be a intolerable cold lodging. expect their come, they stand at the tree root and the bitch they hold fast by the neck for she will have be go to the lion or what they be. that as it chance come. not nigh they, so they watch the tree, that extreme cold night and in the morning travel again, pass by many lake, brook and wood and in one place where the saluage have burn 4. or 5. mile in length, which be a night and in the morning travel again, pass by many lake, brook and wood and in one place where the saluage have burn 4. or 5. mile in length, which be a fine champion country, in the afternoon they discover the two isle in their bay. and so that night, near famish, they get to their plantation, from whence they have send out man every way to seek they that night, the house they have build and thatch where lay their arm, bedding powder etc. take fire and be burn the coast be so. the ship ride more than a mile from the fort, but god be thank, no man be hurt, though much be burn. all this time we can not have conference with a savage their. ride more than a mile from the fort. but god be thank, no man be hurt, though much be burn. all this time we can not have conference with a savage. their first conference with a savage, though. we have many time see they and have many alarm, so that we draw a council and appoint captain standish to have the command of all martial action. but even in the time of consultation, the saluage give a alarm. the next day also, as we be agree upon his order, come a tall, savage, bold among we, not fear any thing and kind bid we welcome- in english he be a sagamo- towards the north where the ship use to fish, and do know the name of most of not fear any thing and kind bid we welcome. in english he be a sagamo, towards the north where the ship use to fish, and do know the name of most of the master that use thither, such victual as we have we give. he be the first savage we yet can speak with. he tell we this place where we be be call patuxet and that all the people three or four year ago there die on the plague in a day or two. we can not be rid of he than he return to the massasoyt from whence he come, where be some sixty people, but the nawsit be 100 strong, which be they encounter our people at the first two day after this samoset. the the massasoyt, from whence he come, where be some sixty people, but the nawsit be 100 strong. which be they encounter our people at the first two day after this, samoset, the second conference, for so be his name, come again and bring five or six of the massasoyt with. he with certain skin and certain tool. they have get that we have, leave in the wood at their alarm. much frie^-dship, they promise, and so depart. but samoset will not leave, we but feign himself sick. yet at last he go to entreat. the saluage come again to confirm a peace. now, the three time as we be consult of our martial order, two saluage appear, but when we go to they they vanish not long after. come again to confirm a peace. now, the three time as we be consult of our martial order, two saluage appear, but when we go to they they vanish. not long after come samo^et and a native of patuxet, where we dwell, and one of they carry into spain by hunt, thence bring into england where a good time he live. and now here signify unto we their great sachem of massasoyt, with quadaquina, his brother and all their man. be there by to see. we, not willing to send our governor, we send edward wollisto with present to they both, to know their mind. make he to understand by his interpreter how king james do salute he and be his friend after a little conference with twenty. with present to they both to know their mind, make he to understand by his interpreter how king james do salute he and be his friend. after a little conference with twenty of his man, he come over the brook to our plantation where we set he upon a rug and then bring our governor to he with drum and trumpet where, after some circumstance- for they use few compliment- we treat of peace with they to this effect that neither he nor any of he shall injury or do hurt to any of we, their condition of peace. if they do, he shall send we the offender that we may punish he and we will do the like to he if any do unjust war against he. condition of peace. if they do, he shall send we the offender that we may punish he, and we will do the like to he. if any do unjust war against he, we will aid he as he shall we against our enemy. and to send to his neighbour confederate to certify they of this, that they may likewise be comprise in these condition, that when any of they come to we, they shall leave their bow and arrow behind they, as we will our piece when we come to they all, which the king seem to like well of and be applaud of his follower in his person. he be a very lusty man in his best year, a able body, grave of countenance and spare of. to like well of and be applaud of his follower in his person. he be a very lusty man in his best year, a able body, grave of countenance and spare of speech. in his attire little differ from the rest, after all. be do the governor, conduct he to the brook, but keep our hostage till our messenger return. in like manner we use quaddaquina, so all depart, good friend. two of his people will have stay with we, but we will not permit they only sam^set and we entertain kind. as yet we have find they intend to keep promise, for they have not hurt our man. they have find straggle in the wood and be afraid of their powerful adversary, the narrobigganset against who he find they intend to keep promise, for they have not hurt our man, they have find straggle in the wood and be afraid of their powerful adversary, the narrobigganset, against who he hope to make use of our help the next day. go a fish for eel, and in a hour he do tread as many out of the ose with his foot as he can lift with his hand, not have any other instrument, but that we may know their habitation so well as they. we, stephen hopkins and edward winslo, have squa^tum for their guide and interpreter. a journey to pakanoki, to packanoki, the habitation of the king of massasoyt, with a red horsemans coat for a present to entreat he, by reason, we have not. guide and interpreter, a journey to pakanoki. to packanoki, the habitation of the king of massasoyt, with a red horsemans coat for a present to entreat he by reason. we have not victual to entertain they as we will. he will defend his people so much from visit we, and if he do send, he shall always send with the messenger, a copper chain they give he that they may know he come from, he, and also give they some of his corn for seed. that night they lodge at namasoet, some fifteen mile off, by the way, we find ten or twelve woman and child that still will pester we till we be weary of they perceive it be the manner of they, where victual be to. the way we find ten or twelve woman and child that still will pester we till we be weary of. they perceive it be the manner of they, where victual be to be, get with most ease there they will live. but on that river of namasch^t have be many habitation of the saluage that be dead and the land lie waste and the river abound with great plenty of fish and have be much frequent by the french. a great courage of two old saluage the next day travel with six or seven indian where we be to wade over the river, do dwell only two old man of that nation then live that think we enemy seek the best advantage they can to fight with we. we be to wade over the river, do dwell only two old man of that nation, then live that think we enemy seek the best advantage they can to fight with we with a wonderful show of courage. but when they know we, their friend, they kind welcome we after we come to a town of the massasoit. but at pakanoki the king be not how the king use they. towards night he arrive and be very proud both of our message and present. make a great oration to all his people. be not he commander of the country about he. be not such a town, his and the people of it, and 20.. town more he name, be he, and shall they not bring their skin to. of the country about he be not such a town, his and the people of it, and 20.. town more he name, be he. and shall they not bring their skin to we, to which they answer: they be he and they will victual. they have none, nor any lodging, but a poor plank or two, a foot high from the ground, whereon his wife and he lie at the one end, we at the other, but a thin mat upon they. two more of his chief man press by and upon we, so that we be worse weary of our lodging, then of our journey, although there be such plenty of fish and foul and wild beast. yet be they so lazy, they will not take pain. be worse, weary of our lodging then of our journey, although there be such plenty of fish and foul and wild beast yet, be they so lazy, they will not take pain to catch it till mere hunger constrain they, for in two or three day we have scarce a meal meat whereby we be so faint, we be glad to be at home, beside what for the flea and their howl and sing in the night in their house and the musketa without door. our head be as light for want of sleep as our belly empty for want of meat. a voyage to nawsit. the next voyage we make be in a shallop with ten man to nawsit, sixteen mile from we, to fetch a boy. belly empty for want of meat. a voyage to nawsit. the next voyage we make be in a shallop with ten man, to nawsit, sixteen mile from we, to fetch a boy, be lose in the wood. we hear be there, who aspinet their king, have bedeck like a savage but very kind he bring he to we and so return well to patuyet. immediate after the arrival of the last ship they send another of five and fifty tun to supply they with seven and thirty person. they set sail in the begin of july but be cross by western wind. it be the end of august ere they can pass plymouth and arrive in new-england at new-plimoth now. so call the 11. of november where they but be cross by western wind. it be the end of august ere they can pass plymouth and arrive in new-england at new-plimoth now. so call the 11. of november where they find all the people they leave, so ill, lusty and well for all their poverty, except six that die a month. they stay ere they return to england load with clapboord, wainscot and walnut, with about three hogshead of beaver skin, the 13. of december and draw near our coast, be set on by a french man set out by the marquis of cera, governor of ile deu, where they keep the ship, imprison the master and company, take from they to the value of 500 pound and after 14. day send they home with a. governor of ile deu, where they keep the ship, imprison the master and company, take from they to the value of 500 pound and after 14. day send they home with a poor supply of victual. their own be devour by the marquis and his hungry servant. now you be to understand this 37. bring nothing but rely whole on we to make we more miserable than before, which the sachem covanacus no soon understand. but send to tusquantum our interpreter a bundle of new arrow in a snake skin. tusquantum be absent, the messenger depart. but when we understand it be a direct challenge, we return the skin full of powder and shot with a absolute defiance which cause we finish our fortification with all expedition now. but when we understand it be a direct challenge, we return the skin full of powder and shot with a absolute defiance, which cause we finish our fortification with all expedition. now, betwixt our two saluage, tusquantum and hobbamock gre^^, such great emulation. we have much ado to know which best to trust. in a journey we undertake in our way, we meet a savage of tusquantum that have cut his face fresh bleed to assure we massasoyt, our suppose friend, have draw his force to packanokick to assault we hobomak as confident, assure we it be false and send his wife as a espy to see. but when she perceive all be well, she tell the king massasoyt how tusquantum have abuse he diverse saluage also he. be false and send his wife as a espy to see. but when she perceive all be well, she tell the king massasoyt how tusquantum have abuse. he diverse saluage also. he have cause to believe we will destroy they. but he will do his best to appease we. this he do only to make his countryman believe what great power he have with we, to get bribe on both side to make peace or war when he will, and the more to possess they. with fear he persuade many. we have bury the plague in our store house which we can send when we list whither we will. but at last all his knavery be discover massasowat send his knife with messenger for his head or he our store house which we can send when we list whither we will. but at last all his knavery be discover massasowat send his knife with messenger for his head or he be his subject. with much ado we appease the angry king and the rest of the saluage and free forgive tusquantum because he speak our language. we can not well be without he. a journey to the town of namaschet in defence of the king of massasoyt against the narrohigganses and the suppose death of squantum. a great difference there be betwixt the narrohigganses and the massasoyte that have always a jealousy coubatant. one of their petty sachems. be too conversant with the narrohigganse. this coubatant live much at namas^het and much storm at our peace. and the massasoyte that have always a jealousy coubatant, one of their petty sachems, be too conversant with the narrohigganse. this coubatant live much at namas^het and much storm at our peace with his king and other, also at squantum and tokamahamon and hobomak, our friend and chief occasioner of our peace, for which he seek to muth hobomak. yet tokamahamon go to he upon a rumour he have take masasoyt prisoner or force he from his country, but the other two will not, but in private, to see if they can hear what be become of their king lodging at namaschet. they be discover. to coubatant who surprise the house and take squantum, say if he be dead, the english have lose their tongue. hobomak see that. of their king lodging at namaschet. they be discover to coubatant, who surprise the house and take squantum, say if he be dead, the english have lose their tongue. hobomak see that and coubatant hold a knife at his breast, be a strong, lusty fellow, break from they and come to new-plimoth, full of sorrow for squantum, who he think be slay. the next day we send ten man with he arm to be revenge of coubatant. they surprise the saluage who conduct we near where we rest and refresh ourselves till midnight and then we beset the house as we have resolve. those that enter the house demand for coubatant but the saluage be half dead with fear. we charge they not to stir, for we come. beset the house as we have resolve. those that enter the house demand for coubatant but the saluage be half dead with fear we charge they not to stir, for we come to hurt none but coubatant for kill squantum. some of they seek to escape, be wound, but at last perceive our end. they tell we coubatant be go and all his man and squantum be yet live. and in the town, in this hurly-burly, we discharge two piece at random which much terrify all the inhabitant except squantum and tokamahamon who, though they know not the end of our come yet assure themselves of our honesty that we will not hurt. they, the woman and child, hang about hobomak, calling he friend, and when they see not the end of our come yet assure themselves of our honesty that we will not hurt. they, the woman and child, hang about hobomak calling he friend and when they see we will hurt no woman, the young youth cry: we be woman to be short. we keep they all. and while we be, search the house for coubatant hobomak, have, get to the top and call squantum and tokamahamon, which come unto we, accompany with other, some arm, other naked, those that have bow. we take they from. they promise they again, when it be day, the house we take for our quarter that night and discharge the prisoner and the next morning go to breakfast to squantum house. thither come all they that love we. be day, the house we take for our quarter that night and discharge the prisoner and the next morning go to breakfast to squantum house. thither come all they that love we to welcome we, but all coubatant faction be flee than we make they plain, know the cause of our come and if their king massasoyt be not well, we will be revenge upon the narrohigganset or any that shall do injury to hobomak, squantum or ^ny of their friend. as for those be wound, we be sorry for it and offer out surgeon shall heal they. of this offer a man and a woman accept that go home with we, accompany with squantum and many other. know friend that offer we all the kindness they can. heal they of this offer. a man and a woman accept that go home with we accompany with squantum, and many other know friend, that offer we all the kindness they can. from the west of england there be go ten or twelve ship to fish, which be all well fraught. those that come first at elbow make seventeen pound a single share beside bever, otter and martin skin. but some of the rest that come to the same port that be all ready furnish so glut the market that the price be abate, yet all return so well content that they be a prepare to go again. there be go from the west country only to fish, five and thirty ship, and about the last of april. return so well content that they be a prepare to go again. there be go from the west country only to fish five and thirty ship, and about the last of april two more from london, the one of one hundred ton, the other of thirty, with some sixty passenger to supply the plantation. now, though, the turk and french have be somewhat too busy in take our ship. will all the christian prince be true at unity, as his royal majesty our sovereign king james desire, seventy sail of good ship be sufficient to fire the most of his coast in the levant and make such a guard in the straits of hellespont as will make the great turk himself more afraid in constantinople than the small. the most of his coast in the levant and make such a guard in the straits of hellespont, as will make the great turk himself more afraid in constantinople than the small red-crosse that cross the sea will be either of any french pickaroun or the pirate of a abstract of diverse relation send from the colony in new england, july 16.. 1622.. note and observation. since the massacre in virginia though, the indian continue their wont friendship. yet we be more wary of they then before, for their hand have be imbrue in much english blood only by too much confidence, but not by force, and we have have small supply of any thing. but man, here i must entreat a little your favour to digress they. blood only by too much confidence, but not by force, and we have have small supply of any thing. but, man, here i must entreat a little your favour to digress. they do not kill the english in virginia because they be christian, but for their weapon and copper, which be rare novelty. but now they fear we may beat they out of their den, which lion and tiger will not admit, but by force. but must this be a argument for a english man and discourage any in virginia or new england? no, for i have. try they both. as you may read at large in the history of virginia notwithstanding, since i come from thence, the honourable company have be humble suitor to his majesty, to have. try they both, as you may read at large in the history of virginia notwithstanding, since i come from thence the honourable company, have be humble suitor to his majesty to get vagabond and condemn man to go thither. nay, so the business have be so abuse that so much scorn be the name of virginia. some do choose to be hang ere they will go thither and be. yet, for all the worst of spite, detraction and discouragement and this iamentable massacre, there be more honest man now suitor to go than ever have be constrain knave. and it be not unknown to most man of understanding how happy many of those collumner have think themselves that they may be admit and yet pay for their be constrain knave and it be not unknown to most man of understanding how happy many of those collumner have think themselves that they may be, admit and yet pay for their passage. to go now to virginia, and i fear i there go too many of those that have shift here till they can no long and they will use that quality there till they hazard all to range this country of new england in like manner. i have but eight, as be say, and among their bruit condition i meet many of their silly encounter and i give god thanks without any hurt at all to i or any with i, when your west-country man be so wound and torment with the saluage though they have. encounter, and i give god thanks without any hurt at all to i or any with i, when your west-country man be so wound and torment. with the saluage, though, they have all the politic direction that have be gather from, all the secret information can be hear of, yet they find little and return with nothing. i speak, not this out of vainglory, as it may be, some gleaner or some who be never there may censure i, but to let all man be assure by those example what those saluage, be that thus strange, do murder and betray our countryman. but to the purpose the paragon with thirty seven man send to relieve, they miscarry twice upon our english coast, whereby they fail of their supply. do murder and betray our countryman. but to the purpose the paragon with thirty seven man send to relieve, they miscarry twice upon our english coast, whereby they fail of their supply. it be true, they live two year without supply. there have be take one thousand base at a draught and in one night twelve hogshead of herring. but when they want all necessary, both for fish and sustenance, but what they can get with their naked industry they endure most extreme want have be now near two year without any supply to any purpose. it be a wonder how they shall subsist, much less so to resist the saluage, fortify themselves, plant sixty acre of corn beside their garden that be well replenish with many usual. it be a wonder how they shall subsist, much less so to resist the saluage. fortify themselves, plant sixty acre of corn beside their garden that be well replenish with many usual fruit. but in the begin of july come in two ship of master weston. though we much want ourselves weston plantation, yet we relieve they what we can and to requite we they destroy our corn and fruit, then plant and do what they can to have. do the like to we. at last they be transport to wichaguscusset at the massachusets, where they abuse the saluage worse than we. we have neither trade nor scarce any thing remain. god, send in one. master jones and a ship of weston have be at monahigan among the. abuse the saluage worse than we. we have neither trade nor scarce any thing remain. god send in one. master jones and a ship of weston have be at monahigan among the fisherman, that for beaver skin and such merchandise as we have, very well refresh. we, though at dear rate weston leave also his man, a small bark and much good provision, and so set sail for england. then we join with they to trade to the southward of cape cod. twice or thrice we be force to return, first by the death of their governor, then the sickness of captain standish. at last our governor, master bradford, undertake it himself to have find the passage betwixt the shovel and the main, the death of tusquantum than governor, then the sickness of captain standish. at last our governor, master bradford, undertake it himself to have find the passage betwixt the shovel and the main, the death of tusquantum than tusquantum. our pilot die, so that we return to the massachusets where we find the trade spoil and nothing but complaint betwixt the saluage and the english at nawset. we be kind use and have good trade, though we lose our barge, the saluage, careful keep both her wrack and some ten hoshead of corn three month, and so we return, some by land, some in the ship. captain standish be recover, go to fetch they both. at his death, desire the english to pray. he may go dwell with the english man. god for they some in the ship captain standish be recover, go to fetch they both at his death, desire the english to pray. he may go dwell with the english man, god, for they be a good god, and trade at namasket and monomete, where the people have the plague, a place much frequent with dutch and french. here the sachem put a man to death for kill his fellow at play, wherein they be so violent they will play their coat from their back and also their wife, though many mile from they. but our provision: decay standish be send to mattachi, where they pretend their wont love, yet it plain appear they intend to kill. he escape. thence we go to monomete where we find nothing but bad. standish be send to mattachi where they pretend their wont love. yet it plain appear they intend to kill. he escape thence. we go to monomete where we find nothing but bad countenance. hear one, a notable villain will boast how many french and english he have. slay this champion, present a dagger to the sachem canacum he have get from the english. they contrive to murder all the english. occasion we to understand how they have contrive to murder all the english in the land. but have such a fair opportunity they will begin here with we. their scornful usage make the captain so passionate to appease his anger and choler. their intent make many fair excuse for satisfaction. scarborow, a lusty savage, always seem the most. with we. their scornful usage make the captain so passionate to appease his anger and choler. their intent make many fair excuse for satisfaction. scarborow, a lusty savage, always seem the most to effect. we bestow on we the best present he have, without any recompense. say he be rich enough to bestow such favour on his friend, yet have undertake to kill the captain himself. but our vigilency so prevent the advantage they expect. we safe return, little suspect in he any such treachery. during this time a dutch ship be drive a shore at massasowat. the sickness of king massasowat. who king lie very sick now because it be a general custom then for all their friend to visit they master winslow and master hamden with. massasowat, the sickness of king massasowat, who king lie very sick now. because it be a general custom then for all their friend to visit they, master winslow and master hamden with habamok for their guide, be send with such cordial as they have to salute he. by the way, they so oft hear the king be dead. habamok will break forth in those word: my love sachem. my love sachem, many have i know, but never any like thou, nor shall ever see the like among the saluage. for he be no liar, nor bloody and cruel like other indian in anger. soon reclaim he will be. rule by reason, not scorn the advice of mean man, and govern his man better with a few stroke than and cruel, like other indian in anger. soon reclaim he will be rule by reason, not scorn the advice of mean man, and govern his man better with a few stroke than other, with many true love where he love. yea, he fear we have not a faithful friend. leave among all his countryman, show how oft he have. restrain their malice much more, with much passion. he speak to this purpose till at last we arrive where we find the dutchman but new go and the house so full we can hardly get in. by their charm. they distemper we that be well much more he that be sick woman rub he to keep heat in he, but their charm end. understand of we though he have their charm. they distemper we. that be well much more he. that be sick woman rub he to keep heat in he, but their charm end. understand of we, though he have lose his sight his cure by the english, his understanding fail not. but take winslow by the hand, say: be thou winslow, oh winslow, i shall never see thou again. hobamock, tell he what restaurative they have bring. he desire to taste they. with much ado they get a little confexion of many comfortable conserve into his mouth. as it desolue. he swallow it, then desolue more of it in water. they scrape his tongue, which be all fur and swell, and wash his mouth and then give he more of it to eat and in. then desolue more of it in water. they scrape his tongue, which be all fur and swell, and wash his mouth and then give he more of it to eat and in his drink. that wrought such a alteration in he in two or three hour, his eye open to our great content with this and such broth as they there provide for he it please god. he recover and thus the manner of his sickness and cure cause no small admiration among they the king. thankfulness during the time of their stay to see his recovery they have send to new plymouth for diverse good thing for he, which he take so kind that he full reveal all the former conspiracy against we to which he have. recovery. they have send to new plymouth for diverse. good thing for he, which he take so kind that he full reveal all the former conspiracy against we to which he have oft be move, and how that all the people of powmet, nawset, succonet, mattachi, manamet, augawam and capawac be join to murder. we therefore, as we respect our life, kill they of massachuset that be the author for take away the principal, and the plot will cease thus, take our leaf and arrive at our fort, we find our brave liberal friend of pamet draw standish to their ambuscado, which be thus discover a bad example. we send he away as though he know, not suspect any thing. they at the massachusets, some be so vild. draw standish to their ambuscado, which be thus discover a bad example. we send he away as though he know, not suspect any thing. they at the massachusets, some be so vild they serve the saluage for victual, the rest send we word the saluage. be so insolent they will assault. they though against their commission. so fearful they be to break their commission. so much time be spend in consultation. they all be famish. till wassapinewat again. come and tell they the day of their execution. be at hand, captain standish. send to suppress the saluage. then they appoint standish with eight. choose man under colour of trade to catch they in their own trap at massachuset and acquaint it with the english in the town where. saluage. then they appoint standish with eight, choose man under colour of trade to catch they in their own trap at massachuset and acquaint it with the english in the town. where arrive he find none in the bark and most of the rest, without arm or scarce clothes, wander abroad. all so senceles, secure he more than wonder they be not all slay. with much ado he get the most of they to their town. the saluage suspect their plot, discover pecksnot, a great man and of as great a spirit. come to habamak, who be then among. they say: tell standish, we know he be come to kill we, but let he begin when he dare. not long after many will come to the fort and be then among they say: tell standish, we know he be come to kill we, but let he begin when he dare. not long after many will come to the fort and whet their knife before he with many brave speech. one among the rest, be by brag. he have a knife that on the handle have the picture of a woman face, but at home i have one have kill, both french and english, and that have a man face on it. and by and by these two must marry. but this here, by and by shall see, and by and by eat, but not speak. also, pecksnot be of a great stature than the captain, tell he though he be a great captain, he be, but by shall see, and by and by eat, but not speak. also, pecksnot be of a great stature than the captain tell. he, though he be a great captain, he be but a little man. and i, though no sachem, yet i be of great strength and courage. these thing standish, bear patient for the present, but the next day, see, he can not get many of they together. but these two roarer and two more be in a convenient room, two desperate, saluage slay and his company about. he standish, fease on pecksnot knife, then hang about his neck wherewith he slay. he and the rest slay, and the other savage. but the youth they take, who be brother to and as villainous as himself, be hang. hang about his neck wherewith he slay. he and the rest slay and the other savage. but the youth they take, who be brother to and as villainous as himself, be hang. it be incredible how many wound they endure, catch at their weapon without any fear or bruit, till the last gasp. habamack stand by all this time, very silent, but all end he say yesterday: pecksnot brag of his strength and stature, but i see you be big enough to lay he on the ground, the town he leave to the guard of weston people. the saluage over co^^med, three saluage more be slay, upon which rumour they all flee from their house. the next day they meet with a file of saluage that let fly. people, the saluage over co^^med three saluage more be slay upon which rumour they all flee from their house. the next day they meet with a file of saluage that let fly their arrow, shoot for shot till hobamack show himself. and then they flee. for all this, a savage boy, to show his innocency. come bold unto we and tell we have the english fugitive, but finish the three canowes they be a make to have. take the ship they will have. do as much to all the english, which be only the cause they have forbear so long. but now consult and consider their estate, those that go in the pinnace to barty isle to get passage for england, the rest to new plymouth where they have forbear so long. but now consult and consider their estate. those that go in the pinnace to barty isle to get passage for england, the rest to new plymouth where they be kind, entertain the sachem, obtak^est and powas and diverse other, be guilty. the three fugitive, in their fury there slay, but not long after, so distract be those poor, scatter people. they leave their habitation, live in swamp where wi^h cold and infinite disease they endure much mortality, sue for peace and cry the god of england be angry with they. thus you see where god please. as some flourish, other perish. now on all hand they prepare their ground and about the midst of april, in a fair season, they begin to plant till. see where god please as some flourish, other perish now on all hand. they prepare their ground and about the midst of april, in a fair season, they begin to plant till the latter end of may. but to god please a extreme drought that in six week after the latter set there scarce fall any rain, so that the stalk be first set, begin to care ere it come to half growth and the last not like to yield any thing at all. our bean also seem so wither we judge all utter dead that now all our hope be overthrow and our joy turn into mourn. and more to our sorrow we hear of the twice return of the paragon, that now the three time be. now all our hope be overthrow and our joy turn into mourn. and more to our sorrow, we hear of the twice return of the paragon that now the three time be. send we three month ago but no news of she, only the sign of a wrack we see on the coast which we judge she. this cause not every of we to enter into a private consideration betwixt god and our conscience, but most solemn, to humble ourselves before the lord by fast and pray to relieve our deject spirit by the comfort of his mercy. in the morning, when we assemble all together, the sky be as clear and the drought as like to continue as ever. yet our exercise continue eight or nine hour. his mercy. in the morning when we assemble all together, the sky be as clear and the drought as like to continue as ever. yet our exercise continue eight or nine hour before our departure, the sky be all overcast, a wonderful blessing and sign of god love. and on the next morning distil. such soft, sweet, moderate shower continue fourteen day mix with such seasonable weather as it be hard to say whether our wither corn or droop. affection be most quicken and reviue, such be the bounty and mercy of god of this. the indian, by the mean of hobamock, take notice, who see we use this exercise in the midst of the week, say it be but three day since sunday and desire to know. indian, by the mean of hobamock, take notice, who see we use this exercise in the midst of the week, say it be but three day since sunday, and desire to know the reason which, when he understand, he and all of they admire the goodness of god towards we, show the difference betwixt their conjuration and our prayer and what storm and danger they oft receive. thereby, to express our thankfulness, we assemble together another day, as before, and, either the next morning or not long after, come in two ship to supply we and all their passenger, well except one, and he present, recover, for we, notwithstanding all these, want there be not a sick person among we. the great ship we return fraught the other. all their passenger, well, except one, and he present, recover. for we, notwithstanding all these, want there be not a sick person among we. the great ship we return fraught, the other we send to the southward to trade under the command of captain altom, so that god be thank. we desire nothing but what we will return commodity to the value. thus all man find our great god, he that never want nature to teach his truth, that only he of every thing be author. for this year, from england be go about forty sail of ship only to fish. forty sail send to fish and, as i be inform, have make a far better voyage than ever. now. some new great observer will have this a: of ship only to fish. forty sail send to fish and, as i be inform, have make a far better voyage than ever. now. some new great observer will have this a island, because i have write it be the continent. other report. that the people be so bruit. they have no religion, wherein sure they be deceive. for my part, i never hear of any nation in the world which have not a religion. their religion, dear bow and arrow. they believe, as do the virginian, of many divine power, yet of one above all the rest, as the southern virginian call their chief god kewassa, and that we now inhabit, oak, but both their king werowance the masachusets, call their great god kiehtan, and their king. the rest, as the southern virginian call their chief god kewassa, and that we now inhabit oak, but both their king werowance, the masachusets, call their great god kiehtan and their king there about his sachems, the penobscote, their great power tantum and their king sagome. those where be this plantation say ki^htan, make all the other god also one man and one woman and of they all mankind. but how they become so disperse, they know not. they say at first there be no king but kiehtan that dwell far westerly above the heaven, whither all good man go when they die and have plenty of all thing. the bad man go thither also and knock at the door, but he bid they go wander in endless. all good man go when they die and have plenty of all thing. the bad man go thither also and knock at the door, but he bid they go, wander in endless want and misery, for they shall not stay there. they never see kiehtan, but they hold it a great charge and duty that one age teach another, and to he they make feast and cry and sing for plenty and victory or any thing be good. they have another power. they call hobam^ck, which we conceive the devil, and upon he they call to cure their wound and disease. when they be curable, he persuade they. he send they because they have displease he. but if they be mortal, than he say: kiehtan, send they. which? cure their wound and disease. when they be curable, he persuade they, he send they because they have displease he, but if they be mortal, than he say kiehtan send they, which make they never call on he in their sickness. they say this: hobamock appear to they sometime like a man, a dear or a eagle, but most common like a snake, not to all but only to their powah, to cure disease. and v^deses, which be one of the chief, next the king, and so bold in the war that they think no weapon can kill they and those be such as conjure in virginia and cause the people to do what they list their government for their government: every sachem be not a king, but can kill. they and those be such as conjure in virginia and cause the people to do what they list their government for their government. every sachem be not a king, but their great sachems have diverse sachems under their protection. pay they tribute and dare make no war without his knowledge. but every sachem take care for the widow, orphan, the age and maim. nor will they take any to first wife, but they in birth equal to themselves, although they have many inferior wife and concubine that attend on the principal from who he never part. but any of the rest, when they list, they inherit by succession and every one know their own bound to his man. he give they land also bound, and what? never part. but any of the rest when they list they inherit by succession and every one know their own bound to his man. he give they land also bound. and what deer they kill in that circuit. he have the sore-part, but it in the water, only the skin. but they account none a man till he have do some notable exploit. the man be most employ in hunt, the woman in slavery, the young obey the elder. their name be variable. they have harlot and honest woman. the harlot never marry or else be widow. they use divorcement and the king common punish all offender himself. when a maid be marry she cut her hair and keep her head cover till it be grow again. their widow. they use divorcement and the king common punish all offender himself. when a maid be marry, she cut her hair and keep her head cover till it be grow again. their art, game, music, attire, burial and such like differ very little from the virginian. only for their chronicle they make hole in the ground as the other set up great stone out of the relation of master edward winslow. a answer to objection. now i know the common question be for all those misery, where be the wealth they have get, or the gold or silver mine? to such greedy, unworthy mind i say once again: the sea be better than the rich mine know, and of all the fish ship that go well, provide there. or silver mine. to such greedy, unworthy mind, i say once again: the sea be better than the rich mine know, and of all the fish ship that go well, provide there be no complaint of loss nor misery, but rather a admiration of wealth, profit and health. as for the land, be it never so good. in two year, so few of such small experience live without supply so well and in health. it be a extraordinary blessing from god, but that with such small mean they shall subsist and do so much to any understand judgement be a wonder, notwithstanding the vain expectation of present gain in some, ambition in other, that to be great will have all else slave, and the carelessness in provide supply. understand judgement be a wonder, notwithstanding the vain expectation of present gain in some, ambition in other that to be great will have all else slave and the carelessness in provide supply have cause those defailement in all those plantation. and how ever some bad condition will extol the action of any nation but their own. yet if we may give credit to the spaniard, portugal and french write, they endure as many misery, and yet not in twenty year effect so much, nay, scarce in forty. thus you may see plain the yearly success from new england by virginia, the ordinary voyage to go to virginia or new-england, which have be so costly to this kingdom and so dear to i, which either to see perish or new england by virginia. the ordinary voyage to go to virginia or new-england, which have be so costly to this kingdom and so dear to i, which either to see perish or but bleed, pardon i, though it passionate i, beyond the bound of modesty to have be sufficient able to foresee their misery and have neither power nor mean to prevent it. by that acquaintance i have with they, i call they my child, for they have be my wife, my hawk hound, my card, my dice and in total, my best content, as indifferent to my heart as my left hand to my right, and notwithstanding all those miracle of disaster have cross both they and i. yet be there, not a englishman remain as god. to my heart as my left hand, to my right and notwithstanding all those miracle of disaster have cross both they and i. yet be there, not a englishman remain, as god be thank, notwithstanding the massacre. there be some thousand. i will yet begin again with as small mean as i do at first, not that i have any secret encouragement. i protest more than lamentable experience. for all their discovery i have yet hear of be but pig of my own sow. nor more strange to i then to hear one tell i he have go from billingsgate and discover gravesend, tilbury, quinborow, lee and margit, which to those do never hear of. they though they dwell in england, may be make some rare secret and have go from billingsgate and discover gravesend, tilbury, quinborow, lee and margit, which to those do never hear of. they, though they dwell in england, may be make some rare, secret and great country unknown except some few relation of master dirmer in england. some be hold great traveller that have see venice and rome, madrill, toledo, seville, prague or ragonsa, constantinople or jerusalem and the pyramid of egypt, that think it nothing to go to summer isle or virginia, which be as far as any of they and i hope in time will prove a more profitable and more laudable journey. as for the danger, you see, our lady and gentlewoman, account it nothing now to go thither and therefore i hope all good man will better. more profitable and more laudable journey. as for the danger, you see our lady and gentlewoman account it nothing now to go thither, and therefore i hope all good man will better apprehend it and not suffer they to languish in despair, who god so wonderful and oft have. preserve what here i have, write by relation. if it be not right, i humble entreat your pardon, but i have not spare any diligence to learn the truth of they that have be actor or sharer in those voyage. in some particular they may deceive i, but in the substance they can not, for few can tell i any thing except where they fish. but see, all those have live there, do confirm more than i have write. but in the substance they can not, for few can tell i any thing except where they fish. but see, all those have live there. do confirm more than i have write? i doubt not. but all those testimony with these new begin example of plantation will move both city and country free to adventure with i more than promise. but because some fortune-teller say i be unfortunate, the objection against i have, they spend their time as i have do. they will rather believe in god. then their calculation and peradventure have give as bad a account of their action and therefore i entreat leave to answer those obiecter that think it strange. if this be true, i have make no more use of it. rest so. a account of their action and therefore i entreat leave to answer those obiecter that think it strange. if this be true, i have make no more use of it, rest so long without employment, nor have no more reward nor preferment, to which i say i think it more strange, they shall tax i. my answer before they have try as much as i have, both by land and sea, as well in asia and africa as europe and america, where my commander be actor or spectator. they always so free reward i. i never need be importunate, or can i ever learn to beg what there i get? i have spend, yet in virginia i stay till i leave five hundred behind. i better provide, then. need be importunate. or can i ever learn to beg what there i get i have spend. yet in virginia i stay till i leave five hundred behind. i better provide then ever i be, from which bless virgin ere i return spring. the fortunate habitation of summer iles, this virgin sister now call new england, at my humble suit by our most gracious prince charles, have be near as chargeable to i and my friend for all which, although i never get shilling but it cost i a pound, yet i will think myself happy, can i see their prosperity. but if it yet trouble a multitude to proceed upon these certainty consideration, what think you i undertake, when nothing be know but that there be a? can i see their prosperity. but if it yet trouble a multitude to proceed upon these certainty consideration, what think you i undertake, when nothing be know, but that there be a vast land. i never have power and mean to do any thing, though more have be spend in formal delay than will have do the business, but in such a penurious and miserable manner, as if i have go a beg to build a university. where have man be as forward to adventure their purse and perform the condition they promise i as to crop the fruit of my labour. thousand ere this have be better by these design. thus, betwixt the spur of desire and the bridle of reason, i be near ride to death. crop, the fruit of my labour. thousand ere this have be better by these design. thus betwixt the spur of desire and the bridle of reason, i be near ride to death in a ring of despair. the reins be in your hand, therefore. i entreat you, ease i and those that think i be either idle or unfortunate, may see the cause and know, unless i do see better deal. i have have warning enough not to be so forward again at every motion, upon their promise, unless i intend nothing but to carry news. for now they dare adventure a ship that, when i go first, will not adventure a groat, so they may be at home again by michaelmas, which make i remember and say: for now they dare adventure a ship that when i go first will not adventure a groat, so they may be at home again by michaelmas, which make, i remember, and say with master hackluit: oh incredulity, the wit of fool that slove do spit at all thing fair, a sluggard cradle, a coward castle. how easy it be to be a infidel. but to the matter, by this all man may perceive the ordinary performance of this voyage. in five or six month the plenty of fish, be most certain approve, and it be certain, from cannada and new england within these six year have come near twenty thousand beaver skin. now have each of these ship transport but some small quantity of the most increase beast. from cannada and new england within these six year have come near twenty thousand beaver skin. now have each of these ship transport, but some small quantity of the most increase beast fowl, fruit plant and seed as i project. by this time their increase may have be sufficient for more than one thousand man. but the desire of present gain in many be so violent and the endeavour of many undertaker so negligent, every one so regard their private gain, that it be hard to effect any public good and impossible to bring they into a body, rule or order, unless both honesty as well as authority and money assist experience. but your homebred engross proiecter will at last find there be a great difference, betwixt say. a body, rule or order unless both honesty as well as authority and money assist experience. but your homebred engross proiecter will at last find there be a great difference betwixt say and do, or those that think their direction can be as soon and easy, perform as they can conceit they, or that their conceit be the fit thing to be put in practice, or their countenance maintain plantation. but to conclude, the fish will go forward, whether you plant it or no, whereby a colony may be. then transport with no great charge that in short time may provide such fraught to buy on. we there dwell, as i will hope no ship shall go or come empty from new england. the charge, the charge of in short time may provide such fraught to buy on. we there dwell as i will hope no ship shall go or come empty from new england. the charge, the charge of this be only salt, net, hook line, knife, irish-rugge, course, cloth, bead, glass and such trash, only for fish and trade with the saluage beside our own necessary provision, whole endeavour will quick defray all this charge and the saluage do entreat i to inhabit where i will. now, all those ship till these last two year have be fish within a square of two or three league and scarce any one yet will go any further in the port they fish in, where questionless five hundred may have their fraught, as well as elsewhere and two or three league and scarce any one yet will go any further in the port they fish in, where questionless five hundred may have their fraught as well as elsewhere and be in the market ere other can have the fish in their ship. because new england fish begin in february in newfoundland not till the midst of may. the progression hereof tend much to the advancement of virginia and summer isle. who empty ship may take in their fraught there and will be also, in time of need, a good friend to the inhabitant of newfoundland. the order of the western man, the return make by the western man, be common. divide in three part, one for the owner of the ship, another for the master. of newfoundland. the order of the western man, the return make by the western man be common. divide in three part, one for the owner of the ship, another for the master and his company, the three for the victualler, which, course be still permit, will be no hindrance to the plantation. as yet, go there never so many, but a mean of transport that yearly, for little or nothing, which otherwise will cost many hundred of pound, the gain, if a ship can gain, twenty, thirty, fifty in the hundred, nay three hundred for one hundred in seven or ten month, as you see they have, do spend twice so much time in come and go as in stay. there be i there plant, see the variety. hundred in seven or ten month, as you see they have do spend twice so much time in come and go as in stay there be i there, plant see the variety of the fish serve the most part of the year and with a little labour we may make all the salt we need use, as be former say, and can conceive no reason to distrust of good success by god. assistance beside for the build of ship, no place have more convenient harbour ebb, nor flood, nor better timber, and no commodity in europe do more decay than wood. master dee his opinion for the build of ship. master dee record in his british monarchy the effect of ship that king edgar have a navy of. do more decay than wood. master dee his opinion for the build of ship. master dee record in his british monarchy the effect of ship that king edgar have a navy of four thousand sail with which he yearly make his progress about this famous monarchy of great britain large declare the benefit thereof, whereupon he project to our most memorable queen elizabeth the erect of a fleet of sixty sail. he call a little navy royal imitate that admire pericles, prince of athens that can never secure that torment estate until he be lord and captain of the sea at this. none need wonder for who know not her royal majesty during her life by the incredible adventure of her royal navy and valiant soldier and seaman. captain of the sea. at this. none need wonder for who know not her royal majesty? during her life, by the incredible adventure of her royal navy and valiant soldier and seaman, notwithstanding all treachery at home, the protect and defend france and holland and reconquer ireland. yet all the world, by sea and land, both fear or love and admire good queen elizabeth, both to maintain and increase that incomparable honour, god be thank to her incomparable successor, our most royal lord and sovereign king james, this great philosopher have. leave this to his majesty and his kingdom. consideration that if the ten of the earth be proper to god, it be also due by sea. the king high way be common to pass but not to and his kingdom consideration that if the ten of the earth be proper to god, it be also due by sea. the king high way be common to pass but not to dig for mine or any thing. so england coast be free to pass, but not to fish. but by his majesty prerogative, his majesty of spain, permit none to pass the pope order, the pope order for the east and west indies for the east and west indies, but by his permission or at their peril. if all that world be so just they, it be no injustice for england to make as much use of she own shore as stranger do that pay to their own lord the ten, and not to the owner of. it be no injustice for england to make as much use of she own shore as stranger do that pay to their own lord the ten, and not to the owner of those liberty any thing to speak of, who subject may neither take nor sell any in their territory. which small tribute will maintain this little navy royal and not cost his majesty a penny and yet maintain peace with all foreigner and allow they more courtesy than any nation in the world afford to england? it be ashame to allege that holla^d be more worthy to enjoy our fish as lord thereof because they have more skill to handle it. then we as they can our wool and undress cloth, notwithstanding all their war and troublesome. worthy to enjoy our fish as lord thereof because they have more skill to handle it. then we, as they can, our wool and undress cloth, notwithstanding all their war and troublesome disorder, to get money to build this navy. he say how to get money to build this little navy who will not spare the one hundred penny of his rent and the five hundred penny of his good. each servant that take forty shilling wage, four penny, and every foreigner of seven year of age, four penny for seven year. not any of these. but they will spend three time so much in pride, wantonness or some superfluity. and do any man love the security of their estate? that of themselves will not be humble suitor. but they will spend three time so much in pride, wantonness or some superfluity. and do any man love the security of their estate, that of themselves will not be humble suitor to his majesty to do this of free will, as a voluntary benevolence or but the one half of this or some such other course as i have pround to diverse of the company, free from any constraint, tax, lottery or imposition. so it may be as honest and true employ as it be. project the poor mechanic in this king-would gain by it. then you may build ship of any proportion and number you please, five time cheap than you can do here and have good merchandise for their fraught in this unknown land to. then you may build ship of any proportion and number you please, five time cheap than you can do here and have good merchandise for their fraught in this unknown land, to the advancement of god glory, his church and gospel and the strengthen and relief of a great part of christendom, without hurt to any, to the terror of pirate, the amazement of enemy, the assistance of friend, the secure merchant, and so much increase of navigation to make england trade and ship as much as any nation in the world beside a hundred other benefit to the general good of all true subject and will cause thousand yet unborn to bless the time and all they that first put it in practice. contention for new-englands good. benefit to the general good of all true subject and will cause thousand yet unborn to bless the time and all they that first put it in practice. contention for new-englands good, not her good, now, lest it shall be obscure as it have be to private end or so weak undertake by our overween incredulity that stranger may possess it. while we contend for new-englands good but not england good, i have present it, as i have say, to the prince and nobility, the gentry and commonalty. hope at last it will move the whole land to know it and consider of it, since i can find they wood and half victual, with the foresay advantage, be this country plant, with what facility they may build and land, to know it and consider of it, since i can find they wood and half victual with the foresay advantage. be this country, plant with what facility they may build and maintain this little navy royal, both with honour, profit and content, and inhabit as good a country as any in the world. within that parallel which, with my life and what i have, i will endeavour to effect if god please and you permit. but no man will go from hence to have less freedom there then here, nor adventure. all they have to prepare the way for they will scarce. thank they for it, and it be too. well know there have be so many undertaker of patent and such share of they as have prepare the way for they will scarce. thank they for it. and it be too, well know, there have be so many undertaker of patent, and such share of they as have breed no less discouragement than wonder to hear such great promise and so little performance in the interim. you see, the french and dutch already frequent it, and god forbid they in virginia or any of his majesty subject shall not have as free liberty as they to conclude, be it not for master cherley and a few private adventurer with they. what have we there for all these inducement the necessity of martial power. as for they who, pride or covetousness lull asleep in a cradle of slothful carelessness, will they but consider how all we there for all these inducement the necessity of martial power. as for they who, pride or covetousness, lull asleep in a cradle of slothful carelessness, will they but consider how all the great monarchy of the earth have be bring to confusion, or but remember the late, lamentable experience of constantinople. and how many city, town and province in the fair rich kingdom of hungaria, transiluania, wallachia and moldavia, and how many thousand of prince, earl, baron, knight, merchant and other have in one day lose good life and honour, or sell for slave like beast in a market place, their wife, child and servant, slay or wander they know not whither, die or live in all extremity of extreme misery and calamity. sure they will not? beast in a market place, their wife, child and servant slay or wander they know not whither, die or live in all extremity of extreme misery and calamity. sure they will not only do this but give all they have to enjoy peace and liberty at home or but adventure their person abroad to prevent the conclusion of a conquer foe who common assault and best prevail where he find wealth and plenty, most arm with ignorance and security, though, the true condition of war be only to suppress the proud and defend the innocent, as do that most generous prince, sigismundus, prince of those country, against they who, under the colour of justice and piety to maintain their superfluity of ambitious pride, think all the world too. do that most generous prince, sigismundus, prince of those country, against they who, under the colour of justice and piety to maintain their superfluity of ambitious pride, think all the world too little to maintain their vice and undo they or keep they from ability to do any thing that will not admire and adore their honour, fortune, covetousness, falsehood, bribery, cruelty, extortion and ingratitude, which be worse than cowardice or ignorance and all manner of vildness, clean contrary to all honour, virtue and nobleness. john smith write this with his own hand. here follow certain note and observation of captain charles whitbourne. concern: new-found land which, although every master train up in fish can make their proportion of necessary according to their custom, yet it be not. note and observation of captain charles whitbourne concern new-found land which, although every master train up in fish can make their proportion of necessary according to their custom. yet it be not much amiss here to insert they that every one which desire the good of those action know they also beside in his book entitle a discovery of new-found land and the commodity thereof, you shall find many excellent, good advertisement for a plantation and how that most year this coast have be frequent with 250. sail of his majesty subject which suppose but 60. ton a piece. one with another they amount to 15000. ton and allow 25 man and boy to every bark, they will make 5000. person who labour return yearly to about 135000.. ton a piece. one with another they amount to 15000. ton and allow 25 man and boy to every bark they will make 5000.. person who labour return yearly to about 135000. pound sterling. beside the great number of brewer, baker, couper, ship-carpenter, net-maker, rope-maker, hookemaker and the most of all other mecanicall trade in england, the charge of let forth a ship of 100 tun with 40. person, both to make a fish voyage and increase the plantation, all these provision the master of purser be to be accountable, what be spend and what be leave with those which shall continue there to plant, and of the 40. thus provide for the voyage, ten may well be spare to leave behind they with 500 weight of biscuit. leave, with those which shall continue there to plant, and of the 40. thus provide for the voyage. ten may well be spare to leave behind. they with 500 weight of biscuit, 5. hogshead of cider or beer, half a hogshead of beef, 4 side of dry bacon, 4. bushel of pease, half a ferkin of butter, half 100 weight of cheese, a peck of mustardseed, a barrel of vinegar, 12. pound of candle, 2. peck of oatmeal, half a hogshead of aquavitae, 2. copper kettle, 1. brass crock, 1. frying-pan, a grindstone and all the hatchet, woodhook, saw, auger, etc. and all other iron tool, with the 8. boat and their implement and spare salt and what else they use, not in a readiness from year to hatchet, woodhook, saw, auger etc and all other iron tool with the 8. boat and their implement and spare salt and what else they use, not in a readiness from year to year, and in the mean time serve they to help to build their house, cleanse land and further their fish whilst the ship be want. by his estimation and calculation, these 8. boat with 22. man in a summer do usual kill 25000. fish for every boat, which may amount to 200000.. allow 120. fish to the 100. sometime they have take above 35000. for a boat so that they load not only their own ship but provide great quantity for sack or other spare ship which come thither only to buy the overplus, if such. for a boat so that they load not only their own ship but provide great quantity for sack or other spare ship which come thither only to buy the overplus. if such ship come not they give over, take any more when sometime there have be great abundance because there be no fit house to lay they in till another year. now most of those sack go empty thither which may as well transport man, provision and cattle at a easy rate as nothing, either to new-england or new-found land. but either to transport they for nothing or pay any great matter for their. liberty to fish will hardly effect so much as freedom as yet. nor can this be put in practice, as before i say till. nothing or pay any great matter for their liberty to fish will hardly effect so much as freedom as yet. nor can this be put in practice, as before i say, till there be a power there. well, plant and settle to entertain and defend. they assist and relieve, they, as occasion shall require. otherways those small division will effect little, but such miserable conclusion, as both the french and we too long have try, to our cost now common: 200000.. fish will load a ship of 100 ton in new-found land, but half so many will near do it in new-england, which carry to toloune or merselus. ^here the custom be small and the kintall less than 90. english pound weight and the prize when least 12.. will near do it in new-england which carry to toloune or merselus. ^here the custom be small and the kintall less than 90. english pound weight and the prize when least, 12. shilling the kintall which at that rate amount to 1320. l starling and the ship may either there be discharge or employ, as have be say, to refraught for england so that the next year she may be ready to go she fish voyage again at a far cheap rate than before. to this add but 12. tun of train oil which deliver in new find land be 10. l the tun make 120. l then it be hard if there be not 10000 of co^^fish which also sell there at 5. l the 1000 make. new find land be 10. l the tun make 120. l, then it be hard if there be not 10000 of co^^fish which also sell there at 5. l the 1000 make 50. l, which bring to england in sum place yield near half, so much more. but ^f at mers^lus it be sell for 16. d the quintal, as common it be and much dear. it amount to 1760. l, and if the boat follow the fish ^ll the 15. of october they may take 80000. more which with their train in newfound land at 4. l the 1000 will amount to 320. l which add to 1320. l with 120. l for oil and 10000 of corfish, 50. l and the overplus at merselus which will 4. l. the 1000 will amount to 320. l, which add to 1320. l, with 120. l for oil and 10000 of corfish, 50. l and the overplus at merselus, which will be 440. l, make the total 2250. l which divide in three part, according to their custom, the victualer have, for the former particular amount to 420. l, 751. l, so all the charge defray, he gain 331. l 11. s then for the fraught of the ship there be 751. l, and so much for the master and his company, which compare with the voyage have be make to new-england. you may easy find which be the better, though both be good. but now experience have teach they at new-plimoth, the facility of the fish. the voyage have be make to new-england. you may easy find which be the better, though both be good. but now experience have teach they at new-plimoth, the facility of the fish late. observe that in april there be a fish, much like a herring that come up into the small brook to spawn, and where the water be not knee deep, they will press up through your hand, yea, though you beat at they with cudgel, and in such abundance as be incredible, which they take with that facility. they manure their land with they when they have occasion. after those, the cod also press in such plenty, even into the very harbour. they have catch some in their arm and hook they so fast. three man. when they have occasion. after those the cod also press in such plenty, even into the very harbour they have catch some in their arm and hook they so fast. three man oft load a boat of two tun in two hour where before they use most to fish in deep water. the present estate of new-plimoth. at new-plimoth there be about 180 person, some cattle and goat. the present estate of the plantation at new-plimoth 1624.. but many swine and poultry, 32 dwell house whereof 7 be burn the last winter and the value of five hundred pound in other good. the town be impail about half a mile compass in the town upon a high mount they have a fort well build with wood loom and five hundred pound in other good, the town be impail. about half a mile compass in the town, upon a high mount, they have a fort, well build with wood, loom and stone, where be plant their ordnance. also a fair watchtower, partly frame for the sentinel, the place it seem be healthful. for in these last three year, notwithstanding their great want of most necessary, there have not one die. of the first planter they have make a salt work and with that salt preserve the fish they take, and this year have fraught a ship of 180. ton. the governor be one, mr william bradford. their captain miles standish, a breed soldier in holland. the chief man for their assistance be master isaak alderton and diverse. ship of 180.. ton. the governor be one mr william bradford. their captain miles standish, a breed soldier in holland. the chief man for their assistance be master isaak alderton and diverse other as occasion serve. their preacher be master william bruster and master john layford. the most of they live together as one family or household, their order of government. yet every man follow his trade and profession, both by sea and land, and all for a general stock out of which they have all their maintenance until there be a betwixt, the planter and the adventurer. those planter be not servant to the adventurer here, but have only counsel of direction from they, but no injunction or command. and all the master of family be partner. the adventurer. those planter be not servant to the adventurer here but have only counsel of direction from they, but no injunction or command. and all the master of family be partner in land or whatsoever, set their labour against the stock till certain year, be expire for the division. they have young man and boy for their apprentice and servant and some of they special family as ship-carpenter, salt-maker, fish-master, yet as servant upon great wage. the adventurer which raise the stock to begin and supply this plantation be about 70.. some gentleman, some merchant, some handicraft man, some adventure great sum, some small, as their estate and affection serve the general stock already employ be about 7000.. l by reason of which charge and many cross. some handicraft man. some adventure great sum, some small, as their estate and affection serve. the general stock already employ be about 7000.. l by reason of which charge and many cross. many of they will adventure no more. but other that know so great a design can be effect without both charge, loss and cross be resolve to go forward with it to their power, which deserve no small commendation and encouragement. these dwell most about london. they be not a corporation but knit together by a voluntary combination in a society without constraint or penalty, aim to do good and to plant religion. they have a precedent and treasurer. every year new choose by the most voice who order the affair of their court and meeting. penalty, aim to do good and to plant religion. they have a precedent and treasurer. every year new choose by the most voice who order the affair of their court and meeting and with the assent of the most of they undertake all ordinary business. but in more weighty affair the assent of the whole company be require. there have be a fish this year upon the coast, about 50. english ship, and by cape anne. there be a plantation, a beginning by the dorchester man which they hold, of those of new-plimoth who also by they have set up a fish work. some talk there be, some other pretend plantation. all who good proceed, the eternal god protect and preserve and these have be the true proceed. they have set up a fish work. some talk there be, some other pretend plantation. all who good proceed, the eternal god protect and preserve. and these have be the true proceed and accident in thos^ plantation. now to make a particular relation of all the act and order in the court, belong unto they of the anihilate old patent and procure new with the charge, pain and argument, the reason of such change, all the treaty, consultation, oration and dissension about the share and divide those large territory confirm of counsellor, elect all sort of officer disappear, letter of advice and their answer, disputation about the magazine and imposition su^ers for patent, position for freedom and confirmation with complaint of injury here, and also the mutiny examination. officer disappear, letter of advice and their answer, disputation about the magazine and imposition, su^ers for patent, position for freedom and confirmation with complaint of injury here, and also the mutiny, examination, arraignement, execution and the cause of the so oft revolt of the saluage at large, as many will have have, and it may be some do expect it will make more quarrel. then any of they will willing answer, and such a volume as will tire any wise man. but to read the content for my own part, i rather fear the unpartial reader will think this rather more tedious than necessary. but he that will be a practitioner in those affair, i hope, will allow they not only needful but expedient. but how ever if? will think this rather more tedious than necessary. but he that will be a practitioner in those affair, i hope, will allow they not only needful but expedient. but how ever, if you please, to bear with those error i have commit. if god please, i live, my care and pain. shall endeavour to be thankful. if i die, accept my good will. if any desire to be further satisfy, what defect be find in this, they shall find supply in i that thus free have throw myself with my mite into the treasury of my country. good, not doubt. but god will stir up some noble spirit to consider and examine if worthy columbus can give the spaniard any such certainty for his design when queen isabel country. good, not doubt, but god will stir up some noble spirit to consider and examine if worthy columbus can give the spaniard any such certainty for his design when queen isabel of spain set he forth with 15. sail, and though i promise no mine of gold yet, the warlike hollander, let we imitate but not hate who wealth and strength, be good testimony of their treasury. get by fish, and new-england have yield already, by general computation, one hundred thousand pound at the least. therefore, honourable and worthy country man, let not the meanness of the word fish distaste you, for it will afford as good gold as the mine of guiana or pot^ssie, with less hazard and charge and more certainty and facility. i s of the word fish. distaste you, for it will afford as good gold as the mine of guiana or pot^ssie, with less hazard and charge and more certainty and facility. i s, i s.