a accidence for young seaman or their pathway to experience. the captain charge. the captain charge be to command all and tell the master to what port he will go or to what height in a fight he be to give direction for the manage thereof. and the master be to see to the cunning. the ship and trim the sail. the master and his mate. the master and his mate be to direct the course, command all the sailor for steer, trim and sail the ship. his mate be only his second. allow sometime for the two mid-ship man that aught to take charge of the first prize: the pilot. the pilot, when they make land, do take the charge of the ship till he bring she. the two mid-ship man that aught to take charge of the first prize: the pilot. the pilot, when they make land, do take the charge of the ship till he bring she to harbour. the capemerchant and purser. the cape merchant and purser have the charge of all the caragasoune or merchandise and the purser do keep a account of all that be receive and deliver. but a man of war have only a purser, the gunner with his mate and quarter gunner. the master gunner have the charge of the ordinance shot, powder, match, ladle, sponge, cartrage, arm and firework and the rest, every one to receive his charge from he according to direction and to give a account of his store. the carpenter and his mate. sponge, cartrage, arm and firework and the rest, every one to receive his charge from he according to direction and to give a account of his store. the carpenter and his mate. the carpenter and his mate be to have the nail, clinch rove and clinch-naile, spike plate, rudder-iron, call, pintel and gudgeon, pumpe-naile, skupper-naile and leather saw, file, hatchet and such like and ever ready for calk bream, stop leak fish or splice the mast or yard as occasion require, and to give a account of his store. the beteswaine and his mate, the boatswain, be to have the charge of all: the cordage, tackle, sail, fid and marl, spike, needle, twine and saile-cloth and rig the ship, his mate, the command of the long boat for. be to have the charge of all the cordage, tackle, sail, fid and marl, spike, needle, twine and saile-cloth and rig the ship, his mate, the command of the long boat for the set forth of anchor, weigh and fetch home a anchor warp, tow and moor and to give a account of his store, the chirurgeon and his mate. the chirurgeon be exempt from all duty but to attend the sick and cure the wound, and good care will be. have he have a certificate from the barber-surgeon hall of his sufficiency and also that his chest be well furnish both for physic and chirurgery and so near as may be proper for that clime you go for, which neglect have be the loss of many a. his chest be well furnish both for physic and chirurgery, and so near as may be proper for that clime you go for, which neglect have be the loss of many a man life. the marshal: the marshal, be to punish offender and to see justice execute according to direction, as duck at yard, arm, hawl under the keel, bind to the capsterne or main mast with a basket of shot about his neck, set in the bilbowe and to pay the cobty or the morryoune. but the boy, the boatswain, be to see every monday at the chest to say their compass, which do they be to have a quarter can and a biscuit of bread. the corporal, the corporal, be to see the set and relieve. at the chest to say their compass. which do they be to have a quarter can and a biscuit of bread. the corporal. the corporal be to see the set and relieve the watch and see all the soldier and sailor keep their arm clean, neat and yare and teach they their use. the steward and his mate. the steward be to deliver out the victual according to the captain direction and mess they 4, 5 or 6 as there be occasion. the quarter maister. the quarter maister have the charge of the hold for stowage, rommage and trim the ship, and of their squadron for their watch. a sayne, a fisgigg, a harp, iron fishhook for porgos, boneto or dorados, etc. and rail line for mackerel. the. rommage and trim the ship and of their squadron for their watch. a sayne, a fisgigg, a harp, iron fishhook for porgos, boneto or dorados, etc. and rail line for mackerel. the cowper and his mate the cowper be to look to the cask, hoop and twig to stave or repair the bucket, baricoe, can, steepe-tub, runlet, hogshead, pipe, butt etc. for wine, beer, cider beverage, fresh water or any liquor. the coxeswaine and his mate the coxswaine be to have a choice to attend the skiffe to go to and again, as occasion, command the cook and his mate the cook be to dress and deliver out the victual he have, his store of quarter, can, small can, platter, spoon, lantern etc. and be to give his cook and his mate. the cook be to dress and deliver out the victual. he have, his store of quarter can- small can- platter, spoon, lantern etc. and be to give his account of the remainder. the (@). the swabber be to wash and keep clean the ship and map the liar. the liar be to hold his place, but for a week and he that be first take with a lie every monday. be so. proclaim at the main mast by a general: cry a liar, a liar, a liar. he be under the swabber and only to keep clean the beakhead and chain the sailor. the sailor be the ancient man for hoist the sail, get the tack aboard, hawl the bowline and steer the ship. and only to keep clean the beakhead and chain the sailor. the sailor be the ancient man for hoist the sail, get the tack aboard, hawl the bowline and steer the ship. the yonker, the younker, be the young man, call foremast man to take in the topsayle or top and yard furl and sling the main sail bouse or tryse and take their turn at helm. the lieutenant. the lieutenant be to associate the captain and, in his absence, to execute his place. he be to see the marshal and corporal do their duty and assist they in instruct the soldier and in a fight, the forecastle be his place to make good as the captain do. the half deck and the quarter master and mid-ship man. assist they in, instruct the soldier and in a fight, the forecastle be his place to make good, as the captain do the half deck and the quarter master and mid-ship man, but in the state man of war he be allow as necessary as a lieutenant on shore. how to divide the company: when you set sail and put to sea, the captain be to call up the company and the one half to go to the starreboord, the other to the larboard. as they be choose the master choose first one, than his mate another, and so forward till they be divide in two part. than each man be to choose his mate, consort or comrado, then divide they into squadron according to your number and another, and so forward till they be divide in two part, than each man be to choose his mate, consort or comrado. then divide they into squadron according to your number and burden of your ship, but care will be have that there be not two comorados upon one watch, because they may have the more room in their cabons to rest, to give a true arithmetical and geometrical proportion for the build of ship, be they all build after one mould, as also of their yeard, mast, cable, cordage and sail, be all the stuff of like goodness. a methodical rule may be project, but it will be too curious for this discourse and as much too troublesome either for the reader or author, but the principal. of like goodness. a methodical rule may be project, but it will be too curious for this discourse and as much too troublesome either for the reader or author. but the principal name of the timber about the build of a ship, according to his understanding, follow and how be frame they be fix. the principal name of the timber about the build a ship: first, lay the keel, the stem and starne in a dry dock or upon the stock and bind they with good knee. then lay all the flore timber and cut your limber hole above the keel to bring the water to the well for the pump. next your navel timber and bind they all with six foot scarf, at the least the garbel. limber hole above the keel to bring the water to the well for the pump. next your navel timber and bind they all with six foot scarf. at the least the garbel strike be the outside plank, next the keel. be sure you have a good sufficient kelson and then plank your outside and inside up with your top timber. but the lengthe, depth, rake and burden be so variable and different that nothing but experience can possible teach it. note for a covenant between the carpenter and the owner: a ship of 400 ton require a plank of four inch, 300. ton three inch, small ship two inch, but none less for clamp, middle band and sleeper they be all of 6. inch plank for bind within. a plank of four inch, 300. ton, three inch small ship, two inch but none less for clamp, middle band and sleeper. they be all of 6. inch plank for bind within the rest for the spar up of the work of square 3. inch plank: lay the beam of the orlope, if the be 400. ton, at ten foot deep in howl and all the beam to be bind with two knee at each end and a stardard knee at every beam end upon the orlope. all the orlope to be lay with square three inch plank and all the plank to be treenailed to the beam. six foot will be between the beam of the deck and orlope and ten port on each side upon the. inch plank and all the plank to be treenailed to the beam. six foot will be between the beam of the deck and orlope and ten port on each side upon the low orlope. all the bind between they shall be with three inch or two inch plank and the upper deck shall be lay with so many beam as be fit with knee to bind. they lay that deck with spruce deal of 30. foot long, the sap cut off, and two inch thick for it be better than any other then for the captain cabin or great cabin, the stearage, the half deck, the round house, the forecastle, and to bind a end with a capsterne and all thing fit for the sea. the smith work. cabin or great cabin, the stearage, the half deck, the round house, the forecastle, and to bind a end with a capsterne and all thing fit for the sea, the smith work, the carve, join and paint, except be the principal thing i remember to be. observe for a charter-party, betwixt, the merchant, the master and the owner- you have precedent of all sort in most scrivener shop. general sea term belong to ship: a dry dock, the stock, the keel, the esteem, the stern, the starne-post, the flower, the sleeper, rise, timber, garble, strike, her rake the fore, reach, plank, bind, knee, bolt, trunion, braser, rider, the orlope, the port, the bend, the bow, the hawse, the hawse, the deck, the partner, a flush, deck, fore and rake, the fore reach, plank bind, knee bolt, trunion, braser, rider, the orlope, the port, the bend, the bow, the hawse, the hawse, the deck, the partner, a flush deck fore and aft, the ram head, the knight, a half deck, a quarter deck, the bulk, the bulk head, the scuttle, the hatch, the hatch way, the hole in the come pitch, tarre, rosin, okum, calk. in the stearage room, the whip, the bittakell, the travas board, the compass, the fly, the needle, the lantern, the socket about the gun-roome, the tiler, the rudder, the pintel, the gudgeon, the bread-roome, the ship run, the powder-roome, the steward room, the cook room, the great cabbon, the gallery, a cabin, a hang cabin, a hamacke, the locker, the round-house, the. the gudgeon, the bread-roome, the ship run, the powder-roome, the steward room, the cook room, the great cabbon, the gallery, a cabin, a hang cabin, a hamacke, the locker, the round-house, the counter, the wayst, the wayst-boord, the gunwayle, station for the net, a chain through the station or breft-rope. what belong to the pump, the pump, the pump? well, the pump break the pump can the pump chain, the spindle, the box, the clap, the pump be choke, the pump suck the ship be. what belong to the before castle, the forecastle or prow, the beakhead, the bit, the fish-hooke, a loufe hook and the blot at the david end, the cat, cat head and cat hole. the ship draught the mast cap and yeard the bowl. beakhead, the bit, the fish-hooke, a loufe hook and the blot at the david end, the cat, cat head and cat hole. the ship draught the mast cap and yeard: the bowl spret, the pillow, the sturrop, the spret sail, the spret sail yard, the spret sail top mast, the spret sail top sail yard, the foremast, the fore yard, the fore top, the fore top mast, the fore top sail yard, the fore top gallant mast, the fore top, gallant sail yard. coat and woulding for all mast and yard, grummet and staple for all yard, the trussell tree or cross tree, the main mast, the step in the kelson where it put its heel, as do also the before mast, the main yard, the main top. yard, the trussell tree or cross tree, the main mast, the step in the kelson where it put its heel, as do also the before mast, the main yard, the main top, the main top mast, the main top sail yard, the top gallant mast, the main top gallant sail yard. the truck or flag staff, the mizzen, the mizzen yard, the mizzen top mast, the mizzen top sail yard. in great ship they have two misens, the latter be call the boneaventu mizzen than the poop lantern and flag staff. when a mast be bear by the board, they make a jury-mast which be make with yard rouftree or what they can splise or fish together. the capsterne and other general phrase: the capsterne, the paul, the. by the board. they make a jury-mast which be make with yard rouftree or what they can splise or fish together. the capsterne and other general phrase, the capsterne, the paul, the whelp, the capsterne bar, a jeer capsterne, be only in great ship to hoist their sail. the can hook, sling and parbunkel, port and ringbolt and hook the skupper, the skupper, hole the chain, the steep tub a enter ladder or cleat. a boy, a can boy, a ship, crank side iron sick, spew her okum, a leak ship, the sheathe fur carry, wash and bream launch, carve, guild and paint a ship, ballast kintlage, cant coin stand, coin, roof tree, a grate net or false deck for your close fight. the rope name in a and bream, launch carve guild and paint a ship. ballast, kintlage, cant coin, stand coin, roof tree, a grate net or false deck for your close fight. the rope name in a ship: the enter rope, the boat rope, the bucket rope, the boy rope, guest rope, the cat rope, the port rope, the keel rope, the rudder rope, the top rope, the bolt rope, the breast rope be now out of use. the water line be concern the tackle and rig a ship. the tackle be the fore stay, the main stay the tackle, the mison stay, the collar, the main shroud and chain. the main top shroud, the fore shroud, the fore top shroud, the swifter, the mison shroud, the mison top shroud and their ratling. mison stay, the collar, the main shroud and chain, the main top shroud, the fore shroud, the fore top shroud, the swifter, the mison shroud, the mison top shroud and their ratling and the parel to all mast, the main hallyard, the main top sail hallyard, the top gallant sail halyard, the fore hallyard, the fore top sail hallyard, the mizzen hallyard and the spret sail hallyeard, the horse, the main sheat, the main top sail sheat, the main brace, the main top sail brace, the main bowl and bridle, the main top sail, the line, the truss, the lift, the earring, the cat, a jeer leatch line, the robins, clow, garnit, tie martlit, the most of all these be also belong to the foremast, mizzen and bowlespret. the truss, the lift, the earring, the cat, a jeer leatch line, the robins clow garnit tie martlit, the most of all these be also belong to the foremast, mizzen and bowlespret and have the same denomination after their mast. only the boulespret have no bolin and the mizzen sheat be call the starne sheat. they have all of they: pulley block, shiver and dead man eye, lanyeard casket and crow foot. a snap block be seldom use but in heave of good and ordinance there be also diverse other small cordage as head line, the knauling, gassit or furl line, marlines, rop, yearn, caburne, sinnet, paunch and such like the cable hawser or stream cable be most use in the water by the anchor when they be knauling gassit or furl line. marlines, rop, yearn caburne, sinnet, paunch and such like the cable hawser or stream cable be most use in the water by the anchor. when they be too short they shoot one into another. when they be gall or break they splice they. when that way unserviceable they serve for junke fendor and braded placket for breast of defence and then as the rest of the overworn tackle for rope yarn, caburne, sinnit, a okum sheep foot be a stay in settle, a top mast and a give in stay the tackle when they be charge with good term for the anchor. the anchor have a stock, a ring, a shank, a flouke. the great in every ship be call the sheet anchor. tackle when they be charge with good term for the anchor. the anchor have a stock, a ring, a shank, a flouke, the great in every ship be. call the sheet anchor, the rest anchor, a stream anchor, grapple or kedger. bend your cable to your anchor the name of the sail, the main sail, the fore sail, call sometime the before course, the main course or a pair of course. each of they have a bonnet and a drabler: the main top sail, the top gallant sail and in a fair gale your stud sail than your mison, your mizzen top sail, your spret sail and spret sail, top sail, a drift sail, a crosiack, a net sail, twyne, a monk seam, a round seam, a suit. than your mison, your mizzen top sail, your spret sail and spret sail. top sail, a drift sail, a crosiack, a net sail twyne, a monk seam, a round seam, a suit of sail, a shift of sail, top, armour, way, clothes, pendant and colour. the term for the harbour, a channel, a bay, a road, a sound, a offen, a cove, a crike, a river, clear ground, very fast ground or good anchor, foul ground, osie ground, sandy ground, clay ground, a headland, a furland, a catch, a land mark for the wind^ a calm, a brese, a fresh gale, a pleasant jail, a stiff jail. it overblowe. a gust, a storm, a spout, a loumegaile, a eddy wind, a flake of wind, a turnado, a mouthsoune. a brese, a fresh gale, a pleasant jail, a stiff jail. it overblowe a gust, a storm, a spout, a loumegaile, a eddy wind, a flake of wind, a turnado, a mouthsoune, a herycano. term for the sea: a calm sea, becalm, a rough sea, a overgrow sea, the rut of the sea, roar of the sea, it flow, quarter flood, high water or a still water. a full sea, a spring tide ebb: a quarter ebb, half ebb, three quarter ebb. a low water, a dead low water, a nepe tide. a a ledge of rock, a breach, a shallow water, deep water, sound, fdome by the mark 3 0 d and a shaftment lest: 4 0 d. disimboage: a gulf, the froth of the sea. term. rock, a breach, a shallow water, deep water, sound, fdome by the mark 3, 0 d and a shaftment, lest 4, 0 d. disimboage, a gulf, the froth of the sea. term for steer starbord be the right hand larbord, be the left starboard. the helm: right your helm, a loufe, keep your loufe, come no near keepefull, stidy. so you go. well, port war no more. bear up the helm, go. roumy beyare at the helm. a fresh man at the helm. term of (@) a sail. how stand she to wind? ward or leyward? set he by the compass? he stand right a head or on the weather, bow or ley bow, out with all your sail. a stydy man to the helm, sit close to. set he by the compass. he stand right a head, or on the weather. bow or ley, bow out with all your sail. a stydy man to the helm, sit close to keep her stydie. give chase or fetch he up. he hold his own. no, we gather on he out. go his flag and pendance, or stream also his colour, his wast-clothe and top arm. he furle and sling his main sail in. go his spret sail and mizzen. he make ready his close fight fore and after. well, we shall reach he by and by what be all ready, yea, yea, every man to his charge. dowse your top sail, salute he for the sea hale. he. whence your ship of spain, whence be you of. by what be all ready. yea, yea, every man to his charge. dowse your top sail. salute he for the sea. hale he, whence your ship of spain, whence be you of england, be you merchant or man of war, we be of the sea. he wayse we to leyward for the king of spain and keep his loufe. give he a chase piece, a broad side, and run a head. make ready to tack about. give he your stern piece. be yare at helm, hale he with a noise of trumpet. we be shoot through and through and between wind and water. try the pump master. let we breathe and refresh a little. sling a man overboard to stop the leak. do do be all ready again. and through and between wind and water. try the pump master. let we breathe and refresh a little. sling a man overboard to stop the leak. do do be all ready again. yea, yea, bear up close with he with all your great and small shot charge he board, he on his wether quarter. lash fast your graplin and shear off. then run stemlin the mid ship, board and board or thwart the hawse. we be foul on each other, the ship on fire, cut any thing to get clear and smother the fire with wet clothes. we be clear and the fire be out. god be thank. the day be spend. let we consult surgeon, look to the wound, wind up the slay with each a weight. clothes. we be clear and the fire be out. god be thank, the day be spend. let we consult surgeon. look to the wound, wind up the slay with each a weight or bullet at his head and foot. give three piece for their funeral. swabber, make clean the ship purser, record their name, watch, be vigilant to keep your birth to windward and that we lose. he not in the night. gunner, sponge your ordinance soldier, scour your piece, carpenter about your leak, boteson and the rest. repair the sail and shroud. cook, see you observe your direction against the morning. watch boy, holla, master, holla, be the kettleboyled. yea, yea, boatswain. call up the man to prayer and breakfast. boy, fetch my cellar of bottle a. observe your direction against the morning. watch boy holla, master, holla, be the kettleboyled, yea, yea, boatswain, call up the man to prayer and breakfast boy, fetch my cellar of bottle. a health to you all. fore and after. courage, my heart for a fresh charge, master, lay he a board. loufe for loufe, mid ship man, see the top and yard well, mane with stone and brass ball to enter, they in the shroud, and every squadron else at their best advantage. sound drum and trumpet and st george for england. they hang out a flag of truce. stand in with he hale, he a main, a base, or take in his flag, strike their sail and come aboard with the captain, purser and gunner, with your. flag of truce, stand in with he hale, he a main, a base, or take in his flag. strike their sail and come aboard with the captain, purser and gunner, with your commission cocket or bill of load out. go their boat. they be launch from the ship side. entertain they with a general cry: god save the captain and all the company with the trumpet sound, examine they in particular and then conclude your condition with feast, freedom or punishment as you find occasion other way. if you surprise he or enter perforce you may stow the man rifle, pillage or sack and cry a prize to call a council in a fleet, there be the council of war and the common council which hang their flag. stow the man, rifle, pillage or sack and cry a prize to call a council. in a fleet there be the council of war and the common council which hang their flag out in the main shroud or the mizzen. nor between two navy they use often especial in a harbour or road where they be at anchor to fill old bark with pitch, tar, train oil, linsed oil, brimstone, rosin reed and dry wood and sutet combustible thing. sometime they link three or four together, tow together in the night and put a drift as they find occasion to pass a fort. some will make both ship and sail all black, but if the fort keep but a fire on the other side and all their piece. they find occasion to pass a fort, some will make both ship and sail all black. but if the fort keep but a fire on the other side and all their piece point blank with the fire. if they discharge what be betwixt they and the fire, the shot will hit if the rule be true. observe to conclude: there be as many stratagim, advantage and invention to be use as you find occasion, and therefore experience must be the best tutor. concern: sail or work of a ship. bend your passerado to the mayne-sayle. get the sail to the yard about your gear on all hand. hoist your sail half mast high. make ready to set sail across your yard. bring your cable to the capsterne boatswain. the sail to the yard about your gear on all hand. hoist your sail half mast high. make ready to set sail across your yard. bring your cable to the capsterne boatswain. fetch a anchor aboard, break ground or way anchor. heave a head man into the top man upon the yard. come be the anchor a pike. heave out your topsail, haule your sheet. what be the anchor away? yea, yea, let fall your fore sail. who at the helm there? coil your cable in small slake. haul the cat. a bitter belay, loufe, fast your anchor with your shank painter. stow the boat, let sail your main sail. on with your bonnet and drabbler steer. study before the wind, the wind veare. get your starboard tack. your anchor with your shank painter. stow the boat, let sail your main sail, on with your bonnet and drabbler steer. study before the wind: the wind veare. get your starboard tack aboard, haul off your ley sheat, overhawle the ease your main. brase out with your spret-saile. flat the fore sheet, pike up the mizzen or brade it. the ship will not wayer lour the main top sail, fear a fathom of your sheet. a fly sheate, a fair wind and a boon voyage. the wind shrink. get your tack close aboard. make ready your loufe howk and to take off your bonnit and drabbler. haul close your main bowline. it overca we shall have wind. sattle your top sail, take in the spret sail, in with loufe howk and to take off your bonnit and drabbler haul. close your main bowline. it overca. we shall have wind. sattle your top sail, take in the spret sail. in with your topsail. lower your main sail, tallow under the barrel. in with your main sail. lower the fore sail. the sail be split. brade up, close all your sail. lash sure the ordinance strike your top mast to the cap. make sure your sheep foot a storm hull. lash sure the helm lie. to try our drift. how cape the ship. the ship spoune before the wind. she lust she lie under the sea. try she with a crose-jacke. bowse it up with the out looker. she will founder in the sea. run on shore split. before the wind she lust, she lie under the sea. try she with a crose-jacke, bowse it up with the out looker, she will founder in the sea. run on shore. split or billage on a rock, a wrack, put out a goose-winge or a hullocke of a sail, fair weather. set your fore sail out with all your sail. get your larbord tack aboard. haul off your starboard sheat, go large, lask ware. yawn the ship at, stay at backe-stayes over. set the ship flat about. handle your sail or trim your sail. let rise your tack. haul of your sheat. rocke-weede adrift or float one to the top to look out for land, a ship. wake the water way the weather, bow, weather, coil. lay the your tack, haul of your sheat. rocke-weede adrift or float one to the top to look out for land, a ship, wake the water way, the weather bow, weather coil. lay the ship by the ley and heave the lead. try the dipsie line. bring the ship to right. fetch the log-line to try what way she make. turn up the minute glass. observe the height. land to make land, how bear it, set it by the compass. clear your leach-line. bear in, bear off or stand off or shear off. bear up outward. bind homeward, bind. shorten your sail. take in your sail, come to a anchor under the ley of the weather shore, the ley shore neal too. look to your. stop your anchor, come home. bind, shorten your sail, take in your sail, come to a anchor under the ley of the weather. shore the ley, shore, neal too. look to your, stop your anchor, come home the ship. a drift, veer out more cable, let fall your sheet. anchor. land-locked, more the ship. a good voyage. arm arm, a skiff, a frigate, a pinnace. a ship, a squadron, a fleet. when you ride among many ship, pike your yard the term of the boat to the boat or skiff belong: oar, a mast, a sail, a stay, a halyard, sheat, a boat-hook, thought thoule, rudder, iron, bail, a trar-pawling or yawn, carling, carling-knee for the david the boates-wayles, a dridge to row a spell, hold-water, trim the boat. who s^^es amen one. a boat-hook, thought thoule, rudder, iron, bail, a trar-pawling or yawn carling, carling-knee for the david the boates-wayles. a dridge to row, a spell hold-water, trim the boat who s^^es? amen one and all for a dram of the bottle. the name of all form of great ordinance and piece and their appurtenance: a basillisco, double cannon, cannon pedrea, demi cannon, culverin, sakar, minion, falcon, falconet, rabbenet, murderer, sling, chamber, currior, hargabusacrock, musket, bastard, musket, coliner, carbine, crabut, long pistol, short pistol, charge, cartrage, match, sponge, ladle, rammer, rammer, head tomkin, a worm, a boar, a barrel, taper, bear, hunicome, lintstocke, carrage truke, linch-pin, trunion, axell-tree, bed, coyning. the piece in the prow, the chase piece in the stern, the quarter piece, the mid-ship, the upper tire, the. barrel, taper bear, hunicome, lintstocke, carrage truke, linch-pin, trunion, axell-tree bed, coyning, the piece in the prow, the chase piece in the stern, the quarter piece, the mid-ship, the upper tire, the middle tire, the low tire, their fid and lead to keep dry the touch hole, travers. a piece dispect, a piece compass, caliper, a gunner quadrant, a hand spike, a crow of iron to mount a piece, to dismount a piece. a dark lantern, a budge barrel, a horn, a prime iron wire. round-shot, crosse-barre-shot, chayne-shot langrill shot a case, case-shot, lead melt, ladle, mould bullet bag, musket shot, colyver shoot, quarter shoot, pistol shot, poison bullet, brass ball, iron ball, granado, trunk of wild fire, pike of wild fire, arrow of wild fire, pot of. mould bullet bag, musket shot, colyver shoot, quarter shoot, pistol shot, poison bullet, brass ball, iron ball, granado, trunk of wild fire, pike of wild fire, arrow of wild fire, pot of wild fire or dragoun to cloy a piece, to load a piece, to poison a piece, hook for gunner or tackle. concern the shoot of great ordinance. concern the particular theorme or term for great ordnance as the concave trunk, cylinder, the soul or bear of a piece, to know whether she be equal, bore, camber, taper or belbor, the several name of her mettle, the thinness and thickness, her carnooze or base ring at her britch, her shaft or chase, her trunnion mousell-rings at her mouth to dispart. she know she level point blank and mettle the thinness and thickness, her carnooze or base ring at her britch, her shaft or chase, her trunnion mousell-rings at her mouth to dispart. she know she level, point blank and best at random, her fortification, the difference of powder, be it serpentine or corn powder, if she be well mount upon a level, plot-form or no, beside there be so many uncertain accident, both in the piece shot and powder, the ground, the air, and difference in proportion. they can no certain artificial rule be proscribe. those proportion follow. be near the matter. but for your better satisfaction, read mr dig his pantrymetria, mr smith or mr burn art of gunry, or mr robert nortons exposition upon master dig. any of these will show you the for your better satisfaction, read mr dig his pantrymetria, mr smith or mr burn art of gunry or mr robert nortons exposition upon master dig. any of these will show you the theoric, but to be a good gunner you must learn it by practice. the gunner scale be make in brass at tower hill with prospective glass and many other instrument by mr bates. note that seldom in any ship they use any ordinance great than a demi cannon. how they divide their share in a man ^ of war, the ship have one three part, the victule the other three, the other three part be for the company and this be subdivide thus share: the captain have 9, the master have 7.. the mate have 5.. part the victule, the other three, the other three part be for the company and this be subdivide thus: share the captain have 9, the master have 7.. the mate have 5.. the gunner have 5. the carpenter have 5. the boatswain have 4. the marshal have 4.. the corporal have 3.. the chirurgeon have 3.. the quarter master have 4.. the steward have 3.. the cook have 3.. the coxon have 3.. the trumpeter have 4.. the sailor two or one and a half. the boy, a single share the lieutenant, what the captain will give. he or, as they can agree, they use to appoint a certain reward extraordinary to he that first descry a sail, if they take she, and to he that first enter. give he, or, as they can agree, they use to appoint a certain reward extraordinary to he that first descry a sail, if they take she, and to he that first enter she for to learn to observe the altitude, latitude, longitude, amplitude, the variation of the compass, the sun azimuth and almicanter, to shift the sun and moon, and to know the tide, your room, prick your card and say your compass, get some of those book, but practice be the best, mr wright. error of navigation, mr tap. seaman calendar, the art of navigation, the sea regiment, the seaman secret wagganour, mr gunter work, the seaman glass for the scale, the new attracter for variation, mr wright for the use of the globe, mr hewes for the sea regiment. the seaman secret wagganour, mr gunter work, the seaman glass for the scale. the new attracter for variation, mr wright for the use of the globe, mr hewes for the same good sea card, two pair of compass, a astrolabe quadrant, a cross staff, a back staff, a astrolabe, a nocturnal. if you have a divine, his pay be most common, both from the adventurer and the sailor. so also be the chirurgeon. advertisement for young commander, captain^^ and officer. young gentleman that desire command aught well to consider the condition of his ship, victual and company, for if there be more learner than sailor, how slight soever, many esteem sailor. all the work to save ship good and life must lie upon they especial. ship victual and company, for if there be more learner than sailor, how slight soever many esteem sailor. all the work to save ship good and life must lie upon they, especial in foul weather, the labour hazard, wet and cold be so incredible i can express it. it be not then the number of they that here will say at home what i can do. i can quick learn, and what a great matter it be to sail a ship or go to sea. sure those for a good time will do most trouble then good, i confess it be more necessary. such shall go, but not too many in one ship, for if the labour of sixty shall lie upon thirty as many time it do. good, i confess it be more necessary. such shall go, but not too many in one ship, for if the labour of sixty shall lie upon thirty, as many time it do they be so overcharge with labour, bruise and overstrayn themselves. for there be no dally nor excuse. with storm gust over grow sea and icy shore, they fall sick of one disease or other, and then, if their victual be putrify it, endanger all man of all other profession in lightning, thunder, storm and tempest. with rain and snow may shelter themselves in dry house by good fire and good cheer, but those be the chief time that seaman must stand to their tackeling and attend with all diligence their great labour upon the deck, many house by good fire and good cheer, but those be the chief time that seaman must stand to their tackeling and attend with all diligence their great labour upon the deck. many suppose any thing be good enough to serve man at sea, and yet nothing sufficient for they a shore, either for their health, for their ease or estate or state. a commander at sea shall do well to think the contrary and provide for himself and company in like manner. also serious to consider what will be his charge to furnish himself at sea with bedding, linen, arm and apparel, how to keep his table aboard, his expense on shore and his petty tally, which be a competent proportion according to your number, of these particular. with bedding, linen, arm and apparel, how to keep his table aboard, his expense on shore and his petty tally, which be a competent proportion according to your number. of these particular follow fine wheat flower, close and well, pack rise, currand, sugar, prune, cinnamon, ginger, pepper, clove, greeneginger oil, butter, old cheese or holland wine, vinegar, canary sack, the best wine, the best water, the juice of lemon for the scurvy, white biscuit, oatmeal, gammon of ba^on, dry, neat tongue roast beef, pack up in vinegar, leg of mutton mince and stew and close, pack up with butter in earthen pot to entertain stranger, marmelet sucket, almond comfit and such like. some it may be will say: i will have man rather to feast then fight. but up with butter in earthen pot to entertain stranger marmelet sucket, almond comfit and such like some it may be, will say: i will have man rather to feast then fight. but i say the want of those necessary occasion. the loss of more man then in any english fleet have be slay in any fight since 88. for when a man be ill, sick or at the point of death, i will know whether a dish of butter rice with a little cinnamon and sugar, a little mince meat or roast beef, a few stew prune, a race of green ginger, a flap-iacke, a can of fresh water brew with a little cinnamon, ginger and sugar be not better than a little poor john or salt fish. prune, a race of green ginger, a flap-iacke, a can of fresh water brew with a little cinnamon, ginger and sugar, be not better than a little poor john. or salt fish with oil and mustard, or biscuit butter cheese or oatmeal pottage on fish day, salt beef, pork and pease and six shilling beer. this be your ordinary ship allowance and good for they. be well if well condition, which be not always, as seaman can too well witness, and after a storm when poor man be all wet and some not so much a cloth to shift he shake with cold. few of those, but will tell you a little sack or aquavitae be much better to keep they in health than a little small beer. cloth to shift. he shake with cold. few of those, but will tell you a little sack or aquavitae be much better to keep they in health than a little small beer or cold water. although it be sweet now that every one shall provide those thing for himself, few of they have either that providence or mean, and there be neither alehouse tavern nor inn to burn a faggot in neither grocer, poulterie, apothocary nor butcher shop, and therefore the use of this petty tally be necessary and thus to be employ. as there be occasion to entertain stranger as they be in quality, every commander shall show himself as like himself as he can as well, for the credit of the ship and his settor forth. occasion to entertain stranger as they be in quality, every commander shall show himself as like himself as he can as well, for the credit of the ship and his settor forth as himself. but in that herein every one may moderate themselves according to their own pleasure. therefore, i leave it to their own discretion and this brief discourse and myself to their friendly construction and good opinion. john smith write this with his own hand.