the description of virginia by captain smith, virginia be a country in america that lie between the degree of 34 and 44 of the north latitude, the latitude the bound thereof on the east side be the great ocean. on the south lie florida, on the north francia, as for the west thereof the limit be unknown. of all this country, we purpose not to speak, but only of that part which be plant by the english man in the year of our lord 1606.. and this be under the degree 37., 38. and 39. the temperature of this country do agree well with english constitution. be once season to the country, which appear by this that though by many occasion our people fall sick, yet do they. recover by very small mean and continue in health, though there be other great cause, not only to have make they sick but even to end their day, etc. the summer be hot, as in spain, the winter cold, as in the temperature france or england. the heat of summer be in june, julie and august, but common the cool brief assuage the vehemency of the heat. the chief of winter be half december, january, february and half march. the cold be extreme sharp, but here the proverb be true that no extreme long continue in the year 1607.. be a extraordinary frost in most of europe, and this frost be find as extreme in uirginia, but the next year for 8. or 10. day of ill weather. other 14 day will be as summer. the wind here be variable, but the like thunder and the wind lightning to purify the air i have seldom either see or hear in europe. from the south-west come the great gust with thunder and heat. the northwest wind be common, cool and bring fair weather with it. from the north be the great cold, and from the east and southeast, as from the barmadas, fog and reins. some time there be great drought, other time much rain. yet great necessity of neither by reason we see not but that all the variety of needful fruit in europe may be there in great plenty by the industry of man, as appear by those we there plant, there be but one. entrance by sea into this country and the entrance that be at the mouth of a very goodly bay, the wideness whereof be near 18. or 20. mile. the cape on the southside be call ccpe henry in honour of our most noble cape henry, prince. the show of the land there be a white, hilly sand like unto the down and along the shore great plenty of pine and firre. the north cape be call cape charles in honour of the cape charles, worthy duke of york. within be a country that may have the prerogative over the most pleasant place of europe, asia, africa or america, for large and pleasant navigable river. heaven and earth never agree better to frame a place for man habitation be. of our constitution, be it full manure and inhabit by industrious people. here be mountain, hill, plain, valley, river and brook, all the country run most pleasant into a fair bay compass, but for the mouth with fruitful and delightsome land in the bay and river be many isle, both great and small, some woody, some plain, most of they low and not inhabit. this bay lie north and south, in which the water flow near 200 mile and have a channel for 140 mile of depth, betwixt 7 and 15 fathom hold in breadth for the most part 10 or 14 mile fron the head of the bay. at the north the land be mountainous and so in a manner from thence by a south-west line. so that the more southward, the far of from the bay be those mounetaine from which fall certain brook which after come to five principal navigable river. these run from the northwest into the south east and so into the west side of the bay, where the fall of every river be within 20 or 15 mile one of another. the mountain be of diverse nature, for at the head of the mountain, the bay, the rock be of a composition like milnstone, some of marble etc. and many piece of crystal we find as throw down by water from the mountain, for in winter these mountain be cover with much snow and when it dissolve, the water fall with such violence that it cause great inundation in. the narrow valley, which yet be scarce, perceive be once in the river. these water wash from the rock such glister tincture that the ground in some place seem as guild, where both the rock and the earth be so splendent to behold that better judgement than we may have be persuade they contain more than probability. the vesture of the earth in most place do manifest prove the nature of the soil to be lusty and very rich. the colour of the earth we find the soil in diverse place resemble fuller earth marvel and diverse other such appearance, but general, for the most part the earth be a black sandy mould, in some place a fat, slimy clay, in other place a very barren. but the best ground be know by the vesture it bear as by the greatness of tree or abundance of weed, etc. the country be not mountainous, nor yet low, but such the valley, pleasant, plain hill and fertile valley, one pretty cross a other, and water so convenient, with their sweet brook and crystal spring, as if be itself have devise they by the river. be many plain marsh contain plain, some 20, some 100, some 200 acre, some more, some less. other plain there be few, but only where the savage inhabit but all overgrow with tree and weed. be a plain wilderness, as god first make it. on the west side of the bay we say. be 5. fair and delightful navigable river, of which. we will now proceed to report the first of those river and the next to the mouth of the bay have his course from the west and by north. the name of this river they call powhatan, the river powhatan, the name of a principal country that lie upon it. the mouth of this river be near three mile in breadth, yet do the shovel force the channel so near the land that a sacre will overshoot it at point blank. this river be navigable 100 mile. the shoulde and sound be here, needless to be express, it fall from rock far west, in a country inhabit by a nation that they call monacan. but where it come into our discovery, it be powhatan, in the far place. that be diligent observe, be fall rock, shoal etc. which make it past navigation any high thence in the run downward the river be enrich with many goodly brook, which be maintain by a infinite number of small rundle and pleasant spring that disperse themselves for best service, as do the vein of a man body. from the south there fall into this river. first the branch, the pleasant river of apamatuck. next, more to the east, be the two river of quiyoughcohanocke, a little far be a bay wherein fall 3 or 4 pretty brook and creek that half entrench the inhabitant of warraskoyac than the river of nandsamund, and last the brook of chisapeack. from the north side be the river of chickahamania, the back river. of james town, another by the cedar isle where we live 10 week upon oyster, than a convenient harbour for fisher boat or small boat. at kecoughtan that so convenient turn itself into bay and creek that make that place very pleasant to inhabit. their cornefield be gird therein in a manner as peninsula. the most of these river be inhabit by several nation, or rather family of the name of the river. they have also, in every of those place, some governor as their king, which they call werowance. in a peninsula on the north side of this james town river be the english plant, in a place by they call james town in honour of the king most excellent majesty, upon which side be also many. place under the werowance, the first and next the river mouth be the kecoughtan. the several inhabitant who beside their woman and child have not past 20.. fight man, the paspaheghe on who land be seat? the english colony, some 40. mile from the bay, have not past 40.. the river call chickahamania, near 200.. the weanock 100. the arrowhatock 30.. the place call powhatan, some 40.. on the south side this river, the appamatuck have 60. fight man, the quiyougcohanock 25.. the warraskoyack 40.. the nandsamunds 200.. the chesapeack be able to make 100 of this last place the bay bear the name. in all these place be a several commander, which they call werowance, except the chickhamanians who be govern by the priest and their assistant. of their elder call caw-cawwassoughes. in summer no place afford more plenty of sturgeon, nor in winter more abundance of foul, especial in the time of frost. there be once: take 52 sturgeon at a draught, at another draught 68. from the late end of may till the end of june be take few but young sturgeon of 2 foot or a yard long. from thence till the midst of september. they of 2 or three yard long and few other, and in 4 or 5 hour with one net be ordinary. take 7 or 8, often more, seldom less. in the small river all the year there be good plenty of small fish so that with hook those that will take pain have sufficient. fourteen mile northward from the river powhatan r pamaunke be the river pamaunke, which be navigable 60 or 70 mile but with catch and small bark 30 or 40 mile far at the ordinary flow of the salt water. it divide itself into two gallant branch. on the south side inhabit the people of youghtanund, who have about 60 man for the inhabitant war. on the north branch, mattapament, who have 30 man. where this river be divide, the country be call pamavuke and nourish near 300 able man. about 25 mile low on the north side of this river be werawocomoco, where their great king inhabit. when captain smith be deliver he prisoner yet there be not past 40 able man, but now he have abandon that. and live at orapake by youghtanund in the wilderness. 10 or 12 mile low on the south side of this river be chiskiack, which have some 40 or 50 man. these, as also apamatuck, irrohatock and powhatan be their great king, chief, alliance and inhabitant. the rest as they report his conquest. before we come to the three river that fall from the payankatank r mountain, there be another river some 30 mile navigable that come from the inland. the river be call payankatanke. the inhabitant be about some 40 serviceable man. the three navigable river be call toppahanock. this toppahanock r be navigable some 130 mile. at the top of it inhabit the people call mannahoacke, amongst the mountain, but they be above the place we describe. upon this river, on the north side be seat a people call cuttatawoman, the inhabitant, with 30 fight man, high on the river. be the moraughtacund with 80 able man. beyond they toppahanock with 100 man, far above. be another cuttatawoman with 20 man, on the south, far within the river. be nautaughtacund have 150 man. this river also, as the two former be, replenish with fish and foul. the four river, be call patawomeke and be 6 or 7 mile in breadth. it be navigable, 140 mile and feed as the rest, with patawomek r many sweet river and spring which fall from the border hill. these hill, many of they be plant and yield no less plenty and variety of fruit. then the river exceed with. abundance of fish. this river be inhabit on both side. first on the south side, at the very entrance, be wighcocomoco and have some 130 man. beyond they sekacawone with 30.. the onawmanient with 100, then patawomeke, the inhabitant, with 160 able man. here do the river divide itself in to 3 or 4 convenient river, the great of the least be call quiyough, tread north west, but the river itself turn north east and be still a navigable stream. on the western side of this buy, be tauxenent with 40 man. on the north of this river, be secowocomoco with 40 man. some what further, potapaco with 20.. in the east part of the buy of the river be pamacacack with 60 man, after moy owance with 100 and last nacotchtanke with 80 able man. the river, 10 mile above this place, make his passage down a low, pleasant valley, overshadow in many place with high rocky mountain, from whence distill innumerable, sweet and pleasant spring. the five river be call and be of a less proportion r than the rest, but the channel be 16 or 18 fathom deep in some place. here be infinite skull of diverse kind of fish more than elsewhere. upon this river dwell. the people call acquintanacksuak and mattapanient. 200 man be the great strength that can be there, perceive, but they inhabit together and not so disperse as the rest. these of all other be find the most civil to give entertainment. thirty league northward be a river not inhabit yet navigable. bolus r for the red earth or clay, resemble bowl ammoniac, the english call it bolus. at the end of the bay, where the head of the bay it be 6 or 7 mile in breadth, there fall into it 4 small river, 3 of. they issue from diverse bog environ with high mountain. there be one that come north, 3 or 4. day journey from the head of the bay and false from. rock and mountain upon this river inhabit a people call sasquesahanock. they be seat 2 day high than be passage sasquesahanock for the discoverer barge, which be hardly 2 toon and have in it but 12 man to perform this discovery, wherein they lie above the space of 12 week upon those great water, in those unknown country, have nothing but a little meal or oatmeal and water to feed they, and scarce, half sufficient of that for half that time, but that by the savage and by the plenty of fish they find in all place they make themselves provision as opportunity serve. yet have they not a mariner or any that have skill to trim their sail, use their oar or any business belong to the? barge, but 2 or 3. the rest be gentleman or as ignorant in such toil and labour, yet necessity, in a short time by their captain, diligence and example teach they to become so perfect that what they do by such small mean. i leave to the censure of the reader to judge by this discourse and the annex map. but to proceed, 60 of those sasquesahanock come to the discoverer with skin bow, arrow, target bead, sword and tobacco pipe for present. such great and well proportion man be seldom see, for they seem like giant to the english yea and to the neighbour, yet seem of a honest and simple disposition with much ado, restrain from adore the discoverer as gods, those be the most strange. people of all those country, both in language and attire for their language it may well beseem their proportion sound from they as it be a great voice in a vault or cave as a echo. their attire be the skin of bear and the description of a sasquesa hanough wolf. some have cassock make of bear head and skin that a man neck go through the skin neck and the ear of the bear fasten to his shoulder, behind the nose and tooth hang down his breast and at the end of the nose hang a bear paw. the half sleeve come to the elbow be the neck of bear and the arm through the mouth with paw hang at their nose. one have the head of. a wolf, hang in a chain for a jewel, his tobacco pipe, 3 quarter of a yard long, pretty carve with a bird, a bear, a dear or some such devise, at the great end sufficient to beat out the brain of a man. with bow and arrow and club suitable to their greatness and condition, these be scarce know. to powhatan they can make near 600 able and mighty man and be pallisadoe in their town to defend they from the massawomekes, their mortal enemy. 5 of their chief werowance. come aboard the discoverer and cross the bay in their barge. the picture of the great of they be signify in the map: the calf of who leg be 3 quarter of a yard about and all. the rest of his limb, so answerable to that proportion that he seem the goodly man that ever we behold. his hair, the one side be long, the other shore close, with a ridge over his crown like a cock comb. his arrow be five quarter long, head with flint or splinter of stone in form like a heart, a inch broad and a inch and a half or more long. these he wear in a wolf skin at his back for his quiver, his bow in the one hand and his club in the other, as be describe on the east side, the bay be the river of tockwhogh and tockwhagh r upon it, a people that can make 100 man seat some 7 mile within the. river where they have a fort, very well, palisado and mantel, with the bark of tree next to they, be oziny with 60 man. more to the south of that east side of the bay, the river of rapahanock, near unto rapahanock r, kuskarawaock r wighcocomoco r, which be the river of kuskarawaock, upon which be seat a people with 200 man, after that be the river of tants, wighcocomoco, and on it a people with 100 man. the people of those river be of little stature, of another language from the rest, and very rude, but they on the river of acohanock, with 40 man, and they of accomack, 80 man. do accomack r equalize any of the territory of powhatan and speak his language who, over all those do, rule as king? southward they go to some part of chawonock and chawonock, the mangoag to search. they there leave by sr walter raleigh, for those part to the town of chisapeack have former be discover by mr heriots and sr ralph layne. among those people be thus many, several nation of sundry language that environ powhatan territory, the several language, the chawonokes, the mangoag, the monacans, the mannahoke, the masawomeke, the powhatan, the sasquesahanock, the atquanachuke, the tockwoghe and the kuscarawaoke, all those, not any one understand another, but by interpreter their several habitation be more plain, describe by this annex map which will present to the eye. the way of the mountain and current of the river, with their several turn, bay, shovel, isle, inlet and creek, the breadth of the water, the distance of place and such like. in which map observe this? that as far as you see the little cross on river, mountain or other place have be discover. the rest be have by information of the savage and be set down accord to their instruction of such thing which be natural in uirginia and how they use they. uirginia do afford many excellent vegetable and live creature, yet grass there be little or none. but what grow in low marsh for all the country be overgrow. why there be little grass with tree who dropping continual, turn their grass to weed. by reason of the rankness of the ground which will soon be amend by good husbandry. the wood that be most common be oak and walnut, weed with their fruit, many of their oak be so tall and straight that they will bear two foot and a half square of good timber. for 20 yard long of this wood there be 2 or 3, several kind, the acorn of one kind who bark be more white than the other, be somewhat sweetish, which be boil half a day in several water, at last afford a sweet oil which they keep in goard to anoint their head and joint the fruit they eat, make in bread or otherwise. there be also some elm, some black walnut tree and some ash of ash elm and elm they make soap ash. if the tree be very great the ash will be good and melt to hard lump. but if they be small it will be but powder and not so good as the other. of walnut there be 2 or 3 kind. there be a kind of walnut, suppose cypress wood- we call cypress because both the wood, the fruit and leaf do most resemble it. and of those tree there be some near 3 fathom about at the root, very straight and 50, 60 or 80 foot without a branch. by the dwell of the savage be some great mulberry tree and in some part of the country they be find grow natural mulberry in pretty grove. there be a assay, make to make silk and and sure the worm prosper excellent well, till the master workman fall sick, during which time they be eat with rat. in some part be find some chestnut. who wild fruit chestnut equalize the best in france, spain, germany or italy to their taste. that have taste. they all plumb. there be of 3 sort: the red and white be like our hedge plumb, but the other, which they call putchamin, grow as high as a palmeta, the fruit be like a meddler. it be first green, then yellow and red. when it be ripe. if it be not ripe it will draw a man mouth awry with much torment, but when it be ripe it be as delicious as a apricock. they have cherry and those be much like a damsen cherry but for their taste and colour we call they cherry. we see some few crab, but very small and bitter, of vine vine, great abundance in many part that climb the top of the high tree in some place. but these bear but few grape, but by the river and savage habitation, where they be not overshadow from the sun, they be cover with fruit, though never prune nor manure. of those hedge grape we make near 20 gallon of wine which be near as good. as your french british wine, but certain they will prove good, be they well manure. there be another sort of grape near as great as a cherry. this they call messaminne. they be fat and the juice thick. neither do the taste so well please, when they be make in wine. they have a small fruit grow on little tree husk like a chestnut, but the fruit most like a very chechinquaens small acorn. this they call chechinquamin, which they esteem a great dainty. they have a berry much like our gooseberry in greatness, colour and taste. those they call rawcomenes, and do eat they raw or boil, of these natural fruit they live a great part of the year which they rawcomens use in this manner. the. walnut chestnut acorn and how they use their fruit. chechinquaman be dry to keep. when they need they they break they between two stone, yet some part of the walnut shell will cleave to the fruit. then do they dry they again upon a mat over a hurdle. after they put it into a mortar of wood and beat it very small. that do they mix it with water that the shell may sink to the bottom. this water will be colour as milk which they call pawcohiscora, and keep it for their use. the fruit, like meddler walnut milk, they call putchamin. they cast upon hurdle on a mat and preserve they as prune of their chestnut and chechinquaman boil 4 hour. they make both broth and bread for their chief man or at their great feast. beside those fruit tree there be a white popular and another tree like unto it that yield a very clear and a odoriferous gum like turpentine, which some call balsam gum. cedar, saxafras tree- there be also cedar and saxafras-tree. they also yield gum in a small proportion of themselves. we try conclusion to extract it out of the wood. but nature afford more than our art. in the warry valley grow a berry which they call qcoughtanamnis, very much like unto capers. these they berry dry in summer. when they will eat they, they boil they near half a day, for otherwise they differ not much from poison. mattoume grow as our bent do in meadow, the seed be not much unlike to rye, though much small matoume. this they use for a dainty bread butter with dear suet during summer. there be either strawberry which ripen strawberry in april, or mulberry which ripen in may and june, raspise hurt, or a fruit that the inhabitant call maracock, which be a pleasant, wholesome fruit, much like a lemoned. many herb in the spring time. there be common disperse throughout the wood, good for broth and salad as herb, violet, purslin, sorrel, etc. beside many we use who name we know not the chief root they have for food be call tockawhoughe root. it grow like a flag in low, muddy, fresh. in one day a savage. will gather sufficient for a week. these root be much of the greatness and taste of potato. they use to cover a great many of they with oak leave and fern and then cover all with earth in the manner of a coal-pit over it on each side they continue a great fire 24 hour before they dare eat it raw. it be no better than poison and be roast, except it be tender and the heat abate, or slice and dry in the sun, mix with sorrel and meal or such like. it will prickle and torment the throat- extreme. and yet in summer they use this ordinary for bread. they have a other root which they call wighsacan, as wighsacan a root, other feed the body. so this cure their hurt and disease. it be a small root which they bruise and apply to the wound. pocones be a small root that grow in the mountain. pocones, a small root which be dry and beat in powder, turn red and this they use for swell ache, anoint their joint, paint their head and garment. they account it very precious and of much worth. musquaspenne be a root of the bigness of a finger and as red as blood in dry it. musquaspenne, a root, will wither almost to nothing. this they use to paint their mat target and such like. there be also pellitory of spain, safafrage, and diverse other pellitory- sasafrage simple- which the apothecary gather and commend to be good and medicinable. in the low marsh grow plot of onion, contain onion a acre of ground or more in many place, but they be small, not past the bigness of the top of one thumb of beast. the chief be dear. nothing differ from their chief, beast be dear. we in the desert, towards the head of the river, there be many, but amongst the river few. there be a beast they call much like a badger but use to live on tree as squirrel squirrel do their squirrel. some be near as great as our small sort of wild rabbit, some blackish or black and white, but the most be gray. a small beast they have they call assapanick, but we call they fly squirrel because spread their leg. and so assapanick, a squirrel, fly, stretch the largeness of their skin that they have be see to fly 30 or 40 yard. a opassom have a head like a swine and a tail like a rat and be of the bigness of a cat. under opassom her belly she have a bag wherein she lodge, carry and suck her young mussascus be a beast of the form and nature of our water rat, but many of they smell mussascus exceed strong of musk. their hare no big than our coney and few of they to be find. their bear be very little in comparison of those of muscovia and tartary. the beaver be as big as bear. the beaver a ordinary water dog, but his leg exceed. short, his fore foot like a dog, his hinder foot like a swan, his tail somewhat like the form of a racket, bare, without hair, which to eat the savage esteem a great delicate. they have many otter which as the beaver they take with snare and esteem the skin, great ornament and otter of all those beast they use to feed when they catch they. there be also a beast they call vetchunquoye, in the form of a wild cat. their fox be like our silver haired coney vetchunquoye fox dog of a small proportion and not smell like those in england. their dog of that country be like their wolf and can bark but howl, and their wolf not much big than our english fox martin. powlecat, weessel, martin, polecat, weasel and minx. and minx we know they have because we have see many of their skin, though very seldom any of they alive. but one thing be strange: that we can never perceive their vermin destroy our hen egg nor chicken, nor do any hurt, nor their fly nor serpent any way pernicious. where in the south part of america they be always dangerous and often deadly. of bird, the eagle be the great devourer. hawk bird there be, of diverse sort, as our falconer call they, sparowhawk, lanaret, goshawk, falcon and osperaye, but they all pray most upon fish patrridge. there be little big than our quail. wild turkey be as big as our tame. there be woosel or blackbird with red. shoulder, thrush and diverse sort of small bird, some red, some blue, scarce so big as a wren, but few in summer. in winter there be great plenty of swan, crayne, gray and white, with black wing, heron, goose, brant, duck, widgeon, dotterell, oxeies, parrot and pigeon. of all those sort. great abundance and some other strange kind to we, unknown by name, but in summer not any or a very few to be see. of fish we be best acquaint with sturgeon, grampus, fish porpus, seal, stingray, who tail be very dangerous- brette, mullet, white, salmond, trout, sole, plaice, herring, conyfish, rockfish, eel, lamprey, catfish, shade, perch of 3 sort, crab, shrimp, crevice, oyster, cocles and muscle. but the most strange fish be a small one. so like the picture of s george his dragon as possible can be, except his leg and wing and the todefish which will swell till it be like to burst when it come into the air. concern the entrails of the earth. little can be say for certainty there want good refiner for these that the rock take upon. they to have skill this way, take up the washing from the mounetaine and some moskered shine, stone and spangle which the water bring down, flatter themselves in their own vain conceit to have be suppose that they be not by the mean of that ore, if it prove as their art and judgement. expect only this. be certain that many region lie in the same latitude. afford mine. very rich, of diverse nature. the crust also of these rock will easy persuade a man to believe there be other mine than iron and steel, if there be. but mean and man of experience that know the mine from spare of their plant fruit in uirginia and how they use they. they divide the year into 5. season, their winter some call popanow, the spring cattapeuk, the summer cohattayough. how they divide the year. the care of their corn nepinough, the harvest and fall of leaf taquitock from september until the midst of november be the chief feast and sacrifice. then have they plenty of fruit as well, plant as natural as corn. green and ripe fish, foul and wild beast exceed fat. the great labour they. take be in plant their corn- for the country natural be overgrow with wood- to how they prepare the ground. prepare the ground, they bruise the bark of the tree near the root. then do they scorch the root with fire that they grow no more the next year. with a crooked piece of wood they beat up the wood by the root and in that mould they plant their corn. their manner be this: they make a hole in the earth with a stick and into it they put 4 grain of wheat and 2 of bean. these hole they make 4 foot one from another. their woman and child do continual keep it with weed and when it be grow middle high, they hill it about. like a hop-yard. in april they begin to plant, but their chief plantation be in may, and so they continue till the midst of june. what how they plant? they plant in april, they reap in august, for may, in september, for june, in october. every stalk of their corn common bear two ear, some 3, seldom any 4, many, but one and some none. every ear ordinary have betwixt 200 and 500 grain. the stalk be green, have a sweet juice in it, somewhat like a sugar cane, which be the cause that when they gather their corn green they suck the stalk. for as we gather green pease, so do they their corn be green, which excel their old. they plant also pease they call assetaman. which be the same. they call in italy their bean be the same the turk call garnanses. but these they much esteem for dainty. their corn they roast in the ear green and bruise it in a mortar of wood with a polt, lap it in roll in the how they use their corn leaf of their corn and so boil it for a dainty. they also reserve that corn late plant that will not ripe by, toast it in hot ash. the heat thereof dry it in winter. they esteem it be boil with bean for a rare dish they call pausarowmena their old wheat. they first steep a night in hot water, in the morning pound it in a mortar. they use a small basket for. their thames than pound again the great, and so separate by dash their hand in the basket, receive the flower in a platter, make of wood, scrape to that form with burn and shell, temper this flower with water. they make it either in cake, cover they with ash till they be, bake and then wash they in fair water. they dry, present with their own heat, or else boil they in water, eat the broth with the bread which they call ponap. the grout and piece of the corn remain by fan in a platter or in the wind, away the bran. they boil 3 or 4 hour with water, which be a ordinary food they call ustatahamen. but some, more thrifty than clean, do burn the core of the ear to powder, which they call pungnough, mingle that in their meal, but it never taste well in bread nor broth their fish and flesh. they boil either very tender how they use their fish and flesh, or broil it so long on hurdle over the fire, or else, after the spanish fashion, put it on a spit, they turn first the one side than the other till it be as dry as their jerkin beef in the west indies that they may keep it a month or more without putrefy. the broth of fish or flesh they eat as common as the meat in may. also amongst their corn they plant pumpeon, plant fruit and a fruit like unto a musk millen, but less and worse, which they call macock. these increase, exceed and ripen in the begin of july and continue until september. they plant also maracock, a wild fruit like a lemon, which also increase infinite. they begin to ripe in september and continue till the end of october, when all their fruit be gather. little else they plant, and this be do by their woman and child. neither do this long suffice they. for near 3 part of the year they only observe time and season and live of what the country natural afford from hand to mouth etc. the commodity in uirginia or that may be have by industry. the mildness of the air, the fertility of the soil and the situation of the river be so propitious to the nature and use of man as no place be more convenient for pleasure, profit and man sustenance under that latitude or climate. here will live any beast, as horse, goat, sheep, ass, hen- a proof- cattle will live well, etc. as appear by they that be carry thither the water. isle and shoal be full of safe harbour for ship of war or merchandise, for boat of all sort for transportation or fish etc. the bay and river have much marchandable fish and place fit for salt coat, build of ship, make of iron etc. muscovia and polonia do yearly receive many thousand for pitch tar soap. ash, rosen, flax, cordage, the commodity, sturgeon, mast, yard, wainscot, firre, glass and such like. also, swethland for iron and copper. france in like manner, for wine, canvas and salt. spain asmuch for iron, steele, fig, reason and sack. italy with silk and velvers, consume our chief commodity. holland maintain itself by fish and trade at our own door. all these temporize with other for necessity, but all as uncertain as peace or war. beside the charge, travel and danger in transport, they by sea, land, storm and pirate. then how much have virginia, the prerogative of all those flourish kingdom for the benefit of our land, whenas within one hundred mile all those be to be have either ready provide by nature or else to be prepare. be there, but industrious man to labour only of copper we may doubt be want, but there be good probability that both copper and better mural be there to be have for their labour. other country have it. so then here be a place, a nurse for soldier, a practice for martiner, a trade for merchant, a reward for the good and that which be most of all, a business most acceptable to god, to bring such poor infidel to the true knowledge of god and his holy gospel, of the natural inhabitant of virginia. the land be not populous, for the man be few. their far great number be of woman and child. within 60 mile of james town there be about some 5000 people, but of able man fit for their war, scarce 1500.. to nourish so the number, many together, they have yet no mean because they make so small a benefit of their land, be it never so fertile. 6 or 700, 700 man be the most be see together when they think to have surprise captain smith. a description of the people have be the most have be see together when they gather themselves to have surprise captain smyth at pamavuke have but 15 to withstand the worst of their fury, as small as the proportion of ground that have yet be discover be in comparison of that yet unknown, the people differ very much in stature. especial in language, as before be express. some be very great as the sesquesahamock, other very little as the wighcocomocoe, but general, tall and straight, of a comely proportion and of a colour brown when they be of any age, but they be bear white. their hair be general black, but few have any beard. the man wear half their head shave the the barber, other half long for barber. they use their woman who with 2 shell will grate away the hair of any fashion they please. the woman be cut in many fashion agreeable to their year, but ever some part remain long. they be the constitution very strong of a able body and full of agility, able to endure to lie in the wood under a tree by the fire in the worst of winter, or in the weed and grass in ambuscado in the summer. they be inconstant in every the disposition thing. but what fear constrain they to keep? crafty, timorous, quick of apprehension and very ingenuous. some be of disposition, fearful, some bold, most cautelous, all savage, general, covetous of coppeer bead and such like trash, they be soon move to anger and so malicious that they seldom forget a injury. they seldom steal one from another lest their conjurer shall reveal it, and so they be pursue and punish. that they be thus fear, be certain. but that any can reveal their offence by conjuration, i be doubtful. their woman be careful not to be suspect of dishonesty without the leave of their husband. each household know their own land and garden and most live of their own labour. for their apparel, the possession they be some time cover with the skin of wild beast, which in winter be dress with the hair, but in summer, without the better sort, use large mantle of dear their attire skin. not much differ in fashion from the irish mantle. some embroider with white bead, some with copper, other paint after their manner, but the common sort have scarce to cover their nakedness, but with grass, the leaf of tree or such like. we have see some. use mantle make of turkey feather so pretty wrought and weave with thread that nothing can be discern but the feather that be exceed warm and very handsome. but the woman be always cover about their midle with a skin and very shamefast to be see bare. they adorn themselves most with copper bead and painting their woman. some their ornament have their leg, hand, breast and face, cunning embroider with diverse work as beast serpent artificial wrought into their flesh with black spot in each ear. common they have 3 great hole whereat they hang chain, bracelet or copper. some of their man wear in those hole a small green and yellow colour snake near half a yard in length which crawl and lap herself about his. neck, often time familiar, will kiss his lip. other wear a dead rat tie by the tail. soon on their head wear the wing of a bird or some large feather with a rattle. those rattle be somewhat like the chape of a rapier, but less, which they take from the tail of a snake. many have the whole skin of a hawk or some strange soul stuff with the wing abroad. other a broad piece of copper and some the hand of their enemy. dry their head and shoulder be paint red with the root, bocone bray to powder, mix with oil. this they hold in summer to preserve they from the heat and in winter from the cold. many other form of painting they use. but he be the most gallant, that be the most monstrous to behold. their building and habitation be for the most part, by their building, the river or not far distant from some fresh spring. their house be build like our arbour of small young spring bow and tie and so close cover with mat or the bark of tree. very handsome that notwithstanding either wind, rain or weather, they be as warm as stoove but very smoky. yet at the top of the house there be a hole, make for the smoke to go into right over the fire. against the fire they lie on little hurdle of reed, cover their lodging with a mat, bear from the ground a. foot and more by a hurdle of wood. on these round about the house they lie head and point one by that she against the fire. some cover with mat, some with skin and some stark naked lie on the ground. from 6 to 20 in a house. their house be in the midst of their field or garden, which be small, plot, their garden of ground, some 20, some 40. some 100, some 200. some more, some less, some time from 2 to 100 of those house together or but a little separate by grove of tree near their habitation. be little small-wood or old tree on the ground by reason of their burn of they for fire so that a man may gallop a horse amongst. these wood any way, but where the creek or river shall hinder. man, woman and child have their several name. accord how they use their child, to the several humour of their parent. their woman, they say be easy, deliver of child. yet do they love child very dear. to make they hardy in the cold morning they then wash in the river and by paint and ointment so can their skin that after a year or two no weather will hurt. they, the man, bestow their time in fish hunt, war and the industry of their woman. such manlike exercise scorn to be see in any woman, like exercise, which be the cause that the woman be very painful and the man often idle. the woman and child do the rest of the work. they make mat, basket, pot, mortar, pound their corn, make their bread, prepare their victual, plant their corn, gather their corn, bear all kind of burden and such like their fire. they kindle present by chase a dry point, stick in a hole of a little square piece of wood. that fire, how they strike fire itself will so fire moss leaf or any such like dry thing that will quick burn. in march and april they live much upon their fish, wear and feed on fish. turkey. their order of. diet and squirrel. in may and june they plant their field and live most of acorn, walnut and fish. but to mend their diet some disperse themselves in small company and live upon fish, beast, crab, oyster, land, torteyses, strawberry, mulberry and such like. in june, julie and august they feed upon the root of tocknough, berry, fish and green wheat. it be strange to see how their body alter with their diet, even as the dear and wild beast they seem fat and lean, strong and weak. powhatan, their great king, and some other that be provident roast their fish and flesh upon hurdle, as before be express and keep it till scarce time. for fish and hunt and war they use much their bow and arrow. they bring their bow to the form of how they make their bow and arrow. we, by the scrape of a shell, their arrow be make some of straight young sprig which they head with bone, some 2 or 3 inch long. these they use to shoot at squirrel on tree. an other sort of arrow they use make of reed. these be piece with wood, head with splinter of crystal or some sharp stone, the spur of a turkey or the bill of some bird. for his knife he have the splinter, their knife, of a reed to cut his feather in form with this knife. also he will joint a dear or any beast, shape his shoe, buskin, mantle etc to make the off his arrow. he have the tooth of a beaver set in a stick wherewith he grate it by degree. his arrow head he quick make with a little bone, which he ever wear at his bracer, of any splint of a stone or glass in the form of a heart and these they glue to the end of their arrow with the sinew of dear and the top of deer horn. boil to a jelly they make a glue that will not dissolve in cold water. for their war also they use target that be round and their target and sword make of the bark of tree and a sword of wood at their back. but oftentimes they use for sword the horn of a dear put through a piece. of wood in form of a pickaxe, some a long stone, sharpen at both end, use in the same manner this they be wont to use also for hatchet, but now by truck. they have plenty of the same form of iron and those be their chief instrument and arm their fish. be much in boats. these they make of one their boat tree by bow and scratch away the coal with stone and shell till they have make it in form of a trough. some of they be a ell deep and 40 or 50 foot in length, and some will bear 40 man, but the most ordinary be small and will bear 10, 20 or 30.. accord to their bigness. instead of oar they use paddle. and stick with which they will row fast than our barge betwixt. their hand and thigh their woman use to spin the bark of tree, dear how they spin sinew or a kind of grass they call pemmenaw. of these they make a thread, very even and ready. this thread serve for many use as about their house apparel, as also they make net for fish for the quantity, as formal brade as we they make. also with it, line for angle, their, their fishooker hook be either a bone grate, as they knock their arrow, in the form of a crooked pin or fishook, or of the splinter of a bone tie to the cleft of a little stick and with the end of the line they tie on the bait. they use also long arrow tie in a line wherewith they shoot at fish in the river. but they of accawmack use staff like unto javelin head with bone. with these they dart fish swim in the water. they have also many artificial wear. in which they get abundance of fish. in their hunt and fish they take extreme pain, yet it be their ordinary exercise. from their infancy they esteem it a pleasure and be very proud to be expert therein and by their continual range and travel they know all the advantage and place. most frequent with dear beast fish, foule, root and berry at their hunt, they leave their habitation and reduce themselves into company, as the tartar do, and go to the most desert how they hunt place with their family, where they spend their time in hunt and fowl up towards the mountain by the head of their river, where there be plenty of game for betwixt the river, the ground be so narrow that little come. there which they devour. not it be a marvel they can so direct pass these desert some 3 or 4 day journey without habitation. their hunt house be like unto arbour cover with mat, these their woman bear after they with corn, acorn, mortar and all bag and baggage they use when they come to the place of exercise. every man do his best to show his dexterity, for by their excel in those quality they get their wife forty yard will they shoot, level or very near the mark, and 120 be their best at random at their hunt in the desert they be common 2 or 300 together. have find the dear, they environ they with many fire and betwixt the fire they place themselves and some take their stand in the midst the dear. be thus fear, by the fire and their voice. they chase they so long within that circle that many time they kill 6, 8, 10 or 15 at a hunt. they use also to drive they into some narrow point of land when they find that advantage, and so force they into the river where with their boat they have ambuscado to kill they. when they have shoot a dear by land, they follow he like blood, hound by the blood and strain, and oftentimes so take they hare, pattridge, turkey, or egg, fat or lean, young or old, they devour. all they can catch in their power. in one of these hunt they find captain smith in the discovery of the head of the river of chickahamania, where they slay his man and take he prisoner in a bogmire where he see those exercise and gather these. observation, one savage hunt alone. use the skin of a dear, one savage hunt alone, slit on the one side and so put on his arm through the neck so that his hand come to the head, which be stuff, and the horn, head, eye, ear and every part as artificial counterfeit as they can devise. thus shroud his body in the skin by stalk. he approach the dear, creep on the ground from one tree to another. if the dear chance to find fault or stand at gaze, he turn the head with his hand to his best advantage to seem like a dear also gaze and lick himself. so watch his best advantage to approach have, shoot he, he chase he by his blood and strain till he get he. when they intend any war, the werowance usual, their consultation, have the advice of their priest and conjurer and their ally and ancient friend, but chief, the priest, determine their rosolution, every werowance or some lusty fellow. they appoint captain over every nation. they seldom make war for land or good, but for woman and child and principal. for revenge, they have many enemy. their enemy, namely all their westerne country, beyond the mountain and the head of the river. upon the head of the powhatan be the monacans, who chief habitation be at russawmeake unto who the mouhemenchughes, the massinnacack, the monahassanuggs and other nation pay tribute. upon the head of the river of toppahanock be a people call mannahoack. to these be contributor the tauxsnitanias, the shackaconias, the outponcas, the tegoneae, the whonkentya, the stegarake, the hassinnungas and diverse other, all confederate with the monacans, though many different in language and be very barbarous, live for most part of wild beast and fruit, beyond the mountain from whence be. the head of the river patawomeke, the savage report, inhabit their most mortal enemy, the massawomekes, upon a great salt water which, by massawomekes, all likelihood be either some part of commada, some great lake or some inlet of some sea that fall into the south sea, these massawomekes be a great nation and very populous. for the head of all those river, especial the pattawomeke, the pautuxunte, the sasquesahanock, the tockwoughe, be continual torment by they, of who cruelty they general complain, and very importunate they be with captain smith and his company to free their offer of subjection they from these tormentor. to this purpose they offer food, conduct, assistance and continual subjection, to which he conclude to effect, but the counsel then present emulate his. success will not think it fit to spare he 40 man to be hazard in those unknown region have pass, as before be speak of, but with 12 and so be lose that opportunity. seven boat full of these, massawomek the discoverer, encounter at the head of the bay who target basket, sword, tobaccopipe platter, bow and arrow and every thing show they much exceedeed they of our part and their dexterity in their small boat, make of the bark of tree, sow with bark and well lute with gum, argue that they be seat upon some great water against all these enemy. the powhatan be constrain sometime to fight their chief attempt, be by stratagem, treachery or surprisal. yet the werowance, woman and child they put not. to death but keep they captive. they have a method in war and for our pleasure they show it. we and it be in this manner, perform at mattapanient. have paint and disguise themselves in the fierce, their manner of battle, manner they can devise. they divide themselves into two company, near a 100 in a company. the one company call the other powhatan, either army, have their captain, these as enemy, take their stand a musket, shoot one from another, rank themselves 15 a breast, and each rank from another 4 or 5 yard, not in file but in the open, betwixt their file, so as the rear can shoot as convenient as the front. have thus pitch the field from either part. go a messenger with. these condition that whosoever be vanquish, such as escape upon their submission in 2 day after, shall live, but their wife and child shall be prize for the conqueror. the messenger be no soon return. but they approach in their order, on each flank a sergeant and in the rear a officer for levitenant. all due keep their order, yet leap and sing after their accustom tune, which they use only in war. upon the first flight of arrow they give such horrible shout and screeche as though so many infernal hellhound can not have. make they more terrible when they have spend their arrow they join together pretty charge and retire every rank, second other as they get advantage, they catch their enemy by the hair of. the head and down he come, that be, take his enemy with his wooden sword, seem to beat out his brain, and still they creep to the rear to maintain the skirmish. the monacans decrease. the powhatan, charge they, in the form of a half moon, they, unwilling to be enclose, flee all in a troop to their ambuscado on who they lead. they, very cunninng, the monacans disperse themselves among the fresh man, whereupon the powhatan retire with all speed to their second, which the monacans see take that advantage to retire again to their own battle, and so each return to their own quarter. all their action, voice and gesture, both in charge and retire, be so strain to the height of their quality and nature. that the strangeness thereof make it seem very delightful. for their music they use a thick cane on which they pipe as on a recorder for their war. they have a great, their music- deep platter of wood. they cover the mouth thereof with a skin. at each corner they tie a walnut which meet on the backside near the bottom with a small rope. they twitch they together till it be so teach and stiff that they may beat upon it as upon a drum. but their chief instrument be rattle, make of small gourd or pumpion shell. of these they have base tenor, counter-tenor, mean and treble. these mingle with their voice. sometime 20 or 30 together make such a terrible noise as will rather affright. then delight any man, if any great commander arrive their entertain mean at the habitation of a werowance, they spread a mat, as the turk do a carpet for he to sit upon. upon a other, right opposite, they sit themselves then do all with a tunable voice of shout, bid he welcome. after this, do 2. or more of their chief man, make a oration, testify their love, which they do with such vehemency and so great passion that they sweat till they drop and be so out of breath they can scarce speak so that a man will take they to be exceed angry or stark mad. such victual as they have they spend free and at night. where his lodging be appoint, they set a woman, fresh, paint, red, with pocones and oil, to be his bedfellow. their manner of trade be for copper, bead and such like, for which they give such commodity as they have their trade as skin foul fish, flesh and their country corn, but their victual be their chief riches. every spring they make themselves sick with drink, the juice of a root they call wighsacan, and water whereof their physic they pour so great a quantity that it purge they in a very violent manner so that in 3 or 4 day after they scarce recover their former health. sometime they be trouble with dropsy swell, ache and such like disease for their chirurgery cure, whereof they build a stove in the form of a dove-house with mat so close that a few coal therein cover with a pot will make the patient sweat extreme. for swell also, they use swal piece of touchwood in the form of clove which prick on the grief, they burn close to the flesh and from thence draw the corruption with their mouth. with this root wighsacan they ordinary heal green wound. but to scarify a swell or make incision their best instrument be some splint stone, old ulcer or putrefy hurt be seldom see cure. amongst they they have many profess physician who with their, their charm to cure charm. and rattle with a infernal rout of word and action will seem to suck their inward grief from their navel or their grieve place. but of our chirurgeon they be so conceit that they believe any plaster will heal any hurt of their religion. there be. yet in uirginia no place discover to be so savage in which the savage have not a religion. dear and bow and arrow, all thing that be able to do they hurt beyond their prevention. they adore with their kind of divine worship as the fire, water, lightning, thunder, our ordinance piece, horse etc. but their chief god they worship be the devil, he they call oak and serve he more. their god of fear then love, they say they have conference. with he and fashion themselves as near to his shape as they can imagine. in their temple they have his image, evil favoured carve and then paint and adorn with chain, copper and bead and cover with a skin in such manner as the deformity may well suit with such a god. by he be common the sepulchre of their king, their body. be how they bury their king, first bowel, then dry upon hurdle till they be very dry, and so about the most of their jointe and neck they hang bracelet or chain of copper, pearl and such like as they use to wear their innards. they stuff with copper bead and cover with a skin hatchet and such trash. then lap they they very careful. in white skin and so roll they in mat for their winede sheet, and in the tomb, which be a arch make of mat, they lay they orderly. what remain of this kind of wealth their king have. they set at their foot in basket. these temple and body be keep by their priest for their ordinary burial. they dig a deep hole in the their ordinary burial earth with sharp stake and the corpse be lap in skin and mat with their jewel. they lay they upon stick in the ground and so cover they with earth. the burial end. the woman be paint all their face with black coal and oil. do sit 24 hour in the house, mourn and lament by turn with such yell. and howl as may express their great passion. in every territory of a werowance be a temple and a priest, 2 or 3 or more, their principal temple or place of superstition. their temple be at uttamussack, at pamavuke, near unto, which be a house, temple or place of powhatan. upon the top of certain red sandy hill in the wood there be 3 great house fill with image of their king and devil and tomb of their predecessor. those house be near 60 foot in length, build arbour wise after their build this place they count so holy as that but the priest and king dare come into they, nor the savage dare not go up the river in boat by it, but that they solemn cast. some piece of copper, white bead or pocones into the river for fear their oak shall be offend and revenge of they. in this place, common be resident 7 priest the chief differ from the rest in his ornament but inferior priest, their ornament for their priest can hardly be know from the common people. but that they have not so many hole in their ear to hang their jewel at the ornament of the chief priest, be certain attire for his head. make thus: they take a dozen or 16 or more snake skin and stuff they with moss and of weasel and other vermin skin, a good many. all these they tie by their tail so as all their tail meet in the top of their head like a great tassel. round about this tassel, be as it be a crown of feather, the skin hang round about his head, neck and shoulder and in a manner, cover his face, the face of all their priest, be paint as ugly as they can devise in their hand. they have every one his rattle, some base, some small. their devotion be most in song, which the chief priest begin and the rest follow. he, sometime, he make invocation with break, sentence by start and strange passion, and at every pause the rest give a short groan. it can not be perceive that they keep any day as more holy than other, but only in some great distress of want, fear of enemy, time of triumph, and gather together their time of solemnity, their fruit, the whole country of man, woman and child, come together to solemnity, the manner of their devotion, be sometime to make a great fire in the house or field and all to sing and dance about it with rattle and shout together 4 or 5 hour sometime. they set a man in the midst and about he they dance and sing. he all the while clap his hand as if he will keep time, and after their song and dance end they go to their feast. they have also diverse conjuration. one they make when their conjuration, captain smith be their prisoner, as they report, to know if any more of his countryman will arrive there and what he there intend the manner of it be thus: first they make a fair fire in a house. about this fire set 7 priest, set he by they, and about the fire they make a circle of meal. that do the chief priest attire as be express, begin to shake his rattle and the rest follow he in his song. at the end of the song he lay down 5 or 3 grain of wheat and so continue, count his song by the grain till 3 time they incircule the fire than they divide the grain. by certain number, with little stick lay down at the end of every song, a little stick. in this manner they sit 8, 10 or 12 hour without cease, with such strange stretch of their arm and violent passion and gesture, as may well seem strange to he. they so conjure who, but every hour expect his end. not any meat they do eat till late in the evening. they have finish this work and then they feast, he and themselves, with much mirth. but 3 or 4 day they continue this ceremony. they have also certain altar stone. they call pawcorance their altar, but these stand from their temple, some by their house, other in the wood and wilderness. upon this they offer blood, dear suet and tobacco. these they do when they return from the war, from hunt and upon many other occasion. they have also another superstition that they use in storm, when the water be rough. in sacrifice to the water, the river and sea coast, their conjurer run to the water side or pass in their boat. after many hellish outcry and invocation, they cast tobacco, copper, pocones or such trash into the water to pacify that god who they think to be very angry in those storm, before their dinner and supper, the better sort will take the first bit and cast it in the fire, which be all the grace they be know to use in some part of the country. they have yearly a sacrifice of child. such a one be at quiyoughcohanock, some 10 mile from james town, and thus perform fifteen, their solemn sacrifice of child, of the proper young boy between 10 and 15 year of age. they paint white, have, bring they forth. the people spend the forenoon in dance and sing about they with rattle. in the afternoon they put those child to the root of a tree by they all. the man stand in a guard, every one have a bastinado in his hand, make of reed, bind together this, make a lane between they all along through which there be appoint 5 young man to fetch these child. so every one of the five go through the guard to fetch a. child each after other by turn. the guard feareles beat, they with their bastinado and they, patient, endure and receive. all defend the child with their naked body from the unmerciful blow that pay. they sound, though the child escape all this while the woman weep and cry out very passionate, provide mat, skin, moss and dry wood as thing fit their child funeral. after the child be thus pass the guard, the guard tear down the tree branch and bough with such violence that they rend the body and make wreath for their head or bedeck their hair with the leaf. what else be do with the childron? be nonseene. but they be all cast on a heap in a valley as dead, where they make a. great feast for all the company, the werowance be demand the meaning of this sacrifice. answer that the child be not all dead, but that the oak or devil do suck the blood from their left breast who chance to be his by lot till they be dead, but the rest be keep in the wilderness by the young man till nine month be expire, during which time they must not converse with any, and of these be make their priest and conjurer. this sacrifice they hold to be so necessary that, if they shall omit it, their oak or devil and all their other quiyoughcosughe which be their other god will let they have no dear turkey corn nor fish, and yet beside he will make a. great slaughter amongst they. they think that their werowance and priest, which their resurrection, they also esteem: quiyoughcosughe, when they be dead, do go beyond the mountain towards the set of the sun and ever remain there, in form of their oak, with their head paint with oil and pocones, fine trim with feather and shall have bead, hatchet, copper and tobacco, do nothing but dance and sing with all their predecessor. but the common people, they suppose, shall not live after death. to divert they from this blind idolatry, many use their best endeavour, chief with the werowance of quiyoughcohanock, who devotion, apprehension and good disposition much exceed any in those country who, though we can not as yet prevail withal to forsake his false god. yet this do believe that our god as much exceed they as our gun, do their bow and arrow and many time do send to the precedent at james town man, with present entreat they to pray to his god for rain, for his god will not send he any. and in this lamentable ignorance do these poor soul sacrifice themselves to the devil, not know their creator of the manner of the virginian government. although the country people be very barbarous, yet have they amongst they such government as that. their magistrate for good command and their people for subjection and obey excel many place that will be count very civil. the form of their common wealth be a monarchical government, one as emperor rule over many. king or governor, their chief ruler be call powhatan and take his name of the principal place of dwell call powhatan, but his proper name be wahunsonacock. some country he have which have be his ancestor and come unto he by inheritance, as the country call powhatan, arrohateck, appamatuke, pamavuke, youghtanud and mattapanient, all the rest of his territory express in the map they report have be his several conquest. in all his ancient inheritance he have house build after their manner, like arbour, some 30, some 40 yard long, and at every house provision for his entertainment accord to the time. at werowcomoco he be seat upon the northside of the river pamavuke, some 14 mile from james town where for the most part he be resident. but he take so little pleasure in our near neighbourhood that be able to visit he against his will in 6 or 7 hour that he retire himself to a place in the desert at the top of the river chickahamania between youghtanund and powhatan. his habitation there be call orapack, a description of powhatan where he ordinary now reside. he be of parsonage, a tall, well proportion man with a sour look, his head somewhat gray, his beard so thin that it seem none at all his age, near 60, of a very able and hardy body to endure any labour about his person ordinary attend a guard of 40 or 50 of the tall man his country do afford every his attendance and watch night upon. the 4 quarter of his house be 4 sentinel each stand from other, a flight shoot and at every half hour one from the corpse guard do hollow unto who every sentinel do answer round from his stand. if any fail, they present send forth a officer that beat he extreme. a mile from orapake in a thicket of wood he have a house in which he keep his kind of treasure as skin, his copper, pearl and bead, which he store up against the time of his death and burial. here also be his store of red paint for ointment and bow and arrow. this house be 50 or 60 yard in length, frequent only by priest. at the 4 corner of this housestand. 4 image as sentinel: one of a dragon, another a bear, the 3 like a leopard and the four like a giantlike man. all make evillfavordly accord to their best workmanship. he have as many woman as he will, whereof, when he his wife, lie on his bed, one sit at his head and another at his foot, but when he sit, one sit on his right hand and another on his left. as he be weary of his woman, he bestow they on those that best deserve they at his hand. when he dine or sup one of his woman, before and after meat, bring he water in a wooden platter to wash his hand. another wait with a bunch of feather to wipe- they instead of a towel, and the feather when he have wipe be dry again. his kingdom descend not to his son nor child, but first to his brother, whereof he have 3. namely opitchapan, opechancanough, his successor and catataugh, and after their decease to his sister, first to the elder sister, then to the rest, and after they to the heir, male and female, of the elder sister, but never to the heir of the male. he, nor any of his people, understand any letter whereby to write or read only the law whereby he rule be custom. yet when he list his will be a law and must be obey, not only as a king but as half a god. they esteem their authority, he, his inferior king, who they call werowance be, tie to rule by custom and have power of life and death as their command in that nature. but this word, werowance, which we call and construe for a king, be a common word whereby they call all commander, for they have but few word in their language and but few occasion to use any officer more than one commander, which common they call werowance. they all know their several land and the tenor of their land habitation and limit to fish soul or hunt in, but they hold all of their. great werowance, powhatan, unto who they pay tribute of skin, bead, copper, pearl, dear turkey, wild beast and corn. what he command they dare not disobey in the least thing. it be strange to see with what great fear and adoration all these people do obey this powhatan, for at his foot they present whatsoever he command, and at the least frown of his brow their great spirit will tremble with fear and no marvel, for he be very terrible and tyrannous in punish, such as offend he. for example, he cause certain malefactor to be bind hand and foot, then have of many fire gather his manner of punishment. great store of burn coal. they rake these coal round in the form of a cockpit and in the midst they cast the offender to broil to death sometime. he cause the head of they that offend he to be lay upon the altar or sacrifice stone and one with club beat out their brain. when he will punish any notorious enemy or malefactor, he cause he to be tie to a tree and with muscle shell or reed the executioner out of his joint. one after another ever cast what they cut of into the fire. then do he proceed with shell and reed to case the skin from his head and face. then do they rip his belly and so burn he with the tree, and all thus themselves report they execute george cassen. their ordinary correction be to beat they with cudgel. we have see a man kneel on his knee and at powhatan command, two man have beat he on the bare skin till he have fall senseless in a sound, and yet never cry nor complain. in the year 1608 he surprise the people of payankatank, his near neighbour and subject. the occasion be to we unknown, but the manner be thus: first he send diverse of his man as to lodge amongst they that night than the ambuscado environ all their house, and at the hour appoint they all fall to the spoil 24 man. they. slay the long hair of the one side of their head with the skin case off with shell or reed they bring away. they surprise also the woman and the child and the werowance. all these they present to powhatan. the werowance, woman and child become his prisoner and do he service the lock of hair with their skin. he hang on a line unto two tree and thus he make ostentation of as great a triumph at werowocomoco, show they to the emglish man that then come unto he at his appointment. they expect, provision he to betray, they suppose, to half conquer they by this spectacle of his terrible cruelty, and this be as much as my memory can call to mind, worthy of note, which i have purposely collect to satisfy my friend of the true worth and quality of virginia. yet some bad nature will not stick to slander the country that will slovenly spit at all thing, especial in company, where they can find none to contradict. they who, though they be scarce, ever 10 mile from james town or at the most, but at the fall, yet hold it a great disgrace that amongst so much action, their action be nothing, exclaim of all thing, though they never adventure to know any thing, nor ever. do any thing but devour the fruit of other man labour, be for most part of such tender education and small experience in martial accident. because they find not english city, nor such fair house, nor, at their own wish, any of their accustom dainty with feather bed and down, pillow tavern and alehouse in every breathe place, neither such plenty of gold and silver and dissolute liberty as they expect, have little or no care of any thing but to pamper their belly, to fly away with our pinnace or procure their mean to return for england, for the country, be to they a misery, a ruin, a death, a hell. and their report here and their own action there accord. some other there be that have yearly stipend to pass to and again for transportation. who to keep the mystery of the business in themselves, though they have neither time nor mean to know much of themselves. yet all man, action or relation they so formal tune to the temporize time, simplicity, as they can make their ignorance seem much more than all the true actor can, by their experience and those with their great word, delude the world with such strange promise as abuse the business much worse than the rest. for the business be build upon the foundation of their feign experience, the planter, the money, tin and mean have still miscarry, yet they ever return. and the planters, so far absent, who can contradict their excuse which, still, to maintain their vainglory and estimation from time to time, they have? use such diligence as make they pass for truth, though nothing more false, and that the adventurer may be. thus abuse, let no man wonder for the wise, live be soon. abuse by he that have a fair tongue and a dissemble heart. there be many in virginia mere project verbal and idle contemplatour and devote to pure idleness. that though they have live two or three year in virginia, lordly, necessity itself can not compel they to pass the peninsula or palisado of james town. and those witty spirit, what will they not affirm in the behalf of our transporter, to get victual from their ship or obtain their good word in england to get their pass thus from the clamour and the ignorance of false informer. be spring, those disaster that spring in virginia and our ingenious verbalist be no less plague to we in uirginia than the locust to the egyptian, for the labour of 30 of the best only preserve in christianity by their strie, the idle liver of near 200 of the rest who live near 10 month of such natural mean as the country natural of itself afford. notwithstanding all this and the worst fury of the savage, the extremity of sickness, mutiny, faction, ignorance and want of victual, in all that time i lose but 7 or 8 man. yet subject the savage to our desire, obedience, and receive contribution from 35 of their king to protect and assist they against any that shall assault they. in which order? they continue true and faithful and as subject to his majesty, so long after, as i do govern there until i leave the country. since how they have revolt, the country lose and again replant and the business have succeed from time to time. i refer you to the relation of they return from virginia that have be more diligent in such observation. the proceed of the english colony in virginia take faithful out of the write of thomas studly, capemarchant anas todkill, doctor russel, nathaniel powel, william phetiplace and richard pot, with the labour of other discreet observer during their residence, chap 1. it may well be think a country so fair as virginia be and a people so tractable will long ere this have be quiet. possess to the satisfaction of the adventurer and the eternize of the memory of those that affect it. but because all the world do see a defailement, this follow treatise shall give satisfaction to all indifferent reader how the business have be carry where no doubt they will easy understand and answer to their question how it come to pass. there be no better speed and success in those proceed. captain bartholomew gosnold, the first mover of the first mover of the action this plantation have many year, solicit many of his friend but find small assistant at last prevail with some gentleman as mr edward-maria wingfield, captain john smith and diverse other who depend a year upon his project but nothing can be effect till by their. great charge and industry. it come to be apprehend by certain of the nobility gentry and merchant, so that his majesty, by his letter, patent give commission for establish counsel to direct here and to govern and to execute there. to effect this be spend another year and by that time three ship be provide, one of 100 tonn, another of 40. and a pinnace of 20.. the transportation of the company be commit to captain christopher newport, a mariner well practise for the western part of america, but their order for government be put in a box not to be open order for government, nor the governor know, until they arrive in virginia on the 19 of december 1606.. we set sail, but by unprosperous wind be keep six week in the sight of england, all which time mr hunt, our preacher, be so weak and sick that few expect his recovery. yet, although he be but 10 or 12 mile from his habitation, the time we be in the down, and notwithstanding the stormy weather, nor the scandalous imputation of some few, little better than atheist of the great rank amongst we suggest against he. all this can never force from he so much as a seem desire to leave the business, but prefer the service of god in so good a voyage, before any affection, to contest with his godless foe. who disastrous design can they have, prevail have even then overthrow the business. so many discontent do then arise, have he not, with the water of patience and his godly exhortation, but, chief, by his true, devote example, quench those flame of envy and dissension. we water. at the canary we trade with the savage. at dominica, three week we spend in refresh ourselu amongst these west-india isle. in gwardalupa we find a bath so hot as in it we boil porck as well as over the fire. and at a little isle call monica, monica, a unfrequented i will, full of bird we take from the bush with our hand near 2 hogshhead full of bird in 3 or 4 hour. in mevis, mona and the virgin isle we spend some time wherewith a loathsome beast like a crocadil, call a gwayn, tortose, pelican, parrot and fish. we daily feast go from thence in search of virginia. the company be not a little discomfort. see the mariner have three day, pass their reckon and find no land, so that captain ratcliff, captain of the pinnace, rather desire to bear up the helm to return for england then make further search. but god, the guider of all good action, force they by a extreme storm to hull all night. do, drive they by his providence to their desire, port obey and all their expectation. for never any of they have. see that coast, the first land they make, they call cape henry. where anchor their first land, mr wingfeild, gosnoll and newport, with 30 other recreate themselves on shore. be assault by 5 savage who hurt 2 of the english. very dangerous that night. be the. box open and the order read, in which barthelomew gosnoll, edward wingfeild, christopher newport, john smith, john ratliffe, john martin and george kendal be name to be the council and to choose a precedent amongst they for a year. who, with the council, shall govern matter of moment? be to be examine by a jury. matter of government but determine by the mayor. part of the council in which the precedent have 2 voice until the 13 of may. they seek a place to plant in than the council be swear m wingfeild be choose precedent and a oration make why captain smith be not admit of the council as the rest now fall. every man to work. the council contrive the fort, the rest cut down tree. to make place to pitch their tent, some provide clapbord to relade the ship, some make garden, some net etc. the savage often visit we kind. the precident, overween jealousy will admit no exeroise at arm or fortification. but the bough of tree cast together in the form of a half moon by the extraordinary pain and diligence of captain kendal, newport, with smith and 20 other be send to discover the discovery of the fall. and powhatan, the head of the river, by diverse small habitation they pass in 6 day. they arrive at a town call powhatan, consist of some 12 house, pleasant seat do a hill before it, 3 fertile isle about it, many of their cornefield. the place be very pleasant and strong. by nature of this place the prince be call powhatan and his people powhatan. to this place the river be navigable but high within a mile by reason of the rock and isle there be not passage for a small boat. this they call the fall. the people in all part kind entreat they till be return within 20 mile of james town. they give just cause of jealousy. but have god not bless the discoverer, otherwise then those at the fort. there have then be a end of that plantation. for at the fort where they arrive the next day they find 17 man hurt and a boy slay by the savage, and have it not chance a cross bar. shoot from the fort, assault by the savage. the ship strike down a bough from a tree amongst they, that cause they to retire. our man have all be slay, be secure, all at work and their arm in dry fat. hereupon the precedent be content. the fort shall be pallisadoe. the ordinance mount his man, arm and exercise for many be the assault and ambuscado of the savage, and our man, by their disorderly straggle, be often hurt when the savage, by the nimbleness of their heel, well escape what toil we have with so small a power to guard our workman. adays watch all night, resist our enemy and effect our business: to relade the ship, cut down tree and prepare the ground to plant our corn, etc. i refer to the reader consideration. six week be spend in this manner, captain newport, who be hit only for our transportation, be to return with the ship. now. captain smith, who all this time, from their departure from the canary, be restrain as a prisoner upon the scandalous suggestion of some of the chief envy his repute, who feign he intend to usurp the government, murder the council and make himself king. that his confederate be disperse in all the three ship and that diverse of his confederate that reveal it will affirm it. for this he be commit. 13. week. he remain thus suspect and by that time the ship shall return. they pretend out of their commisseration to refer he to the council in england to receive a check, rather than, by particulate his design, make he so odious to the world as to touch his life or utter, overthrow his reputation. but he much scorn their charity and public defy the uttermost of their cruelty. he wise prevent their policy, though he can not suppress their envy yet so well. he demean himself in this business as all the company do see his innocence and his adversary malice, and those suborn to accuse he accuse his accuser of subornation. many untruth be allege against he but be so apparent disprove beget a general hatred in. the heart of the company against such unjust commander. many be the mischief that daily spring from their ignorant yet ambitious spirit. but the good doctrine and exhortation of our preacher, mr hunt, reconcile they and cause captain smith to be admit of the council the next day. all receive the communion the day follow the savage voluntary desire: peace, and captain newport return for england with news. leave in cap newport, return for eng land, virginia 100, the 15 of june 1607.. anas todkill, john capper, james read blacksmith, jonas profit sailor, tho couper barber, john herd, brick layer, william garret bricklayer, edward brinto, mason, william love taylor, nic skot drum, with diverse other to the number of 105.. chap 2. what happen till the first supply? be. thus leave to our fortune it fortune that within tennedaies, the occasion of sickness, scarce ten amongst'vs can either go or well stand such extreme weakness and sickness oppress we, and thereat none need morvaile if they consider the cause and reason which be this. while the ship stay, our allowance be somewhat better by a daily proportion of biscuit which the sailor will pils to sell, give or exchange with the sailor abuse we for money, saxesras, surre or love, but when they depart there remain neither tavern, beerhouse nor place of relief, but the common kettle have. we be as free from all sin as gluttony and drunkenness. we may have be canonize for saint, but our precedent will never have be admit for engross. to his private otemeale sack oil, aquavitae beef egg or what not. but the kettle that indeed he allow, equal to be distribute, and that be half a pint of wheat and as much barley boil with water for a man a day, and this have fry some 26. week in the ships-hold, contain as many worm as grain, so that we may true call it rather so much bran than corn. our drink be water, our lodging castle in air, with this lodging and diet, our extreme toil in bear and plant palisado. so strain and bruise we and our continual labour in the extremity of the heat have so weaken we as be cause sufficient to have make we as miserable in our native country or any other place in the world. from may to september, those that escape live upon sturgeon and sea-crab 50. in this time we bury the rest. see the precedent project to escape these misery in our pinnace, abad, precedent by flight who all this time have neither feel want nor sickness. so move our dead spirit as we depose he and establish ratcliff in his place. gosnoll be dead, kendal, depose smith. new, recover martin and ratliffe be by his care, preserve and relieve, but now be all our provision, spend the sturgeon go. all help, abandon each hour, expect the fury of the savage, when god, the patron of all good, endeavour in that desperate extremity, so change the heart of the savage that they bring such plenty of their fruit and provision as no man want plenty unexpected. and now, where some affirm it be ill, do of the council to send forth man so bad provide, this incontradictable reason will show they plain they be too ill advise to nourish such ill conceit. first, the fault of our go be our own. what can be think fit or necessary we have. but what we shall find, what we shall want, where we shall be. we be all ignorant and suppose to make our passage in two month, with victual to live and the advantage of the spring to work, we wear at sea 5. month where we both spend our victual and lose the opportunity of the time and season to plant. such action. have ever since the world beginning be subject to such accident and every thing of worth be find full of difficulty, but nothing so difficult as to establish a common wealth, so far remote from man and mean and where man mind be so untoward as neither do well themselves nor suffer other but to proceed. the new precedent and martin be little belove of. weak judgement in danger and less industry in peace. commit the manage of all thing abroad to captain smith who, by his own example, good word and fair promise, set some to mow, other to the building of james town. bind thatch, some to build house, other to thatch they himself always bear the great task for his own share so that in short time he provide most of they, lodging neglect any for himself. this do see the savage superfluity begin to decrease, with some of his workman. ship himself in the shallop to search the country for trade. the want of the language knowledge to mamnage his boat with out sailor, the want of a sufficient power, know the multitude of the savage apparel for his. man and other necessary, be infinite impediment, yet no discouragement. be but 6 or 7 in company he go down the river to kecoughtan, where at first they scorn he as a starve man. yet he so deal with they that the next day they load his boat with corn. and in his return he discover and kind trade with the, the beginning of trade abroad, weraskoyk. in the mean time those at the fort so glut the savage with their commodity as they become not regard, smith perceive, notwithstanding their late misery, not any regard. but from hand to mouth the company be well recover, cause the to be provide with thing fit to get provision for the year follow. but in the interim he make 3.. or 4. journey and discover the people of chickahamine. yet what he careful provide, the rest careless spend. wingfield and kendal live in disgrace, see allthing at random in the absence of smith. the company dislike of their precedent weakness and their small love. the discovery of chickahamine to martin, never-mending sickness. strengthen themselves with the sailor and other confederate to regain their former credit and authority, or at least such mean aboard the be fit to sail as smith have appoint for trade, to alter her course and to go for england. smith unexpected return, have the plot, discover to he much trouble. he have to prevent it. till with store of fauken and musket. shoot he force they stay or sink in the river which action. cost the life of captain kendal. these brawl be so disgustful as some will say they be better forget. yet all man of good judgement will conclude it be better their baseness shall be manifest to the world than the business bear the scorn and shame of their excuse. disorder the precedent. and captain archer, not long after, intend also to have abandon the country, which project also be curb and suppress by smith the spaniard. never more greedy desire. another project: to abandon the country gold. then he victual, which find so plentiful in the river of chickahamine, where hundred of savage in diverse place stand with basket, expect his come. and now the winter approach, the river be come. so cover with swan goose, duck and crane that we daily feast with good bread, virginia pease, pumpion and putchamin, fish, soul and diverse sort of wild beast as fat as we can eat they, so that none of our tustaffaty humorist desire to go for england. but our comaedy never endure long without a tragedy. soon idle exception be mutter against captain smith for not discover the head of chickahamine river and tax by the council to be too slow in so. worthy a attempt. the next voyage. he proceed so far that with much labour, by cut of tree in sunder, he make his passage. but when his barge can pass no far he leave she in a broad bay out of danger of shot command. none shall go ashore till his return. himself with 2 english and two savage, go up high in a canoe. but he be not long absent. but his man go ashore. who want of government give both occasion and opportunity to the savage to surprise one george casson, and much fail not to have cut of the boat and all the rest. smith, little dream of that accident. be get to the mar. she be. at the river head, 20 mile in the desert, have his 2 man, slay as be suppose, sleep by the canoe while himself by fowl, seek they victual who find he be beset with 200 savage, 2 of they. he slay, still defend himself with the aid of a savage, his guide, who he bind to his arm and use as his buckler till at last drip into a bogmire. they take he prisoner. when this news come to the fort, much be their sorrow for his loss, few expect what ensue. a month, those barbarian keep he prisoner. many strange triumph and conjuration they make of he. yet he so demean himself amongst they as he not only divert they from surprise the fort but procure his own liberty and get himself and his company such estimation amongst they that those savage admire he as a demi god. so return safe to the fort once more. stay the pinnace her flight for england which till his return can not set sail so extreme be the weather and so great the the 3 project to abando the fort, frost his relation of the plenty he have see, especial at werowocomoco where inhabit powhatan that till that time be unknown. so revive again their dead spirit as all man fear be abandon. powhatan have send with this captain diverse of his man, load with provision he have condition, and so appoint his trusty messenger to bring but 2 or 3 of our great ordinance. but the messenger be satisfy with the sight of one of they discharge, run away, amaze with fear till mean, be use with gift to assure they our love. thus you may see what difficulty still cross any good endeavour and the good success of the business and be thus oft bring to the very period of destruction. yet you see by what strange mean god have still deliver it. as for the insufficiency of, they admit in commission that error can not be. prevent by their elector there be no other choice and all be stranger each to other. education, a true proof of god, love to the action, quality or disposition. and if any deem it a shame to our nation to have any mention make of these enormity, let they peruse the history of the spanish discovery and plantation, where they may see how many mutiny, discord and dissension have accompany they and cross their attempt, which be know to be particular man. offence. do take away the general scorn and contempt. malice and ignorance may else produce to the scandal and reproach of those who action and valiant resolution deserve a worthy respect. now, whether it have be better for captain smith to have conclude with any of. their several project to have abandon the country with some 10 or 12 of they we call the better sort, to have leave mr hunt, our preacher, m anthony gosnoll, a most honest, worthy and industrious gentleman, with some 30 or 40 other, his country man, to the fury of the savage famine and all manner of mischief and inconvenience, or starve himself with they for company, for want of lodging, or but. of two evil, the lesser be choose adventure abroad to make they provision, or, by his opposition, to preserve the action and save all their life. i leave to the censure of other to consider thomas studley, chap 3.. the arrival of the first supply with their proceed and return, all this time our care. be not so much to abandon the country but the treasurer and council in england be as diligent and careful to supply we. two tall ship they send we with near 100 man, well furnish with all thing can be imagine necessary both for they and we. the one command by captain newport, the other by captain nelson, a honest man and a expert mariner. but such be the leewardnesse of his ship that, though he be within sight of cape henry by stormy contrary wind, be the phoenix from cape henry force to the west indies, force so far to sea as the west indies be the next land for the repair of his mast and relief of wood and water. but captain newport, get in and arrive at james town not long after the redemption of captain smith, to who the savage every other day bring such plenty of bread, fish, turkey squirrel, dear and other wild beast. part they give, he as present from the king, the rest, he, as their market clerk, set the price how they shall sell. so he have enchant those poor soul, be their prisoner in demonstrate unto they the roundness of the world, the course of the moon and star, the cause of the day and night, the largeness of the sea, the quality of our ship, shoot and powder, the division of the world with the diversity of people, their complexion, custom and condition, all which he feign, how c. smith get his liberty to be under the command of captain newport, who he term to they his father, of who arrival it chance he so direct prophesy, as they esteem he a oracle. by these fiction he not only save his own life and obtain his liberty, but have they at that command, he may command they what he list, that god that create all these thing. they know their opinion of our god. he adore for his god, who they will also term in their discourse the god of captain smith. the precedent and council so much envy his estimation amongst the savage, though we all in general equal, participate with he of the good thereof that they wrought it into their understanding by their great bounty in give 4. time, more for their commodity, then he appoint that their greatness and authority as much exceed he as their bounty and liberality. now, the arrival of his first supply, so overjoy we that we can not devise too much to please the mariner. we give they liberty to tract or trade at their pleasure, but in a short time it follow that can not be have for a pound of copper which before be sell for a ounce. thus ambition and sufferance cut the throat of our trade. but confirm their opinion of newport greatness wherewith smith have possess powhatan especial by the great present newport. often send he, before he can prepare the, to go and visit he so that this savage also desire to see he. a great bruit there be to set he forward. when he go he be accompany with captain smith and mr scrivener, a very wise, understanding gentleman. new arrive and admit of the council and 30. or 40. choose man for that guard, arrive at werowocomo, newport. conceit of this great savage breed, many doubt and suspicion of treachery which smith to make appear be needless, which 20. man smith revisit powhatan well appoint, undertake to encounter with that number the worst that can happen there. name be nathaniel. powel, robert beheathland, william phettiplace, richard wyffin, anthony gosnoll, john taverner, william dier, thomas coe, thomas hope, anas todkell with 10.. other who name i have forget these. be kind, receive a shore with 2. or 300.. savage be conduct to their town. powhatan, strain, powhatan, first, entertainment of our man himself to the uttermost of his greatness, to entertain we with great shout of joy, oration of protestation and the most plenty of victual he can provide to feast. we sit upon his bed of mat, his pillow of leather, embroider after their rude manner, with pearl and white bead. his attire, a fair robe of skin as large as a irish mantle at his head and foot, a handsome young woman on each side his house. sit 20.. of his concubine, their head and shoulder paint red with a great chain of white bead about their neck. before those sit his chief man in like order in his arbor-like house with many pretty discourse. to renew their old acquaintance, the great king and our captain spend the time till the ebb, leave our barge a ground, then renew their feast and mirth. we quarter that night with powhatan. the next day, newport come a shore and receive as much content as those. the exchange of a christian for a savage people can give he a boy name: thomas savage. be then give unto powhatan, who newport call his son for, who powhatan give he namontacke, his trusty servant and one of a shrewd subtle. capacity, 3. or 4. day be spend in feast, dance and trade, wherein powhatan carry himself so proud yet discreet, in his savage manner as make. we all admire his natural gift, consider his education as scorn, to trade as his subject. do he bespeak newport in this manner? captain newport, it be not agreeable with my great powhatas speech, nes, in this peddle manner, to trade for trifle, and i esteem you a great werowan. therefore lay i down all your commodity together, what i like i will take and in recompense give you that i think fit their value. captain smith, be our interpreter. regard newport as his father know best the disposition of powhatan, tell we his intent be, but to cheat we yet, captain. newport think to out brave this savage in ostentation of greatness. and so to bewitch he with his bounty as to have what he list. but so it chance powhatan have his desire, value his corn at such a rate as i think it better cheap in spain, for we have not 4. bushel, for that we expect 20. hogshead, this breed, some unkindness between our two. captain newport, seek to please the humour of the unsatiable savage smith, to cause the savage to difference of opinion. please he but smother his distaste to avoid the savage suspicion glance in the eye of powhatan. many trifle who fix his humour upon a few blue bead. a long time he importunate desire. they but smith seem so much the more to affect than so that ere we depart for a pound or two of blue bead, he bring over my king for 2 or 300 bushel of corn. yet part, good friend, the like entertainment we find of spechanchynough king of pamaunke, who also, he, in like manner, fit at the like rate with blue bead. and so we return to the fort where this new supply be lodge with the rest. accidental fire the quarter, and so the town, which be but thatch with reed. the fire be so fierce as it burn their pallizadoe, though 10. or 12 yard distant, with their james town burn arm bedding apparel and much private provision. good, mr hunt, our preacher, lose. all his library and all that he have but the clothes on his back. yet none ever see he repine at his loss. this happen in the winter, in that extreme frost 1607.. now though we have victual sufficient, i mean only of oatmeal meal and corn, yet the ship stay there 14. week, when she may as well have be go in 14. day. a ship idle, loiter 14 week, spend the beef, pork, oil, aquavitae, fish, butter and cheese, beer and such like as be provide to be land we, when they depart, what their discretion can spare we, to make a feast or two with biscuit, pork, beef, fish and oil, to relish our mouth of each somewhat. they leave we. yet i must confess, those that have either money, spare clothes, credit to give bill of payment, gold, ring, fur or any such commodity, be ever welcome to this. remove tavern. such be our patience to obey such vile commander and buy our own provision at 15 time the value suffer they feast we bear the charge. yet must not repine but fast, and then leakage, ship-rat and other casualty occasion the loss but the vessel and remnant for totals we be glad to receive with all our heart to make up the account high commend their providence for preserve that for all this plenty our ordinary be but meal and water, so that this great charge little relieve our want whereby, with the extremity of the bitter cold air, more than half of we die and take our death in that pierce winter. i can deny, but both skrivener and smith do their best to amend what be amiss. but with the precedent go the mayor part that their horn be too short. but the worst mischief be our gild refiner with their golden. promise, make all man their slave in hope of recompense. there be no talk. no, the effect of mere verbalist hope. no work, but dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold. such a brute of gold as one mad fellow desire to be bury in the sand lest they shall, by their art, make gold of his bone. little need there be and less reason. the ship shall stay their wage, run a needle charge on our victual consume. 14 week that the mariner may say they build such a golden church that we can say the rain wash near to nothing in 14 day. be it that captain smith will not applaud all those golden invention because they admit he not to the sight of their trial, nor golden consultation. i know not, but i hear he question with captain martin and tell he, except he will show he a more substantial trial, he be not enamour with their dirty skill, breathe out these and many other passion, never any thing, do more. torment he then to see all necessary business, neglect to fraught such a drunken ship with so much gild dirt till than we never account captain newport, a refiner who be fit to set sail for england and we not have any use of parliament play petition a return to england. admiral recorder, interpreter, chronologer, court of plea nor. justice of peace. send m wing field and cap archer with he for england to seek some place of better employment, chap 4.. the arrival of the phoenix, her return and other accident. the authority now consist in resine, captain martin and the still sickly precedent, the sale of the store commodity, maintain their estate as inheritable revenue. the spring approach and the ship depart, m skrivener and capt, the repair of james town, smith divide, betwixt they the rebuild our town, the repair our palisado, the cut down tree, prepare our field, plant our corn and to rebuild our church and recover our storehouse. all man thus busy at their several labour, m nelson arrive with his lose phoenix lose, i say, for that all man deem. he lose. land safe his man so well he have manage his ill hap cause the indian isle to feed his company that his victual to that be leave we before be sufficient for half a year. he have nothing, but he free impart it which honest deal be a mariner cause. we admire he. we will not have wish so much as he do for we now to relade this ship with some good tiding, the precedent yet notwithstanding, with his dignity to leave the sort. give order to captain smith and m skrivener to discover and search the commodity of monacans country beyond the fall. 60 able man be. allot their number, the 60 appoint to discover monacan which within 6 day, exercise smith have so. well train to their arm and order that they little fear with who they shall encounter. yet so unseasonable be the time and so opposite be capt martin to every thing, but only to fraught his ship also with his fantastical gold, as captain smith rather desire to relade, she with cedar, which be a present dispatch, then, either with dirt or the report of a uncertain discovery, while their conclusion be resolve. this happen, powhatan, to express his love to newport, when he depart, present he with 20 turkey, conditional, to return he 20 sword, which immediate be a ill example to sell sword to savage, send he now after his departure he present captain smith with the like luggage but not find his humour obay in. send he weapon, he cause his people with 20.. devise to obtain they at last, by ambuseadoe, at our very port they will take they powhatan treachery force, surprise we at work. or any way which be so long permit that they become so insolent. there be no rule. the command from england be so straight not to offend they as our authority bearer, keep their house will rather be any thing than peace breaker. this charitable humour prevail till well it chance they meddle with captain smith who without far the governor weakness deliberation give than such a encounter as some he so hunt up and down the i will some he so terrify with whip beat and imprisonment. as for revenge, they surprise two of his. forage, disorderly smith. attempt to suppress the savage insolence soldier and have assemble their force bold, threaten at our port to force smith to redeliver 7. savage which for their villainy he detain prisoner, but to try their fury. in less than half a hour he so hamper their insolence that they bring the 2. prisoner. desire peace without any far composition for their prisoner who be threaten and examine their intent and plotter of their villainy. confess they be direct only by powhatan to obtain he our own weapon to cut our own throat with the manner, how, where and when which we plain find most true and apparent. yet he send his messenger and his dear daughter pocahuntas to excuse powhatan, excuse he of the injury. do by his subject, desire their liberty with the assurance of his love. after smith have, give the prisoner what correction he think fit, use they well a day or two after, and then deliver they pocahuntas. for who sake only he feign to save their life and grant they liberty. the patient council that nothing will move to war with the savage will glad have wrangle with captain smith for his cruelty. yet none be slay to any man knowledge. but it bring they in such fear and obedience as his very name will sufficient affright. they, the fraught of this ship be, conclude to be a ship fraught with cedar, cedar, by the diligence of the master and captain smith. she be quick relade, mr scrivener. be neither idle nor slow to follow all thing at the fort, the ship fall to the cedar. i will, captain martin, have make shift to be sick near a year and now neither pepper, sugar, clove, mace, nor ^^gmets, ginger, nor sweet meat in the country to enjoy the credit of his suppose art, at his earnest request, be most willing admit to return for england. yet have be there but a year, and not past half a year since the ague leave. he that he may say somewhat. he have see he go twice by water to paspahegh, a place near 7. mile from james town. but lest the dew the adventure of capt mart^^ shall distemper, he be ever force to return before night thus. much i think fit to express. he express command i to record his journey. i be his man and he sometime my master. thomas studly, anas todkill- their name that be land in this supply- daniel stall, jueller. william dawson, refiner. abraham ransack, refiner. william johnson, goldsmith. peter keffer, a gunner, robert alberton, a perfumer, richard belfield, goldsmith. christopher ro^es, james watking, richard fetherstone, james burn, a curgion, john jew, a couper, robert cotten, a tobaco-pipe-maker, richard dole, a black smith, and diverse other to the number of 120.. chap 5. the accident that happen in the discovery of the bay, the prodigality of the precedent state, go so deep in the store that smith and scrivener have a while. tie both martin and he to the rule. of proportion. but now smith be to depart the precedent authority. so over-sway mr scrivener, discretion as our store, our time, our strength and labour be idle consume to fulfil his fantasy. the second of june 1608.. smith leave the fort to perform his discovery with this company: walter russel, doctor of physic, james read blacksmith, richard keale, fishmonger, jonas profit, fisher, these be in a open barge of two ton burden. leave the phoenix at cape-henry. we cross the bay to the eastern shore and fall with the isle. call smith isle the first people we see be 2. grim and stout, savage upon cape-charles, with long cape, charles pole like javelin, head with bone. they bold demand what we be and what we will. but after many circumstance they in time seem very kind, acawmacke and direct we to acawmacke, the habitation of the werowan, where we be kind, entreat this king. be the comely proper civil savage we encounter his country be a pleasant, fertile clay-soile. he cold we of a strange accident. late happen he and it be two dead child. by the extreme passion of their parent, or some dream, vision, fantasy or affection, move they again to revisit their dead carcase. a strange mortality of savage who benumb body reflect to the eye of the beholder such pleasant, delightful countenance, as though they have regain their vital spirit. this, as a miracle, draw many to behold they all which be a great part of his people, not long. after die and not any one escape. they speak the language of powhatan, wherein they make such description of the bay, isle and river that often do we exceed pleasure. pass along the coast, search every inlet and bay fit for harbour and habitation, see many isle in the midst of the bay. we bear up for they, but ere we can attain they, such a extreme gust of wind, rain, thunder and lightning happen that with great danger we escape the unmerciful rage of that ocean-like a extreme gust water the next day, search those inhabitable isle, which we call russels isle, to provide fresh water, russels iles, the defect whereof force we to follow the next eastern channel which bring we to the river wighcocomoco. wighcocomoco. the people, at first with great fury, seem to assault we yet at last, with song, dance and much mirth, become very tractable but search their habitation for water. we can fill but 3, and that such a extreme want of fresh water puddle that never till then we ever know the want of good water. we dig and search many place but ere the end of two day we will have refuse two barrico of gold for one of that puddle water of wighcocomoco. be past these isle fall with a high land upon the main we find a great pond of fresh water, but so exceed hot that we suppose it some bath. that place we call point ployer be thus refresh in cross over from. the main to other isle. the wind and water so much increase, with thunder, lightning and rain, that our foremast blow overbord and such mighty wave overwrought we in that small the barge near sink, in a gust barge that with great labour we keep she from sink by free out the water. 2 day we be enforce to inhabit these uninhabited isle which for the extremity of gust, thunder, rain, storm and ill weather we call limbo. repair our fore sail with our shirt we set sail for the main and fall with a fair river on the east, call kuskaranaocke. by it inhabit the people of soraphanigh, nause, arsek and quake that much extol a great nation, call massawomekes. the first notice of the massawomecks. in search of who we return by limbo but find this eastern shore shallow break isle and the main for most part without fresh water. we pass by the straits of limbo for the western shore, so broad be the bay here that we can scarce perceive the great high cliff on the other side. by they we anchor that night and call they richard cliff 30 league. we sail more northwards, not find any inhabitant yet. the coast well water, the mountain very barren, the valley very fertile, but the wood extreme thick, full of wolf, bear, dear and other wild beast. the first inlet we find we call bolus, for that the clay in many place be like, if not. bolearmoniac. when we first set sail some of bolus river, our gallant doubt nothing but that our captain will make too much. have home, but have lien not above 12 day in this small barge. oft tire at their oar, their bread spoil with wet so much that it be rot. yet so good be their stomach that they can digest it do with continual complaint. so importune he now to return as cause he bespeak they in this manner, gentleman, if you will remember the memorable history of sir ralph lane, how his smith speech to his soldier company importune he to proceed in the discovery of allege they have. yet a dog that be boil with saxafras leave will rich feed they in their return. what a shame will it be for you that have be so suspicious of my tenderness to force. i return with a month provision, scarce able to say where we have be, nor yet hear of that. we be send to seek, you can say. but i have share with you of the worst. be past and for what be to come of lodging diet or whatsoever, i be content. you allot the worst part to myself. as for your fear that i will lose myself in these unknown large water or be swallow up in some stormy gust, abandon those childish fear, for worse than be pass can happen, and there be as much danger to return as to proceed forward. regain, therefore, your old spirit for return. i will not, if god assist i, till i have see the massawomekes find patawomeck or the head of this great water you conceit to be endless. 3 or 4 day we expect wind and weather. who adverse extremity add such discouragement to our discontent as 3 or 4 fall, extreme sick. who pitiful complaint cause we to return, leave the bay some 10 mile broad at 9 or 10 fathom water. the 16 of june we fall with the river of patawomeck, the discovery of patawomeck. fear be gon^ and our man recover. we be all content to take some pain to know the name of this 9 mile broad river. we can see no inhabitant for 30 mile sail. then we be conduct by 2 savage up a little bay creek towards onawmament where all the wood be lay with ambuscado to the number of 3 or 400 savage, but so ambuscado of savage, strange paint, grime and disguise, shout, yell and cry as we rather suppose. they so many devil, they make many bravado. but to appease their fury, our captain prepare with a seem willingness as they to encounter they the graze of the bullet upon the river, with the echo of the wood, so amaze they as down go their bow and arrow and exchange hostage james watkins be send 6 mile up the wood to their king habitation. we be kind use by these savage, of who we understand they be command to. betray we by powhatan direction and he so direct a treacherous project from the discontent of james town. the like encounter we find at patawomeck, cecocawone and diverse other place, but at moyaones, nacothtant and taux the people do their best to content we the cause of this discovery be to search a glister metal, the savage tell we they have from patawomeck, the which newport assure that he have try to hold half silver. also to search what fur, metal, river rock, nation, wood, fish, fruit, victual and other commodity the land afford and whether the bay be endless or how far it extend. the mine we find 9 or 10 mile up in the country from the river antimony, but it prove of no value some. otter, beaver, martins, luswarts and sable. we find, and in diverse place, that abundance of fish lie so thick with their head above the water as, for want of net, our barge drive amongst they. we attempt to catch they with a fry pan, but we find it a bad instrument to catch fish with neither better fish, more plenty or variety. a abundant plenty of fish have any of we ever see in any place, swim in the water, then in the bay of chesapeack, but there not to be catch with frying-pan. to express all our quarrel, treachery and encounter amongst those savage, i shall be too tedious, but in brief, at all time we so encounter they and curb their insolence as they conclude with. present to purchase peace. yet we, how to deal with the savage, lose not a man. at our first meeting our captain ever observe this order to demand their bow and arrow, sword, mantle or fur with some child for hostage, whereby he can quick perceive when they intend any villainy have. finish this discovery, though our victual be near spend. he intend to have see his imprisonment acquaintance upon the river of toppahannock, but our boat, by reason of the ebb, chanse to ground upon a many shovel lie in the entrance. we spy many fish lurk amongst the weed on the sand. our captain sport himself to catch they by, nail they to the ground with his sword. set we all a fish in that manner. by this devise we take more in a hour than we all can eat. but it chance the captain take a fish from his sword, a stingray, very hurtful, not know her condition, be much of the fashion of a thornback with a long tail, whereon be a most poison sting of 2. or 3. inch long, which she strike a inch and half into the wrist of his arm, the which, in 4. hour, have so extreme swell his hand, arm, shoulder and part of his body. as we all, with much sorrow, conclude his funeral and prepare his grave in a i will hard by, as himself appoint, which then we call stingeray isle after the name of the fish. yet by the help of a precious oil, doctor russels apply, eat night his torment pain. be so well, assuage that he eat the fish to his supper, which give no less joy and content to we than ease to himself. have neither surgeon nor surgery but that preservative oil we present. set sail for james town, pass the mouth of pyankatanck and pamaunke river. the next day we safe, arrive at kecoughtan, the simple, savage see, our captain hurt and another bloody which come by break his shin. our number, the savage affright. with their own suspicion of bow, arrow, sword, target mantle and fur will needs imagine we have be at war. the truth of these accident will not satisfy they, but impatient they importune we to know with who we fight, find their aptness to believe we fail, not as a great secret to tell they any thing that may affright they. what spoil we have get and make of the masawomeeke this rumour go fast up the river than our barge that arrive at weraskoyack the 20. of julie, where trim she with paint, streamer and such devise, we make the fort jealous of a spanish frigate where we all safe. arrive the 21. of july. there we find the last supply, all sick, the rest some lame. some bruise, all unable to do any thing but complain of the, a needless misery, pride and unreasonable, needless cruelty of their silly precedent that have, riotous, consume the store and to fulfil his folly about, build he a unnecessary palace in the wood have bring they all to that misery that have not we arrive they have as strange torment, he with revenge. but the good news of our discovery and the good hope we have by the savage relation our bay have stretch to the south-sea, appease their fury, but conditional that ratliffe shall be depose and that captain smith will take upon he the government. their request be effect. he substitute mr scrivener, his dear friend in the presidency. equal distribute those private provision the. other have engross, appoint more honest officer to assist scrivener, who then lie extreme torment with a calenture and in regard of the weakness of the company and heat of the year, they be the company, leave to live at ease, unable to work. he leave they to live at ease but embark himself to finish his discovery. write by walter russel and anas todkill, chap 6.. what happen? the second voyage to discover the bay, the 20. of july, captain smith set forward to finish the discovery with 12. man, their name be william ward jonas. profit the wind be contrary, cause our stay 2. or 3 day at kecoughtan, the wer^^^^s feast. we, with much mitth his people be persuade we go purposely to be revenge. of the massawomecke. in the evening we fire 2. or 3. racket. so testify the poor savage. they suppose nothing impossible. we attempt the savage, admire firework and desire to assist. we the first night we anchor at stingeray. i will the next day cross palawomecks river and haste for the river bolus. we go not much far before we may perceiveive the bay to divide in 2. head and arrive there we find it, the head of the bay, divide in 4. all which we search so far as we can sail they 2. of they we find uninhabited. but in cross the bay to the other we encounter 7. or 8. canoe full of massawomecks. we see they prepare a encounter with the massawomecks to (@). we leave our oar and make way with our sail to encounter they. yet be we, but five with our captain can stand, or within a day after we leave kecoughtan, the rest be all of the last supply, be sick almost to death until they be season to the country have shut they under our tarpawling. we put their hat upon stick by the barge side to make we seem many, and so we think the indian suppose those hat to be man, for they (@) with all possible speed to the shore and there stay, stare at the sail of our barge till we anchor right against they. long it be ere we can draw they to come unto we at last. they send 2 of their company unarm in a conowe, the rest all follow to second. they, if need require these a be, but each present with all bell, bring aboard all their fellow present, the captain with venison bear flesh, fish, bow, arrow clubs, target and bear skin. we understand they nothing at all. but by sign whereby they signify unto we they have be at war with the tockwoghs, the which they confirm by show their green wound. but the night part we, we imagine they appoint the next morning to meet, but after that we never see. they enter the river of tockwogh, the savage, all arm. a encounter with the tockwoghs in a fleer of boat round environ we it chance one of they. can speak the language of powhatan who persuade the rest to a friendly parley. but when they see we furnish with the massawomecke weapon and we feign the invention of kecoughtan to have take, they perforce, they conduct we to their pallizadoed town mantel with the bark of tree, with scaffold like mount breast, about with bark, very formal, their man, woman and child, with dance, song, fruit, fish, fur and what they have kind, entertain. we spread mat for we to sit on, stretch their best ability to express their love. many hatchet, knife and piece of iron and brass we see, which they report to have from the sasquesahanocke hatchet from sasquesahanock, a mighty people and mortal enemy with the massawomecke. the sasquesahanock inhabit upon the chief spring of these. 4. two day journey, high than our barge can pass for rock. yet we prevail with the interpreter to take with he a other interpreter to persuade the sasquesahanock to come to visit we. for their language be different. 3. or 4. day, we expect their return. then 60 of these giant, like people come down with present of venison, tobacco, pipe, basket, target, bow and arrow. 5 of their werowance. come bold aboard we to cross the bay for tockwogh, leave their man and canoe. the wind be so violent that they dare not pass. our order be daily to have prayer with a psalm at which solemnity the poor savage much wonder our prayer be, do they? be long busy with consultation till they have contrive their business. then they begin, in most passionate manner, to hold up their hand to the sun with a most fearful song. then embrace the captain, they begin to adore the sasquesahanock offer to the english. he, in like manner though he, rebuke they. yet they proceed till their song be finish, which do, with a most strange, furious action and a hellish voice, begin a oration of their love that end with a great paint bear skin. they cover our captain than one, ready with a chain of white bead weigh at least 6 or 7 pound, hang it about his neck. the other have 18 mantle make of diverse sort of skin, sow together all these with many other toy. they lay at his foot, stroke their ceremonious hand about his neck for his creation to be their governor, promise their aid, victual or what they have to be he if he will stay with they to defend and revenge they of the massawomecks. but we leave they at tockwogh. they much sorrow for our departure, yet we promise the next year again to visit they. many description and discourse they make. we of atquanahucke, massawomecke and other people signify. they inhabit the river of cannida and from the french to cannida have their hatchet and such like tool by trade. these know no more of the territory of. powhatan, then his name, and he as little of. they thus have seek all the inlet and river worth note. we return to discover the river of these people we find very tractable and more r will then any. we promise they, as also the patawomeck, the next year, to revenge they of the massawomecks. our purpose be cross in the discovery of the river of toppahannock, for we have much wrangle toppahanock r with that peevish nation, but at last they become as tractable as the rest. it be a excellent, pleasant, well inhabit, fertile and a goodly navigable river. towards the head thereof. it please, god, to take one of our sick, call m fetherstone, where, in fetherstons bay we bury he in the night with a volley of shot. the rest fetherstone bary, notwithstanding their ill diet and bad lodging crowd in so small a barge, in so many danger, never rest but always toss to and again all well recover their health. then we discover the river of payankatank and set sail for james town. but in cross payankatanke discover the bay in a fair calm. such a sudden gust surprise. we in the night, with thunder and rain as we be half employ in free out water, never think to escape drown, yet run before the wind. at last we make land by the. flash of fire from heaven, by which light only we keep from the split shore till it. please god, in that black darkness, to preserve we by that light, to find point, comfort and arrive safe at james town, the 7 of september 1608.. where we find m skrivener and diverse other. well, recover their proceed at james town, many dead, some sick, the late precedent prisoner for mutiny by the honest diligence of m skrivener. the harvest gather, but the store provision, much spoil with rain. thus be that year when nothing want consume and spend and nothing do. such be the government of captain ratcliff. but only this discovery wherein, to express all the danger, accident and encounter, this small number pass in that small barge. with such watery diet in these great water and barbarous country till then to any christian utter unknown. i rather refer their merit to the censure of the courteous and experience reader than i will be tedious or partial. be a party by nathaniel poell and anas todkill, chap 7. the presidency surrender to captain smith, the arrival and return of the second supply. and what happen? the 10. of september 1608.. by the election of the council and request of the company, captain smith receive the letter patent and take upon he the place of precedent which till then by no mean he will accept, though he be often importune thereunto. now, the build of ratcliffes, pallas stay as a thing needless. the church be repair, the storehouse recover, build, prepare for the supply we expect the fort, reduce to the qvere form of this figure the order of watch, renew the squadron, each set of the watch, train the whole company, every saturday, exercise in a field, prepare for that purpose the boat trim for trade which in their journey encounter the second supply that bring they back to discover the country of monacan. how or why, captain newport obtain such a private commission as not to return without a lump of gold, a certainty of the south-sea or one of the lose company of sr walter rawley? i know not, nor why he bring such a 5. piece barge not to bear we to that south sea till. we have bear she over the mountain, which how far they extend, be yet unknown. as for the coronation of powhatan and his present of basin ewer bed clothes and such costly novelty, they have be much better. well spare then. so ill spend, for we have his favour. much better, only for a poor piece of copper till this stately kind of powbatans scorn, when his courtesy be most deserve, solicit. make he so much overvalue himself that he respect we as much as nothing at all. as for the hire of the pole and dutch to make pitch and tar, glass mill and soap-ash be most necessary and well, but to send they and scutcheon more without victual to work be not so well consider yet. this can not have hurt. we have they be 200.. though then we be 130 that want for ourselves- for we have the savage in that decorum- their harvest be new. gather that we fear not to get victual sufficient. have we be 500 now be there no way, to no way, but one to overthrow the business, make we miserable. but to neglect that time to make our provision. while it be to be, have the which be do to perform this strange discovery, but more strange coronation. to lose that time, spend that victual we have, tire and starve our man. have no mean to carry victual munition the hurr or sick, but their own back. how or by who they be invent, i know not. but captain newport, we only account, the author, who, to effect these project, have so gild all our hope, with great promise that both company and council conclude his resolution. i confess we little understand then our estate to conclude his conclusion, against all the inconvenience, the foresee precedent, all eadge there be, add to the council one, captain waldo and captain win, two ancient soldier and valiant gentleman but ignorant of the business. be new, arrive rateliffe, be also permit to have his voice, and mr scrivener, desirous to see strange country, so that although smith be precedent, yet the council have the authority and rule it as they list. as for clear smith objection, how pitch and tar, wainscot, clapbord glass and soap ash can be. provide to relade the ship, or provisiongot to live withal when none be in the country and that which we have spend before the ship depart? the answer be captain newport. undertake to fraught the pinnace with corn in go and return in his discovery and to refraught she again from werawocomoco. also promise a great proportion of victual from his ship. infer that smith proposition be only devise to hinder his journey to effect it himself and that the crucltie smith have use to the savage in his absence. may occasion they to hinder his design for which all work be leave and 120 choose man be appoint for his guard and smith to make clear. these seem suspicion that the savage be not so desperate as be pretend by captain newport and how willing he be to further they to effect their project because the coronation captain smith with 4 go to powbatan will consume much time, undertake their message to powhatan to entreat he to come to james town to receive his present accompany only with captain waldo, m andrew buckler, edward brinton and samuel collier. with these 4 he go over land against werawacomoco there pass the river of pamavuke in the savage canoe powhatan be 30 mile of who present be send for. in the mean time his woman entertain smith in this manner. in a fair, plain field they make a fire before which the woman entertainment at werawcomoco. he sit upon a mat. sudden, amongst the wood, be hear such a hideous noise and shriek that they betake they to their arm. suppose powhatan with all his power come to surprise they but the beholder, which be many, man, woman and child, satisfy the captain. there be no such matter. be present. present with this antic 30 young woman camenaked out of the wood, only cover behind and before with a few green leaf. their body all paint some white, some red, some black, some party colour, but every one different. their leader have a fair pair of stags horn on her head and a otter skin at her girdle, another at her arm, a quiver of arrow at her back and bow and arrow in. her hand, the next in her hand, a sword, another a club, another a pot-stick, all horn alike. the rest, every one with their several devise, these fiend, with most hellish cry and shout, rush from amongst the tree, cast themselves in a ring about the fire, sing and dance with excellent ill variety, oft fall into their infernal passion and then, solemn again to sing and dance, have spend near a hour in this maskarado as they enter in like manner, depart, have reaccommodated themselves. they solemn invite smith to their lodging, but no, soon be he within the house. but all these nymph, more torment he then ever with crowd and press and hang upon he most tedious cry: love you, not i. this salutation end. the feast be set consist of fruit in basket, fish and flesh in wooden platter. bean and pease there want not for 20 hog, nor any savage dainty their invention can devise. some attend, other sing and dance about they this mirth and banquet be end with firebrand instead of torch. they conduct he to his lodging. the next day come powhatan smith, deliver his captain smith message, message of the present, send he and redeliver he namontack desire he come to his father newport to accept those present and conclude their revenge against the monacans. whereunto the subtle savage thus reply: if your king have send i present, i also be a king. powhatan answer: and this my land 8 day, i will stay to receive they. your father be to come to i, not i to he, nor yet to your fort. neither will i bite at such a bait. as for the monacans, i can revenge my own injury, and as for atquanuchuck, where you say your brother be slay, it be a contrary way from those part. you suppose it, but for any salt water beyond the mountain, the relation you have have from my people be false. whereupon he begin to draw plot upon the ground. accord to his discourse of all those region, many other discourse they have, yet both desirous to give each other content in complemental courtesy. and so captain smith return with this answer upon this captain newport send his present by powhatan coronation water which be near 100 mile, with 50 of the best, shot himself, go by land which be but 12 mile, where he meet with our 3 barge to transport he over all thing be fit for the day of his coronation. the present be bring his basin ewer bed and furniture, set up his scarlet cloak and apparel with much ado put on he be persuade by namontacke. they will do he no hurt, but a foul trouble there be to make he kneel to receive his crown. he neither know the majesty nor meaning of a crown nor bend of the knee, endure so many persuasion, example and instruction as tire they all. at last, by lean hard on his shoulder, he a little stoop, and newport put the crown on his head when, by the warn of a pistol, the boat be prepare with such a volley of shot that the king start up in a horrible fear till he see all be well. then remember himself to congratulate their kindness. he give his old shoe and his mantle to captain newport, but perceive his purpose be to discover the monacans. he labour to divert his resolution, refuse to lend he either man or guide more than namontack. and so, after some complemental kindness on both side, in requital of his present, he present newport with a heap of wheat ear that may contain some 7 or 8 bushel and as much more. we buy ready dress in the town wherewith we return to the fort. the ship have disburden herself of 70 person, with the first gentlewoman and woman servant, the discovery of monacan- that arrive in our colony. captain newport, with all the council and 120 choose man set forward for the discovery of monacan, leave the precedent at the fort with 80. such as they be to relade. the ship arrive at the fall. we march by land some forty mile in 2 day and a half and so return down to the. same path we went two town. we discover of the monacans, the people neither use we well nor ill. yet for our security we take one of their petty werowance and lead he bind to conduct we the way. and in our return, search many place we suppose mine, about which we spend some time in refine, have one, william calicut, a refiner fit for that purpose. from that crust of earth we dig, he persuade we to believe. he extract some small titie of silver, and not unlikely better stuff may be have for the dig. with this poor trial, be content to leave this fair, fertile, well water country. come to the fall the savage feign there be. diverse ship come into the bay to kill. they at james town trade they will not, and find their corn we can not, for they have hide it in the wood and be thus delude. we arrive at james town half sick, all complain and tire with toil, famine and discontent, to have only but discover our gild hope and such fruitless certainty as the precedent foretell we no soon be we land. but the precedent disperse many as be able, some for glass, other for pitch tar and soap ash. leave they with the fort to the counsel oversight. but 30 of we he conduct 5. mile from the fort to learn to make clapbord, cut down tree and lie in wood. amongst the rest he have choose gabriel beadel and john russel, the only. two gallant of this last supply and both proper gentleman. strange be these pleasure to their condition. yet lodging, eat, drink, work or play they do. but as the precedent, all these thing be carry so pleasant as within a week they become master, make it their delight to hear the tree thunder as they fall, but the axe so oft blister there. tender finger that common, every three blow, have a loud oath to drown, the echo for remedy of which sin. the precedent devise how to have every man oath number and at night for every oath to have a can of water pour down his sleeve, with a punishment for swear which every offender be so wash himself. and all that a man shall scarce. hear a oath in a week by this. let no man think that the precedent or these gentleman spend their time as common wood-hackers at fell of tree or such like other labour, or that they be press to any thing as hireling or common slave for what they do be, but once a little enure, it seem, and they conceit it only as a pleasure and a recreation. yet 30 or 40 of such voluntary gentleman will do more in a day than 100 of one gentleman, better than 20 lubber the rest. that must be press to it by compulsion. master scrivener, captain waldo and captain win at the fort, every one in like manner, careful regard their charge. the precedent return from amongst the wood. see the time consume and no provision get and the ship lie idle and will do nothing present. embark himself in the discovery barge, give order to the council to send mr persey after he with the next barge that arrive at the fort. 2. barge he have himself and 20. man, but arrive at that dogged nation, be too well acquaint with our want. refuse to trade with as much scorn and insolency as they can express the precedent, perceive it be powhatan policy to starve. we tell they. he come not so much for the chickahamine force to contribution their corn as to revenge. his imprisonment and the death of his man, murder by they. and so land his man and ready to charge they. they. immediate flee, but then they send their imbassadour with corn, fish fowl or what they have to make their peace. their corn be that year bad. they complain extreme of their own want. yet fraught our boat with 100 bushel of corn, and in like manner, mr percy, that not long after we arrive they have do the best they can to content we, within 4. or 5. day we return to james town, though this much content, the company that then fear nothing but starve. yet some so envy his good success that they rather desire to starve than a bad reward for well do. his pain shall prove so much more effectual than they. some project there be, not only to have depose he, but to have keep he out of the fort, for that be precedent. he will leave his place and the fort without their consent, but their horn be so much too short to effect it as they themselves, more narrow, escape a great mischief. all this time, our old tavern make as much of all a good tavern in virginia, they that have either money or ware as can be desire, and by this time they be become so perfect on all side- i mean soldier, sailor and savage- as there be ten-times more care to maintain their damnable and private trade then to provide for the colony thing that be necessary. neither be it a small policy. in the mariner to report. in england we have such plenty and bring we so many man without victual when they have so many private factor in the fort that within 6. or 7. week after the ship return of 2. or 300.. hatchet, chissel, mattock and pickax searce 20. can be find and for pike-head, knife, shot powder or any thing they can steal from their. a bad trade of master and sailor fellow be vendible. they know as well and as secret how to convey they to trade with the savage for fur, basket, mussaneeke, young beast or such like commodity. as exchange they with the sailor for butter, cheese, beef, pork, aquavitae, beer, biscuit and oatmeal, and then fain all be, send they from their friend. and though virginia afford no fur for the store, yet one mariner in one voyage have get so many as he have confess to have sell in england for 30l. those be the saint-seeming worthy of virginia that have, notwithstanding all this, meat, drink and pay, but now they begin to grow weary. their trade be both perceive and prevent. none have be in virginia that have observe any thing which know not this to be true. and yet the scorn and shame be the poor soldier, gentleman and careless governor who be all thus buy and sell the adventurer cozen and the action overthrow by their false excuse, information and direction. by this, let all the world judge how this business can prosper. be thus abuse by such pilfer occasion, the proceed and accident with the second supply. mr scrivener be send with the barge and to werawocomoco where he find the savage, more ready skriveners. voyage to werawocomoco to fight, then trade, but his vigilancy be such as prevent their project and by the mean of namontack get 3. or 4. hogshead of corn and as much red paint which then be esteem a excellent dye. captain newport be dispatch with the trial. of pitch, tar, glass, frankincense and soap ash, with that clapoord and wainscot can be provide. meet with mr scrivener at point comfort and so return for england. leave we in all 200. with those he bring we the name of those in this supply, be these: mistress forest and anne buras, her maid, 8. dutchman and pole, with diverse to the number of 70. person, those poor conclusion, so affright we all with famine, that the precedent provide for nansamund, nansamund, force to contribution. take with he captain winne and mr scrivener, then return from captain newport. these people also long deny he trade, excuse themselves to be so. command by powhatan. till we be constrain, to begin with they perforce, and then they will rather sell. we some than we shall take all. so load our boat with 100 bushel, we part friend and come to james town, at which time there be a marriage between john laydon and anna burrowes be the first marriage we have in virginia. long he stay not, but fit himself and captain waldo with 2. barge from chawopo, weanocke and all part, there be find neither corn nor savage, but all flee. be jealous of our intent till we discover the river and people of appametuck, where we find appamatucke, discover little that they have. we equal divide betwixt the savage, and we but give they copper in consideration. mr persie and mr scrivener go also abroad but can find nothing. the precedent: see this procastinate of time. be no course to live resolve with captain waldo, who he know to be sure, in time of need to surprise powhatan and all his provision. but the unwillingness of captain winne and mr scrivener for some private respect, do their best to hinder their project. but the precedent, who no persuasion can persuade to starve, be invite by powhatan to come unto he, and if he will send he but man to build he a house, bring he a grindstone, 50. sword, foam piece, a cock and a hen with copper and bead. he will load his ship with corn. the precedent, not ignorant of his devise, yet unwilling to neglect any opportunity present, send 3. dutchman and 2. english have no victual to employ they all. for want thereof be. idle know there need no better castle than that house to surprise powhatan to effect this project. he take order with captain waldo to second he, if need require, scrivener. he leave his substitute and set forth with the pinnace 2. barge and six and forty man, which only be such as volentary, offer themselves for his journey, the which, by reason of mr scrivener ill success be censure very desperate. they all know smith will not return empty howsoever, cause many of those that he have appoint to find excuse to stay behind chap 8.. captain smith journey to pamaunke the 29 of december. he set forward for werawocomoco, his company be these in the discovery barge, himself in the pinnace, mr george. persie, brother to the earl of northumber land, mr francis west, brother to the lord de-la-ware, william phetiplace, captain of the pinnace, jonas profit master. 4. dutchmen and richard savage be send by land to build the house for powhatan. against our arrival, this company be victual, but for 3. or 4. day lodge the first night at weraskoyack, where the precedent take sufficient provision. this kind savage do his best to divert he from see powhatan, but perceive he can not prevail. he advise in this manner the good counsel of weraskoyack: captain smith, you shall find powhatan to use you kind, but trust he not and be sure he have no opportunity to seize on your arm, for he have send for you only to cut. your throat. the captain, thank he for his good counsel. yet the better to try his love desire. guide to chowanoke, for he will send a present to that king to bind he his friend, to perform this journey. be send michael sicklemore, a very honest, valiant and painful soldier, with he two guide and direction: how to search for the lose company of sr walter rawley and silk grass. then we depart. thence the precedent. assure the king his perpetual love and lenft with he samuel collier, his page to learn the language. the next night be lodge at kecoughtan, 6017 day. the extreme wind, rain, frost and snow cause we to keep christmas amongst the savage plenty of victual, where we be never more merry nor. feed on more. plenty of good oyster fish, flesh, wildfowl and good bread. nor never have better fire in england than in the dry, warm, smoky house of kecoughtan, but depart thence when we find no house. we be not curious in any weather to lie 3 or 4 night together upon any shore under the tree by a good fire. 148 fowl, the precedent, anth bagly and edward pise do kill at 3, shoot at kiskiack the frost force we 3 or 4 day. also to suppress the insolency of those 148 fowl, kill at 3. shoot proud savage to quarter-in their house and guard our barge and cause they give we what we want, yet be we but 12 with the precedent, and yet we never. want harbour where we find any house. the 12 of januarie we arrive at werawocomoco, where the river be freeze near half a mile from the shore. but to neglect no time the precedent with his barge so far have approach by break the ice as the ebb leave he amongst those oozie shovel. yet rather than to lie there, freeze to death. by his own example, he teach they to march middle deep. more than a flight shoot through this muddy freeze ooze. when the barge a ill march slote, the appoint 2 or 3 to return. she aboard the pinnace where, for want of water, in melt the salt ice, they make fresh water. but in this march m russel, who none can persuade to stay. behind be somewhat ill and exceed heavy so overtoil himself as the rest have much ado ere he get a shore to regain life into his dead benumb spirit quarter. in the next house we find we send to powhatan for provision, who send we plenty of bread, turkey and venison. the next day have feast we. after his ordinary manner he begin to ask when we will beegon feign. he send not for we. neither have he any corn, and his people much less. yet for 40 sword he will procure we 40 bushel. the precedent, show he the man there present that bring he the message and condition. ask he how it chance he become so forgetful. thereat the king conclude the matter with a merry. laughter, ask for our commodity, but none he like without gun and sword. powhatan, subteltic, value a basket of corn more precious than a basket of copper, say. he can eat his corn but not his copper. captain smith, see the intent of this subtle, savage capt smith discourse to powhatan. begin to deal with he. after this manner, powhatan, though i have many course to have, make my provision. yet believe your promise to supply my want. i neglect all to satisfy your desire and to testify my love. i send you my man for your build, neglect my own. what your people have, you have engross, forbid they our trade. and now you think, by consume the time we shall consume for want not have to. fulfil your strange demand. as for sword and gun, i tell you long ago i have none to spare and you shall know those i have can keep i from want yet steal or wrong you. i will not, nor dissolve that friendship. we have mutual promise, except you constrain i by your bad usage. the king have attentive listen to this discourse, powhatan reply and flattery promise that both he and his country will spare he what they can, the which within 2 day they shall receive. yet, captain smith, say the king, some doubt i have of your come hither. that make i not so kind. seek to relieve you, as i will, for many do inform i, your come be not for trade but to invademy people and possess my country who dare not come to bring you corn. see you thus arm with your man to clear we of this fear. leave aboard your weapon, for here they be needless. we be all friend, and for ever powhatan. with many such discourse they spend the day quarter that night in the king house. the next day he review his building which he little intend shall proceed for the dutchman. find his plenty and know our want and perceive his preparation to surprise. we little think we can escape both he and famine. to obtain his favour, reveal to he as much as they know of our estate and project and how to prevent they, one of they, be of so good a judgement, spirit and resolution and a hireling that be certain of wage for his labour and ever well use both he and his countryman that the precedent know not who better to trust and not know any fit for that employment have, send he as a spy to discover powhatan intent then little doubt his honesty, nor can ever be certain of his villainy. till near half a year after, while we expect the come in of the country, we wrangle out of the king 10 quarter of corn for a copper kettle, the which the precedent perceive. he much to effect, value it at a much great rate. but in regard of his scarcity, he will accept of as much more the next year, or else the country of monacan, the king, exceed liberal. of that he have not yield, he monacan, wherewith each seem well content. powhatan, begin to expostulate the difference betwixt peace and war. after this manner, captain smith, you may understand that i have see the death of all my people, thrice and not one. live powhatan^^. course of peace and war of those 3 generation. but myself, i know the difference of peace and war better than any in my country. but now i be old and ere long must die my brother, namely opichapam opechankanough and kekataugh, my two. sister and their two daughter be distinct each other successor. i wish their experience no less than i, and your love to they no less than i to you. but this brute from nansamund that you be come to destroy my country so much, affright all my people as they dare not visit you. what will it avail you to take that perforce you may quiet have with love, or to destroy they that provide you food? what can you get by war, when we can hide our provision and fly to the wood whereby you must famish by wrong? we your friend. and why be you thus jealous of our love? see, we unarm and both do and be willing still to feed you with that you. can get, but by our labour. think you i be so simple not to know it be better to eat good meat, lie well and sleep quiet with my woman and child, laugh and be merry with you, have copper hatchet or what i want. be your friend, then be force to fly from all, to lie cold in the wood, feed upon acorn root and such trash and be so hunt by you that i can neither rest, eat nor sleep. but my tire man must watch, and if a twig but break, every one cry: there come, captain smith, then must i fly. i know not whether. and thus, with miserable fear, end my miserable life. leave my pleasure to such youth as you, which through your rash unadvisedness may quick as miserable end, for want of that you never know how to find. let this therefore assure you of our love, and every year our friendly trade shall furnish you with corn, and now also, if you will come in friendly manner to see we, and not thus with your gun and sword as to invade your foe. to this subtle discourse, the precedent thus reply. see, you will not right conceive of our word. we strive to make you know our thought by our deed, the vow i make you of my love, both myself- c smith reply- and my man have keep. as for your promise, i find it every day. violate by some of your subject. yet we find your love and kindness, our custom, be so far from be ungrateful that for your sake only we have curb our thirst, desire of revenge. else have they know as well the cruelty we use to our enemy as our true love and courtesy to our friend. and i think your judgement sufficient to conceive as well by the adventure we have undertake as by the advantage we have by our arm of you that have we intend you any hurt. long ere this we can have effect it. your people come to i at james town, be entertain with their bow and arrow without exception. we esteem it with you as it be with we, to wear our arm as our apparel. as for the danger of our enemy, in such war consist our chief pleasure. for your riches we have no use. as for the hide, your provision, or by your fly to the wood, we shall so unadvised, starve as you conclude, your friendly care in that behalf be needless, for we have a rule to find beyond your knowledge. many other discourse they have, till at last they begin to trade. but the king see, his will will not be admit as a law our guard disperse, nor our man disarm. he sigh, breathe his mind once more in this manner. captain smith, i never use any of werowance, so kind as yourself. yet from you i receive the least powhatan importunity for to have they unarm, to betray they kindness of any. captain newport, give i sword, copper clothes, a bed tool or what i desire ever. take what i offer he and will send away his gun when i entreat he. none do deny to lay at my foot or do what i desire, but only you, of who i can have nothing but what you regard not. and yet you will have whatsoever you demand, captain newport, you call father and so you call i, but i see for all. we both, you will do what you listen, and we must both seek to content you. but if you intend so friendly as you say, send hence your arm that i may believe you, for you see the love i bear. you do cause i, thus, naked, forget myself. smith, see this savage, but trifle the time to cut his throat. procure the savage to break the ice that his boat may come to fetch both he and his corn and give order for his man to come ashore to have surprise the king with who also he but trifle the time till his man land and to keep he from suspicion. entertain the time with this reply. powhatan, you must know, as i have but one god c smiths discourse to delay time that he may surprise powhatan. i honour but one king. and i live, not here as your subject but as your friend, to pleasure you with what i can. by the gift you bestow on i, you gain more than by trade. yet will you visit i as i do you. you shall know it be not our custom to sell our courtesy as a vendible commodity. bring all your country with you for your guard. i will not dislike of it as be over jealous, but to content you to morrow, i will leave my arm and trust to your promise. i call you father, indeed, and as a father you shall see, i will love you. but the small care you have of such a child cause my man persuade i to shift for myself. by this time powhatan have knowledge. his man powhatan plot to have murder smith. be ready while the ice be break his luggage, woman and child flee and to avoid suspicion, leave 2 or 3 of his woman talk with the captain while he secret flee and his man as secret beset the house which be at the instant discover to capt smith with his pistol, sword and target. he make such a passage amongst those naked devil that they flee, be sore. he some one way, some another, so that without hurt he obtain the corpse. du-guard, when they perceive he so well, escape and with his 8. man, for he have no more with he. to the uttermost of their skill, they seek by excuse to dissemble the matter, and powhatan to excuse his flight. and the sudden come of this multitude. send our captain a great, a chain of pearl for a present bracelet and a chain of pearl by a ancient orator that bespeak we to this purpose. perceive then from our pinnace a barge and man depart and come unto we. captain smith our werowans be flee. fear his. excuse your gun and know when the ice be break there will come more man. send those of he to guard his corn from the pilfrie. that may happen without your knowledge. now, though, some be hurt by your misprision, yet he be. your friend and so will continue. and since the ice be open, he will have you send away your corn and if you will have his company, send also your arm, which so affright this people that they dare not come to you. as he have promiseed they shall now have. provide basket for our man to carry the corn. they kind, offer their service to guard our arm that none shall steal. they, a great many they be of goodly well appoint, pretend to kill our man. load with basket. we force the savage, carry they, fellow as grim as devil. yet the very sight of cock, our match against they and a few word cause they to leave their bow and arrow to our guard. and bear down our corn on their own back. we need not importune they to make quick dispatch, but our own barge be leave by the ebb, cause we to stay till the midnight. tide carry we safe aboard. have spend that half night with such mirth as though we never have suspect or intend any thing. we leave the dutchman to build brinton to kill foul for powhatan, as by his messenger he importunate desire and leave direction with our man to give powhatan all the content they can that we may enjoy his company at our return from pamaunke. chap 9: how we escape surprise at pamaunke. we have no soon set sail but the dutchman deceive c smith powhatan return and send adam and francis. 2. stout dutch man to the fort who feign to captain winne that all thing be well and that captain smith have use for their arm, wherefore they request new the which be give they. they tell he their come be for some extraordinary tool and shift of apparel. by this colourable excuse, they obtain 6. or 7. more to their confederacy, such expert thief that present, furnish they with a great many sword, pike-head piece, shot powder and such like. they have savage at hand, ready to carry it away. the next day. they return unsuspected, leave their confederate to follow and, in the interim, to convey they a competency of all thing they can, for which service they shall live, with powhatan as his chief affect. free from those misery that will happen. the colony samuel, their other consort, powhatan, keep for their pledge. who diligence have, provide they 300.. of their kind of hatchet, the rest 50. sword, 8. piece and 8. pike, brinton and richard savage. see the dutchman so strange, diligent to accommodate the savage. these weapon attempt to have get to james town but they be apprehend within 2. or 3. day we arrive at pamaunke, the king, as many day, entertain we with feast and much mirth, and the day he appoint to begin our trade, the precedent with mr persie, mr west, mr russel, mr beheathland, m powel, mr crashaw, mr ford and some other to the number of 15.. go up to opechancanoug house, near a quarter. of a mile from the river where we find opechancanoughs. abandon, nothing but a lame fellow and a boy and all the house about. of all thing abandon. not long. we stay ere the king arrive, and after he come, diverse of his people, load with bow and arrow. but such pinch commodity and those esteem at such a value as our captain begin with he in this manner: opechancanough. the great love you profess with your tongue seem mere deceit by your action. smith speech to opechancanough. last year you kind fraught our ship, but now you have invite i to starve with hunger. you know my want and i your plenty, of which by some mean i must have part. remember it be fit for king. to keep their promise. here be my commodity, whereof take your choice, the rest i will proportion fit bargain for your people. the king seem kind to accept his offer and the better to colour his project, sell we what they have to our own content. promise the next day more company. better provide the barge and pinnace be commit to the charge of mr phetiplace the precedent with his old 15 march up to the king house where we find 4 or 5 man new, come with great basket. not long after come the king who, with a strain cheerfulness, hold we with discourse. what pain he have take to keep his promise till mr russel bring we in news that we be all betray for at least 6. or 700.. of well appoint indian have environ the house and beset 700, savage, beset the english, be but 16.. the field, the king, conjecture what russel relate. we can well perceive how the extremity of his fear bewray his intent. whereat some of our company seem dismay with the thought of such a multitude, the captain encourage we after this manner, worthy countryman, be the mischief of my smith speech to his company seeming-friend, no more than the danger of these enemy, i little care, be they as many more if you dare do, but as i, but this be my torment. that if i escape they, our malicious council with their open mouth minion, will make i such a peace-breaker in their opinion in england as will break my neck. i can wish those here that make these seem saint and i a oppressor, but this be the worst of all. where in i pray, aid i with your opinion. shall we begin with they and surprise this king? we can keep he and defend well ourselves. if we shall each kill our man and so proceed with all in this house, the rest will all fly. then shall we get no more than the body that be slay and then starve for victual. as for their fury, it be the least danger, for, well you know, be alone. assault with 2 or 300 of they. i make. they con pound to save my life, and we be now 16 and they but 700.. at the most, and assure yourselves, god will so assist we, that if you dare but to stand to discharge your piece, the very smoke will be sufficient to affright they yet howsoever, if there be occasion we fight like man and not die like sheep. but first i will deal with they to bring it to pass. we may fight for some thing and draw they to it by condition. if you like this motion, promise i you will be valiant. the time not permit any argument. all vow to execute whatsoever he attempt or die. whereupon the captain approach the king. bespeak he in this manner: i see, opechancanough, your plot to murder i. but i, smith, offer to opechancanough, fear it not as yet, your man and i have do no harm, but by our direction, take therefore your arm. you see i, my body shall be as naked as you. the i will, in your river, be a fit place if you be content, and the conqueror of we two shall be lord and master over all our man. otherways, draw all your man into the field. if you have not enough, take time to fetch more and bring what number you will. so every one, bring a basket of corn against all, which i will stake the value in copper. you see, i have but 15. man and our game shall be the conqueror. take all the king be guard with 50 or 60 of his chief opechancanoughs, devise to betray smith man. seem kind to appease smith suspicion of unkindness by a great present at the door. they entreat he to receive this be to draw he without the door, where the present be guard with at the least 200 man and 30 lie under a great tree that lie thwart as a barricado, each his arrow nocked, ready to shoot some. the precedent command to go and see what kind of deceit this be and to receive the present. but they refuse to do it yet diverse offer who he will not permit but command mr persie and mr west to make. good the house. take mr poell and mr beheathland to guard the door and, in such a rage, snatch the king by his vantbrace, in the midst of his man, with his pistol ready, bend against his breast. thus he lead the tremble king near dead with fear amongst all his people who deliver the captain, his bow and arrow, all his man. be easy entreat to cast down their arm. little dream, any dare in that manner. have use their king who then, to escape himself, bestow his present in goodsadnesse and have cause all his multitude to approach difarm the precedent, argue with they to this effect. i see you, pamaunky, the great desire you have to smith. discourse to the pamaunky. cut my throat and my long suffering. your injury have inbolden you to this presumption. the cause i have forbear your insolence, be the promise i make you before the god. i serve to be your friend till you give i just cause to be your enemy. if i keep this vow, my god will keep i. you can hurt i if i break it, he will destroy i. but if you shoot but one arrow to shed one drop of blood of any of my man, or steal the least of these bead or copper i spurn before i with my foot, you shall see, i will not cease revenge if once i begin, so long as i can hear where to find. one of your nation that will not deny the name of pamaunke. i be not now at rasseneac, half drown with mire, where you take i prisoner. yet then, for keep your promise and your good usage and save my life. i so affect you that your denial of your treachery do half persuade i to mistake myself. but if i be the mark you aim at, here i stand, shoot he that dare you promise to fraught my ship ere i depart, and so you shall, or i mean to load she with your dead carcase. yet if, as friend, you will come and trade, i once more promise not to trouble you, except you give i the first occasion upon this. away the savage dissemble their, go, their bow and arrow and man, woman and child bring in their commodity. but 2 or three hour they so throng about the precedent and so overweary he as he, retire himself to rest, leave mr beheathland and mr powel to accept their present. but some savage perceive he fast asleep and the guard, careless, disperse 40 or 50 of their choice man, each with a english sword in his hand, begin to enter the house with 2 or 300 other that press to second. they the noise and have they make in. do so shake. the house. as they awake he from his sleep and be half amaze with this sudden sight, betake he straight to his sword and target mr crashaw and some other charge in like manner. they throng fast back then before forward the house. thus their excuse and reconcilement cleanse the king and his ancient with a long oration come to excuse this intrusion. the rest of the day be spend with much kindness. the company again renew their present of their best provision and what soever we give they, they seem well content with it. now, in the mean while, since our departure, this happen at the fort. mr scrivener, willing to cross the surprise of powhatan 9 day after the precedent departure, will needs visit the i. will of hog and take with he captain waldo, though the precedent have appoint he to be ready to second his occasion with mr anthony gosnoll and eight other. but so violent be the wind, that extreme freeze, time that the boat sink, but where or how, none do know, for they be all drown. only this be know that the skiff be much overload and will scarce. have the loss of mr skrivener and other with a skiff live in that extreme tempest. have she be empty, but by no persuasion he can be divert though both waldo and 100 other doubt as it happen, the savage be the first that find their body, which so much the more encourage they to effect their project to advertise. the precedent of this heavy news. none can be find will undertake it, but the journey be often refuse of all in the fort until mr wiffin undertake alone the performance thereof, wherein he be encounter with many danger. and mr wiffin, his journey to the precedent, difficulty, and in all part as he pass, as also that night he lodge with powhatan perceive such preparation forwarre that assure he some mischief be intend, but with extraordinary bribe and much trouble in three day travel at length. he find we, in the midst of these turmoil, this unhappy news, the precedent, swear he to conceal from the rest and so dissemble his sorrow with the best countenance he can, when the night approach, go safe aboard with all. his company now so extreme powhatan have threaten the powhatan constrain his man to be treacherous, death of his man if they do not by some mean kill captain smith, that the next day they appoint the country shall come to trade, unarm, yet unwilling to be treacherous, but that they be constrain, hate, fight almost as ill as hang, such fear they have of bad success the next morning. the sun have not long appear, but the field appear, cover with people and basket to tempt. we ashore the precedent, determine to keep aboard, but nothing be to be have without his presence. nor they will not endure the sight of a gun. then the precedent see many, their three attempt to betray. we depart and be. unwilling to lose such a booty so well, contrive the pinnace and his barge with ambuscado, as only with m r persie, mr west and mr russel. arm he go ashore, other unarm he appoint to receive what be. bring the savage flock before he in heap and the bank serve as a trench for retreat he draw. they fair open to his ambuscado for he not be to be persuade to go to visit their king. the king come to visit he with 2 or 300 man in the form of two half moon, with some 20 man and many woman, load with great paint basket. but when they approach somewhat near we, their woman and child flee for when they have environ and beset the field. in this manner. they think their purpose sure, yet so tremble with fear as they be scarce able to nock their arrow. smith, stand with his 3 man ready, bend, behold they till they be within danger of our ambuscado, who, upon the word, discover themselves. and he retire to the bank, which the savage no soon perceive but away they flee, esteem their heel for their best advantage. that night we send to the fort mr crashaw and mr foard who, in the midway between werawocomoco and the fort, meet 4 or 5. of the dutch man confederate go to powhatan, the which, to excuse those gentleman suspicion of their run to the savage, return to the fort. and there continue. the savage hear our barge depart. in the night be so terrible, afraid that we send for more man. we have so much, threaten their ruin and the rase of their house, boat and canoe that the next day the king send our captain a chain of pearl to a chain of pearl, send to obtain peace, alter his purpose and stay his man. promise though they want themselves to fraught our ship and bring it aboard to avoid suspicion, so that 5 or 6 day after, from all part of the country within 10 or 12 mile, in the extreme cold, frost and snow, they bring we provision on their naked back. yet, notwithstanding this, kindness and trade, have their art and poison be sufficient. the precedent with mr west and some other. have be. poison it, make they sick but expel itself. wecuttanow, a stout young, the precedent, poison the offender, punish fellow know he be suspect for. bring this present of poison with 40 or 50. of his choice companion, see the precedent, but with a few man at potauncat so proud, brave it as though he expect to encounter a revenge which the precedent perceive in the midst of his company. do not only beat but spurn he like a dog as scorn to do he any worse mischief, whereupon all of they flee into the wood, think they have do a great matter to have so well escape and the townsman remain present. fraught our barge to be rid of our company frame. many excuse to excuse. wecuttanow be son to their chief king. but powhatan, and tell we if we will show they he that bring the poison. they will deliver he to we to punish as we please. man may think it strange, there shall be this stir for a little corn, but have it be gold with more ease we may have get it and have it want the whole colony have starve. we may be think very patient to endure all those injury, yet only with fear they we get what they have, whereas if we have take revenge they by their loss, we shall have lose our self. we search also the country of youghtanund and mattapamient, where the people impart that little they have with such complaint and tear. from woman, the savage want and poverty and child as he have. be too cruel to be a christian that will not have be satisfy and move with compassion. but have this happen in october, november and december, when that unhappy discovery of monacan be make, we may have fraught a ship of 40 tun and twice as much may have be have from the river of toppahannock, patawomeck and the main occasion of our temporize with the savage be to part friend as we do, to give the less cause of suspicion to powhatan to fly by who we now, the dutchman, do much hurt, return with a purpose to have: surprise, he and his provision for effect, whereof, when we come against the town, the precedent. send mr wiffin and mr coe a shore to discover and make way for his intend project. but they find that those damn dutchman have cause powhatan to abandon his new house and and to carry away all his corn and provision, and the people they find by their mean so ill affect that have they not stand well upon their guard? they have hardly escape with their life. so the precedent find his intention thus frustrate and that there be nothing now to be have and therefore a unfit time to revenge their abuse. hold on his course for james town. we have, in this journey for 25l of copper, 50l of iron and bead, keep 40 man 6. week and daily feast with bread, corn flesh. fish and foul. every man have, for his reward and in consideration of his commodity, a month provision. no trade be allow but for the store and we deliver, at james town to the capemarchant, 279 bushel of corn. those temporal proceed to some may seem too charitable to such a daily dare, treacherous people, to other unpleasant that we wash not the ground with their blood, nor show such strange in vention in mangle, murder, ransack and destroy, as do the spaniard, the simple body of those ignorant soul, nor delightful, because not stuff with relation of heap and mine of gold and silver, nor such rare commodity as the portugal and spaniard find in the east and west indies the want whereof have beget we that. be the first undertaker. no less scorn and contempt than their noble conquest and valiant adventure beautify with it praise and honour. too much, i confess, the world can attribute to their ever memorable merit. and to clear we from the world blind, ignorant censure, these few word may suffice to any reasonable understanding. it be the spaniard. good hap to happen in those part. where be infinite number of people who have manure the ground with that providence that it afford victual at all time and time have bring they to that perfection. they have the use of gold and silver and the most of such commodity as their country afford, so that what the spaniard get be only the spoil and pillage of those country people. and not the labour of their own hand. but have those fruitful country be as savage, as barbarous, as ill people as little plant labour and manure as virginia, their proper labour, it be likely, will have produce as small profit as we. but have virginia be people plant manure and adorn with such store of precious jewel and rich commodity as be the indies, then have we not get and do as much as, by their example, may be expect from we. the world may then have traduce we and our merit and have, make shame and infamy our recompense and reward. but we chance in a land, even as god make it, where we find only a idle, improvident scatter, people ignorant of the knowledge of gold or silver or any commodity and careless of any thing but from hand to mouth but for babble of no worth. nothing to encourage we, but what accidental we find nature afford, which ere we can bring to recompense our pain, defray our charge and satisfy our adventurer. we be to discover the country subdue the people, bring they to be tractable, civil and industrious, and teach they trade that the fruit of their labour may make. we recompense or plant such colony of our own that must first make provision how to live of themselves, ere they can bring to perfection. the commodity of the country, which doubtless will be as commodious for england as the west indies for spain, if it be right, manage, notwithstanding all our homebred opinion that will argue the contrary, as former such like have do against the spaniard and portugal. but to conclude, against all rumour of opinion, i only say this for those that the three first year begin this plantation, notwithstanding all their faction mutiny and misery, so gentle, correct and well, prevent. peruse the spanish decade, the relation of m hacklut, and tell i how many ever, with such small mean as a barge of 2 ton, sometime with 7., 8., 9 or but at most 15 man, do ever discover so many fair and navigable river subject, so many. several king, people and nation to obedience and contribution with so little blood shed. and if, in the search of those country, we have happen where wealth have be, we have as sure have it as obedience and contribution. but if we have overskip it, we will not envy they that shall chance to find it yet. can we not but lament? it be our ill fortune to end when we have. but only learn how to begin and find the right course, how to proceed, by rich wiffin, william phettiplace and anas todkill, chap 10.. how the savage become subject to the english when the ship depart, all the provision of the store, but that the precedent have get be so rot with the last summer rain. and eat with rat and worm, as the hog will scarce eat it. yet it be the soldier diet till our return, so that we find nothing do but victual spend and the most part of our tool and a good part of our arm convey to the savage. but now cast up the store and find sufficient till the next harvest. the fear of starve be abandon and the company divide into ten, fifteen or, as the business require. 4 hour each day be spend in work, the rest in pastime and merry exercise. but the untowardness of the great number cause the precedent to make a general assembly. and then he advise they as follow, countryman, the long experience of our late misery, the precedent advise. to the company i hope be sufficient to persuade every one to a present correction of himself. and think not that either my pain or the adventurer purse will ever maintain you in idleness and sloth. i speak not this to you all, for diverse of you i know deserve both honour and reward better than be yet here to be have. but the great part must be more industrious or starve howsoever you have be heretofore tolerate by the authority of the council. from that i have often command you. yet see now the authority rest whole in myself. you must obey this for a law that he that will not work shall not eat except by sickness. he be disable for the labour of 30 or 40 honest and industrious man shall not be consume to maintain 150 idle varlet. now though you presume the authority here be but a shadow and that i dare not touch the life of any, but my own, must answer it. the letter patent each week shall be read. you who content will tell you the contrary. i will wish you therefore, without contempt, seek to observe these order set down, for there be now no more counsel to protect you, nor curb my endeavour. therefore, he that offend, let he assure, expect his due punish, mean he make also. a table as a public memorial of every man desert to encourage the good and with shame to spurn on the rest to amendment. by this, many become very industrious yet more. by severe punishment perform their business for all be so, task that there be no excuse can prevail to deceive he. yet the dutchman, consort so close, still convey powder, shot swords and tool that though we can find the defect, we can not find by who it be occasion, till it be too late. all this time the dutchman remain with powhatan. the dutchman plot to murder capt smith. receive they instruct the savage, their use, but their consort not follow they, as they expect to know the cause, they send francis, their companion, a. stout young fellow, disguise savage like to the glass-house, a place in the wood near a mile from james town. where be the for all their unsuspected villainy 40 man they procure of powhatan to lie in ambuscade for captain smith who no soon hear of this dutchman but he send to apprehend he who find he be go yet to cross his return to powhatan, captain smith present, dispatch 20, shot after he and then return. but from the glass-house alone he encounter the king of paspaheigh, a most strong, stout savage who, persuasion not be able to persuade he to his ambush, see he only arm but with a falchion, attempt to have shoot he. but the precedent: prevent his shot by grapple with he and the savage as well. prevent he for draw his falchion and perforce bear he into the river to have drown he long they struggle in the water, from whence the king perceive two of the pole upon the sand will have flee, but the precedent: hold he by the hair and throat smith, take the king of paspaheigh prisoner till the pole come in. then see how pitiful the poor savage beg his life. they conduct he. prisoner to the fort the dutchman ere long be, also bring in who villainy though all this time it be suspect. yet he feign such a formal excuse that for want of language, winifrid have not right understand they, and for their deal with powhatan that to save their life they be constrain to accommodate his arm of who he extreme complain to have detain, they perforce, and that he make this escape with the hazard of his life and mean not to have return but only walk in the wood to gather walenut. yet for all this fair tale, there be so small appearance of truth, he go by the heel the king also. he put in fetter purpose to regain the dutchman by the, save his. life. the poor savage do his best by his daily messenger to powhatan, but all return that the dutchman will not return, neither do powhatan. stay they and bring they fifty mile on their back, they be not able. daily, this king, wife, child and people come to visit he with present which he liberal bestow to make his peace. much trust they have in the precedent promise. but the king find his guard negligent. though fetter yet escape, captain win think to pursue. he find such troop of savage to hinder his passage. as they exchange many voly of shot for flight of arrow. captain smith hear of this. in return to the fort take two savage prisoner, the one call kemp, the other kinsock. the two most exact villain in the country. with those captain winifrid and 50 choose man, attempt that night to have regain the king and revenge his injury. and so have do if he have follow his direction or be advise by those two villain that will have betray both their king and kindred for a piece of copper. but he trifle away the night, the savage. the next morning by the rise of the sun, brave he come a shore to fight. a good time, both side let fly at other. but we hear of no hurt. only they take two canoe, burn the king house and so return the precedent. fear those bravado will but encourage the savage, begin himself to try his conclusion whereby 6. or 7 savage be slay as many. the salu^ges desire peace. make prisoner, burn their house, take their boat with all their fish, wear and plant they at james town for his own use. and now resolve not to cease till he have revenge himself upon all that have injure he. but in his journey, pass by paspaheigh towards the savage, do their best to draw he to their ambuscado, but see he regardless. pass their country. all show themselves in their brave manner to rrie their valour. he can not but let fly and ere he can land the savage. no soon know he. but they throw down their arm and desire peace. their orator be a stout young man call ocanindge, who worthy discourse deserve, geanindge. his oration to be remember and this it be, captain smith, my master, be here present in this company. think it, captain winifrid, and not you, and of he he intend to have be revenge. have never offend he if he have offend you in escape your imprisonment. the fish swim, the fowl fly and the very beast strive to escape the snare and live. they blame not. he be a man, he will entreat you. remember your be a prisoner. what pain he take to save your life. if, since he have injure you, he be compel to it. but howsoever you have, revenge it with our too-great loss. we perceive and well know you intend to destroy. we that be here to entreat and desire your. friendship and to enjoy our house and plant our field of who fruit, you shall participate, otherwise you will have the worst by our absence, for we can plant any where, though with more labour, and we know you can live, if you want our harvest and that relief we bring you. if you promise we peace, we will believe you. if you proceed in revenge, we will abandon the country upon these term the precedent: promise they peace till they do we injury, upon condition they shall bring in provision. so all depart, good friend, and so continue till smith leave the country, arrive at james town. complaint be make to the precedent that the who all this while a savage smother at james town and be recover, continue trade and seem our friend by colour, thereof be the only thief and amongst other thing a pistol be steal and the thief flee there be apprehend 2 proper young fellow that be brother know to be his confederate, now to regain this pistol, the one we imprison, the other be send to return again within 12 hour or his brother to be hang. yet the precedent pity, the poor naked savage in the dungeon send he victual and some charcoal for fire ere midnight his brother return with the pistol, but the poor savage in the dungeon be so smother with the smoke he have. make and so piteous burn that we find he dead. the other most lamentable bewail his death and break forth in such bitter agony that the precedent to quiet he tell he that if hereafter they will not steal he will make he alive again. but little think he can be recover yet. we do our best with aquavitae and vinegar. it please god to restore he again to life, but so drink and affright that he seem lunatic, not understand any thing he speak or hear, the which as much grieve and torment the other as before to see he dead of which malady. upon promise of their good behaviour afterward, the precedent promise to recover he and so cause he to be lay by a fire. to sleep, who in the morning have well sleep, have recover his perfect sense and then be dress of his burn and each a piece of copper give they. they go away so well content that this be spread amongst all the savage. for a miracle that captain smith can make a man alive that be dead. these and many other such pretty accident so amaze and affright both powhatan and all his people that from all part with present, they desire peace, return many steal, thing which we neither demand nor think of- and after that those that be take steal, both powhatan and his people have send they back to james town to receive their punishment and all the country become absolute as free for we. as for themselves, chap 11.. what be do in three month? have victual the store, devour by rat how we live 3 month of such natural fruit as the country afford. now we, so quiet, follow our business that in 3 month we make 3 or 4 last of pitch and tar and soap ash. produce a trial of glass, make a well in the fort of excellent sweet water which till then be want. build some 20 house, recover more. do in 3 month, then 3 year, our church. provide net and wear for fish and to stop the disorder of our disorderly thief and the savage, build a block house in the neck of our isle. keep by a garrison to entertain the savage trade and none to pass nor repass, savage, nor christian, with out the precedent order. 30 or 40 acre of ground we dig and plant of 3, sow in one year, increase 60 and odd pig and near 500 chicken bring up themselves without have any meat give they but the hog be transport to hog i will where also we build a block house with a garrison to give we notice of any ship and for their exercise they make clapbord wainscot and cut down tree against the ship come. we build also a fort for a retreat near a convenient river, upon a high command hill very hard to be assault and easy to be defend, but ere. it be half finish. this defect cause a stay. in search our cask corn, we find it half rot, the rest so consume with the many thousand rat increase, first from the ship that we know not how to keep that little we have. this do drive we all to our wit end for there be nothing in the country but what nature afford until this time, keinp and be fetter, prisoner and daily wrought and teach we how to order and plant our field. who now, for want of victual, we set at liberty. but so well be. they use that. they little desire it, and to express their love for 16 day continuance, the country, bring we when least 100l a day of squirrel, turkey, dear. and other wild beast, but this want of corn occasion, the end of all our work. it be work sufficient to provide victual 60 or 80 with ensign laxon be send down the river to live upon oyster, and 20 with lieutenant percy to try for fish at pointcomfort. but in 6 week they will not agree once to cast out their net, mr west, with as many go up to the fall but nothing can be find but a few berry and acorn of that in the store. every one have their equal proportion till this, present by the hazard and endeavour of some 30 or 40. this whole number, the pain of 40 feed 150.. have ever be feed? we have more sturgeon, their can be. devour by dog and man, of which the, in dustrious, by dry and pownd, mingle with caviar, sorrel and other wholesome herb will make bread and good meat. other will gather as much tockwough root in a day as will make they bread a week, so that of those wild fruit, fish and berry, these live very well in regard of such a diet. but such be the most strange condition of some 150 that have they not be force perforce to gather and prepare their victual, they will all have star ve and have eat one another. of those wild fruit the savage often bring we, and for that the precedent will not fulfil the unreasonable desire of those distract lubberly glutton, to sell not only our. kettle, hoe, tool and iron, nay, sword piece, and the very ordnance and house, may they have prevail, but to have be but idle for those savage fruit they will have impart all to the savage especial. for one basket of corn they hear of to be at powhatan, 50 mile from our fort, though he buy near half of it to satisfy their humour. yet to have have the other half, they will have sell their soul, their desire to destroy themselves, though not sufficient to have keep they a week, thousand be their exclamation, suggestion and devise. to force he to those base invention to have make it a occasion to abandon the country. want, perforce, constrain he to endure their exclaim: folly till he find. out the author, one dyer, a most crafty knave, and his ancient maligner, who he worthy, punish, and with the rest he argue the case in this manner. fellow soldier, i do little think any so false to the precedent speech, to the drone report, or so many so simple to be persuade that i either intend to starve you, or that powhatan at this present have corn for himself, much less for you, or that i will not have it if i know where it be to be have. neither do i think any so malicious, as now i see a great many. yet it shall not so much passionate i, but i will do my best for my worst maligner, but dream no long of this. vain hope from powhatan. nor that i will long forbear to force you from your idleness and punish you if you rail. you cannotdeny but that by the hazard of my life, many a time i have save you when may your own will have prevail. you will have starve and will do still, whether i will or no. but i protest by that god that make i, since necessity, have not power to force you together for your self. those fruit the earth do yield, you shall not only gather for yourselves but for those that be sick. as yet i never have more from the store then the worst of you and all my english extraordinary provision that i have, you shall see, i divide among the sick and this savage trash you so scornful repine at be put in your mouth. your stomach can digest it and therefore i will take a course you shall provide it. the sick shall not starve, but equal share of all our labour, and every one that gather, not every day as much as i do the next day, shall be set beyond the river and for ever be banish from the fort and live there or starve. this order, many murmur, be very cruel, but it cause the most part so well, bestir themselves that 200 man. except they be drown. there die not pass 7 or 8.. as for captain winifrid and mr ley, they die, but 7 of 200 die in 9 month. ere this want happen and the rest die, not for want of such as. preserve the rest. many be billit among the savage whereby we know all their passage field and habitation, how to gather and use their fruit as well as themselves. so well, those poor savage use we that be. thus billet as diverse of the soldier run away to the savage return our sugitives search kemp our old prisoner. glad be this savage to have such a occasion to testify his love. for instead of entertain they and such thing as they have steal with all the great offer and promise they make they to revenge their injury upon captain smith first, he make himself sport in show his countryman by they how he be use. feed they with this law: who will not work must not eat till they be near starve. continual threaten to beat they to death. neither can they get from he till perforce he. bring they to our captain that so we content he and punish they as many other that intend also to have follow. they be rather content to labour at home than adventure, to live idle among the savage of who. there be more hope to make better christian and good subject. than the one half of those that counterfeit themselves both. for so afeard be all those king and the better sort of their people to displease we that some of the base sort that we have extreme hurt and punish for their villainy, will hire we. we shall not tell it to their king or countryman, who will also repunish they and yet return they to james town to content the precedent by that testimony of their love, mr sicklemore. well, return from chawonock but search so they send by sir walter rawley, find little hope and less certainty of they be. leave by sir walter rawley so that nathaniel powel and anas todkill be also by the quiyoughquohanock conduct to the mangoage to search they there. but nothing can we learn? but they be all dead. this honest, proper, good, promis-keeping king of all the rest do ever best affect we, and though to his false god he be yet very zealous. yet he will confess our god as much exceed he as our gun do. his bow and arrow often send our precedent: many present to pray to his god for rain or his corn will perish for his god. be angry. all this time, to reclaim the dutchman and one bentley, a other fugitive, we employ one william volda, a swisser by birth, with pardon and promise to regain they little we then suspect, this double villainy of any villainy who plain teach we in the most trust be the great treason. for this wicked hypocrite, by the seem hate he bear to the lewd condition of his curse countryman, the dutchman project, have this opportunity by his employment to regain. they convey they every thing they desire to effect their project to destroy the colony with much devotion. they expect the spaniard, to who they intend to have, do good service, but to begin with the first opportunity they see necessity. thus enforce we to disperse ourselves, importune powhatan to lend they but his force, and they will not only destroy our hog, fire our town and betray our pinnace, but bring to his service and subjection the most part of our company. with this plot they have acquaint many discontent and many be agree to their devilish practice. but on thomas dovese and thomas mallard who, christian heart much relent at such a unchristian act, voluntary, reveal it to captain smith who do his best it may be, conceal, persuade dovese and malard to proceed in the confederacy, only to bring the irreclamable dutch man and inconstant savage in such a manner amongst his ambuscado as he have prepare as not many of they shall ever have return from out our but this brute come to the ear of the impatient multitude. they so importune the precedent to cut of those dutchman as amongst many that offer to cut their throat before the face of powhatan, mr wiffin and abbot be send to stab or shoot they but these dutch man make such excuse two gentleman. send to kill. they accuse volday who they suppose have reveal their project as abbot will not. yet wiffin will perceive it. but deceit the king. understand of this their employment. send, present his messenger to captain smith to signify it be not his fault to detain they, nor hinder his man from execute his command, nor do he, nor will he maintain they or any to occasion his displeasure. but ere this business be bring to a point, god have see our misery sufficient. send in captain argall to fish for sturgeon with a ship well furnish with wine and biscuit, which, though it be not send we. such be our occasion. we take it at a price, but leave he sufficient to return for england still. dissemble valdo his villainy, but certain he have not escape. have the precedent continue. by this you may see, for all those cross treachery and dissension, how he wrestle and overcome. note these inconvenience without blood shed. all that happen also, what good be do. how few die. what food the country natural afford, what small cause there be, man shall starve or be murder by the savage. that have discretion to manage this courage and industry. the 2. first year, though, by his adventure he have oft bring the savage to a tractable trade. yet you see how the envious authority ever cross he and frustrate his best endeavour. yet this wrought in he that experience and estimation among the savage, as otherways it have be impossible. he have ever effect that he do, though. the many miserable yet generous and worthy adventure he have long and oft endure as well in some part of africa and america as in the most part of europe and asia by land or sea, have teach he much. yet in this case he be again to learn his lecture by experience which, with thus much a do have obtain. it be his ill chance to end when he have, but only learn how to begin. and though he leave these unknown difficulty make easy and familiar to his unlawful successor who, only by live in james town, presume to know more than all the world can direct they, though they have all his soldier with their triple power. and twice triple better, mean by what they have do in his absence. the world do see, and what they will have do in his presence. have he not prevent their indiscretion? it do just approve what cause he have to send they for england. but they have make it more plain since their return, have his absolute authority, free in their power, with all the advantage and opportunity that his labour have. effect, as i be sorry, their action have make it so manifest, so i be unwilling to say what reason do compel i to make apparent the truth, lest i shall seem partial, reasonless or malicious. chap 12. the arrival of the three supply to redress those jar and ill proceed. the alteration of the government. the council in england alter the government and devolve the authority to the lord de-la-ware who, for his deputy, send sr thomas gales and sr george somers with 9 ship and 500 person. they set sail from england in may 1609. a small catch perish at sea in a herycano. the admiral with 150 man, with the two knight and their new commission, their bill of load with all manner of direction and the most part of their provision arrive, not with the other 7 as captain arrive ratliffe. the loss of virginia who right name be sickelmore, martin and archer who, as they have be troublesome at sea, begin. again to mar all ashore. for though, as be say they veer former depose and send for england, yet now return again, grace by the title of captain of the passenger. see the admiral want and great probability of her loss strengthen themselves with those new company so rail and exclaim against captain smith that they mortal hate he ere ever. they see, he who understand by his scout the arrival of such a fleet, little dream of any such supply. suppose they spaniard he so determine and order his affair as we little fear their arrival, nor the success of our encounter. nor be the savage any way negligent or unwilling to aid and assist we with their best power. have it so be. we have be. happy for we will not have. truse they the savage offer to fight under o^r colour, but as our foe, whereas receive those as our countryman and friend. they do their best to murder our precedent, to surprise the store the fort and our lodging, to usurp the government and make we all their servant and slave to our own merit, to 1000 mischief mutiny. those lewd captain lead this lewd company, wherein be many unruly gallant pack thither by their friend to escape ill destiny. and those will dispose and determine of the government sometime, one the next day, another to day the old commission to morrow the new the next day. by neither in fine they will rule all or ruin all. yet in charity we. must endure they thus to destroy we or by correct their folly have, bring the world censure upon we to have be guilty of their blood. happy have we be. have they never arrive and we for ever abandon and as we be, leave to our fortune. for on earth be never more confusion or misery than their faction. occasion the precedent. see the desire those brave have to the plant nansamund rule. see how his authority be so unexpected change will willing have leave all and have return for england. but see there be small hope this new commission will arrive. long he will not suffer those factious spirit to proceed. it will be too tedious, too strange and almost incredible. shall i particular relate the infinite. danger, plot and practice he daily escape amongst this factious crew the chief whereof he quick lay by the heel till his lee. sure better serve to do they justice and to take away all occasion of further mischief. mr persie have his request grant to return for england and mr west with 120 go to plant at the fall martin with near as a plantation of the fall many to nansamund with their due proportion of all provision accord to their number. now the precedent year be near expire, he make martin precedent who know his own insufficiency and the company scorn and conceit of his unworthiness. within 3 hour resign it again to captain smith and at nansamund thus proceed the people be contributor use he. kind. yet the breach of peace with the savage, such be his jealous fear and cowardice. in the midst of his mirth, he do surprise this poor naked king with his monument house and the i will he inhabit and there fortify himself. but so apparent distract with fear. as embolden the savage to assault, he kill his man, redeem their king, gather and carry away more than 1000 bushel of corn. he not once dare to intercept they, but send to the precedent, then the fall for 30 good shot which from james town immediate be send he. but he so well employ they as they do, just nothing but return, complain of his childishness, that with they flee from his company and so leave they to. their fortune, mr west have seat his man at the fall present return to revisit james town. the precedent meet he, by the way, as he follow he to the fall where he find this company so inconsiderate seat in a place not only subject to the river inundation but round environ with many intolerable inconvenience. for remedy, whereof he send present to powhatan to sell he the place, call powhatan, promise powhatan sell for copper to defend he against the monacans. and these shall be his condition with his people to resign. he the fort and house and all that country for a proportion of copper that all steal offender shall be. send he there to receive their punishment that every house, as a custom, shall pay. he a bushel of corn for a inch square of copper and a proportion of pocones as a yearly tribute to king james for their protection, as a duty, what else they can spare to barter at their best discretion? but both this excellent place and those good condition do those fury refuse, contemn both. he mutiny his kind care and authority the worst they can to show their spite they do. i do more than wonder to think how only with 5 man he either dare or will adventure, as he do know how greedy they be. 5 suppress 120 of his blood to land amongst they and commit to imprisonment the great spirit amongst they till by their multitude be 120.. they force he to retire. yet in that retreat he surprise one of the boat wherewith he return to their ship, wherein be their provision, which also he take, and well it chance he find the mariner so tractable and constant, or there have be small possibility he have ever escape notwithstanding, there be many of the best, i mean of the most worthy, in judgement, reason or experience that from their first land, hearing the general good report of his old soldier and see with their eye his action so well, manage with discretion as captain wood, captain web, captain moon, captain phitz-iames, mr partridge, mr white, mr powel and diverse other, when they perceive the malice and condition of ratliffe, martin and archer, leave their faction and ever rest his faithful. friend, but the worst be the poor savage that daily bring in their contribution to the precedent that disorderly company so torment those poor naked soul by steal their corn, rob the breach of peace with the savage at the fall their garden, beat they, break their house and keep some prisoner that they daily complain to captain smith. he have bring they for protector worse enemy than the monocans themselves which, though till then for his love they have endure. they desire pardon if hereafter they defend themselves, since he will not correct they, as they have long expect he will, so much they importune he to punish their misdemeanore, as they offer, if he will conduct they to fight for he, against they. but have spend. 9 day in seek to reclaim. they show they how much they do abuse themselves with their great guild. hope of sea mine commodity or victory. they so mad conceive, then see, nothing will prevail with they. he set sail for james town. now, no soon be the ship under sail, but the savage assault. those 120 in their fort find a assault by the savage. some straggle abroad in the wood. they slay many and so affright the rest as their prisoner escape and they scarce retire with the sword and cloak of these they have slay. but ere we have sail a league our ship ground. give we once more liberty to summon they to a parley where we find they all so strange amaze with. this poor, simple assault as they submit themselves upon any term to the precedent mercy who present, put by the heel 6 or 7 of the chief offender. the rest, he seat gallant at powhatan in their savage fort they build and pretty, fortify with pole and bark of tree, sufficient to have defend they from all their savage in virginia, dry house for lodging, 300 acre of ground ready to plant, and no place so strong, so pleasant, and the plant of nonsuch delightful in virginia, for which we call it nonsuch the savage. also, he present appease, redeliver to every one their former loss. thus all be friend, new peace conclude, new officer appoint to command, and the precedent again ready to depart, but at that. instant arrive, mr west, who, good nature with the persuasion and compassion of those mutinous prisoner be, so much abuse that to regain their old hope, new turboile arise. for the rest be possess of all their victual munition and every thing. they grow to that height in their former faction. as there the precedent leave they to their fortune. they return again to the open air at west, for it abandon nonsuch, and he to james town with his best expedition. but this happen. he in that journey sleep in his boat for the ship be return. 2 c smith blow up with powder. day before accidental one fire his powder bag which tear his flesh from his body and thigh. 9 or 10. inch square in. a most pitiful manner. but to quench the torment, fire fry. he in his clothes, he leap over board into the deep river where ere they can recover he. he be near drown in this estate without either chirurgeon or chirurgery. he be to go near 100 mile, arrive at james town, cause all thing to be, prepare for peace or war to obtain provision, while those thing be provide, martin, ratliffe and archer be to have their trial. their guilty conscience fear a just reward for their desert. see the precedent. unable to stand and near bereave of his sense by reason of his torment, they have plot to have murder. he in his bed, but his heart do fail. he that shall have give fire to. that merciless, a bloody pistol. so not find that course to be the best. they join together to usurp the government, thereby to escape their punishment and excuse themselves by accuse. he the precedent, have notice of their project, the which to withstand though his old soldier importune. he but permit they to take of their head that will resist his command. yet he will the government usurp. nor permit they but send for the master of the ship and take order with they for his return for england, see there be neither chirurgeon nor chirurgery in the fort to cure his hurt and the ship to depart the next day. his commission to be suppress, he know not why, himself and soldier to be reward, he know. not how, and a new commission grant, they know, not to who, the which so disable that authority he have, as make, they presume so oft, to those mutiny and faction as they do beside. so grievous be his wound and so cruel his torment. few expect he can live, nor be he able to follow his business to regain what they have lose, suppress those faction and range the country for provision, as he intend and well he know. in those affair his own action and presence be as requisite as his experience and direction, which now can not be. he go present, aboard, resolve there to appoint they governor and to take order for the mutineer and their confederate who see he go persuade m c. persie to stay and be their precedent and, within less than a hour, be this mutation, begin and conclude. for when the company understand smith will leave, they and see the rest in arm, call precedent and councillor diverse begin to fawn on those new commander that now bend all their wit to get he resign. they, his commission, who, after many salt and bitter repulse that their confusion shall not be attribute to he for leave the country without government and authority, have take order to be the cause why smith leave the country and his commission free from danger of their malice. he be not unwilling. they shall steal it from he but never consent to deliver it to any. but have that unhappy blast not. happen, he will quick have qualify the heat of those humour and faction, have the ship, but once, leave they and we to our fortune, and have make that provision from among the savage, as we neither fear spaniard savage nor famine. nor will have leave virginia, nor our lawful authority, but at as dear a price as we have, buy it and pay for it. what shall i say? but thus we lose. he that in all his proceed, make justice his first guide and experience his second, ever hate, baseness, sloth, pride and indignity, more than any danger, that never allow more for himself than his soldier, with he that, upon no danger, will send they where he will not lead they himself that will never. see we want what he either have or can by any mean get. we that will rather want then borrow or starve then not pay that love action more than word and hate, falsehood and cozenage worse than death. who adventure be our life and who loss our death. leave we thus with 3 ship, 7 boat commodity ready to trade the harvest, new gather, 10 week provision in the store, 490 and odd person, 24 piece of ordinance, 300 musket, snaphanche and fire lock, shot powder and match, sufficient curate pike, sword and morion, more then man the savage, their language and habitation well know to 100, well train and expert soldier. net for fish, tool of all sort to work apparel to supply our want. 6. mare and a horse, 5 or 600 swine, as many hen and chicken, some goat, some sheep, what be bring or breed there remain, but they regard nothing but from hand to mouth to consume that. we have take care for nothing but to perfect some colourable complaint against captain smith for effect, whereof 3 week long they stay, the 6 ship till they can produce they. that time and charge may much better have be spend, but it suit well with the rest of their discretion. now all those smith have either whip, punish their complaint and proof against he or any way disgrace- have free power and liberty to say or swear any thing. and from a whole armful of their examination this be conclude the. mutineer at the fall complain he cause the savage assault they for that he will not revenge their loss. they be but 120 and he 5 man and himself, and this they prove by the oath of one. he have oft whip for perjury and pilfer the dutchman that he have appoint to be stab for their treachery. swear he send to poison they with rat, bane the prudent council that he will not submit himself to their steal authority. coe and drer that shall have murder. he be high prefer for swear, they hear one say. he hear powhatan say that. he hear a man say: if the king will not send that corn he have, he shall not long enjoy his copper crown, nor those robe. he have, send he. yet those also swear he may have have corn for tool, but will not the truth be, smith have no such engine as the king demand, nor powhatan any corn. yet this argue he will starve. they other complain he will not let they rest in the fort to starve, but force they to the oyster bank to live or starve as he live himself. for though he have of his own private provision, send from england sufficient, yet he give it all away to the weak and sick, cause the most untoward by do as he do to gather their food from the unknown part of the river and wood that they live, though hardly that otherways will have starve ere they will. have leave their bed, or at most the sight of james town, to have get their own victual. some prophetical spirit calculate he have the savage in such subjection. he will have make himself a king by marry pocahontas powhatan daughter. it, pocahontas powhatan daughter, be true. she be the very nomparell of his kingdom and at most not past 13 or 14 year of age. very oft she come to our fort with what she can get for captain smith that ever love and use all the country well, but she especial, he ever much respect and she so well requite it that when her father intend to have surprise he, she, by stealth in the dark night come through the wild wood and tell he of. it. but her marriage can no way have entitle he by any right to the kingdom, nor be it ever suspect he have ever such a thought or more. regard she or any of they. they, in honest reason and discretion. he may, if he will. he may have marry she or have, do what he list for. there be none that can have hinder his determination. some that know not any thing to say the council instruct and advise what to swear. so diligent they be in this business that what any can remember he have ever do or say in mirth or passion, by some circumstantial oath it be apply to their fit use. yet not past8 or 9 can ^^y much and that nothing but. circumstance which all man do know be most false and untrue. many get their pass by promise in england to say much against he. i have, ipresume, to say this much in his behalf, for that. i never hear such foul slander, so certain believe and urge for truth by many, a hundred that do still not spare to spread they, say they and swear they that i think do scarce know he, though they meet he. nor have they either cause or reason but their will or zeal to rumour or opinion for the honourable and better sort of our virginian adventurer. i think they understand it as i have. write it, for instead of accuse he- i have never hear any- give he a better report. than many of those witness themselves that be send only home to testify against he richard pots w p. when the ship depart, c davis arrive in a small pinnace with some 16 proper man. more to those the plant at point comfort be add a company from james town under the command of captain ratliffe to inhabit point comfort. martin and mr west have lose their boat and near half their man amongst the savage be return to james town for the savage no soon understand of captain smith loss. but they all revolt and do murder and spoil all they can encounter. now be we all constrain to live only of that which smith have, only for his own company. for the rest have consume their. proportion. and now have we 20 precedent, with all their appurtenance for mr persie. be so sick he can not go nor stand, but ere all be consume. m west and ratliffe, each with a pinnace and 30 or 40 man, well appoint, seek abro^^ to trade. how they carry the business, i know not, but ratliffe and his man be most slay by powhatan, ratliffe slay by powhatan. those that escape return near starve in the pinnace. and mr west find little better success. set sail for england. now we all find the want of captain smith. yea, his great maligner can then curse his loss. now for corn provision and contribution from the savage we have nothing but mortal wound with club and arrow. as for our hog, hen, goat, sheep, horse, or what live our commander and officer do daily, consume they some small proportion. sometime we taste till all, be devour, then sword, arrow piece or any thing we trade to the savage who bloody finger, be so imbrue in our blood that, what by their cruelty, our governors, indiscreation and the loss of our ship of 500 within 6 month, after there remain not many more than 60.. most miserable and poor creature, it be to vild to say what we endure, but the occasion be only our own, for want of providence, industry and government, and not the barrenness and defect of the country, as be general suppose. for till then in 3 year, for the number be land. we we have never land sufficient provision for 6 month. such a glutton be the sea and such good fellow the mariner. we as little taste of those great proportion, the fruit of imp, ovidence for their provision as they of our misery. that notwithstanding, ever sway and overrule the business, though we do live as be, say, 3 year chief of what this good country natural afford. yet now have we be in paradise itself with those governor. it will not have be much better with we. yet be there some amongst we who have they have the government will sure have. keep we from those extremity of misery that in 10 day more will have. supplant we all by death. but god that will not, it shall be unplanted. send sir thomas gate and sir george summer with a the arrival of sr tho gate with 150. 150 man, most happy preserve by the berondoe to preserve we, strange it be to say how miraculous they be- preserve in a leak ship, in those extreme storm and tempest, in such overgrow sea, 3 day and 3 night by baple out water and have give themselves to death. how happy when, lest expect that worthy captain, sir george somers have line all that time cunning the ship before those sawlow wave, discover those break isle where, how plentiful they live with fish and flesh. what a paradise this be to inhabit. what industry they. use to build their 2 ship. how happy they do transport they to james town in virginia. i refer you to their own print relation. but when those noble knight do see our misery, james town abandon, be stranger in the country and can understand no more of the cause. but by their conjecture of our clamour and complaint, of accuse or excuse one a other, they embark we with themselves with the best mean they can and abandon james town, set sail for england. but yet god will not so have it. for ere we leave the arrival of the lo^d laware the river, we meet the lord de-la-ware than governor for the country, with 3 ship exceed, well furnish with all necessary fit, who again return. they to the abandon, james town, the 9 of june 1610.. accompany with sir ferdinando wainman and diverse other gentleman of sort, sir george somers and captain argall, he present dispatch to require the bermondas to furnish they with provision, sir thomas gate for england to help forward their supply. himself neglect not the best be in his power for the furtherance of the business and regain what be lose. but even in the begin of his proceed, his lordsh have such a encounter with a scurvy sickness that make he unable to wield the state of his body, much less the affair of the colony, so that after 8. month sickness he be force to save his life by his return for england. in this time argall. not find the bermondas, have 2 ship send to the bermundas, lose sir george somers at sea, fall on the coast of sagadahock where refresh himself, find a convenient fish for god with a taste, whereof he return to james town, from whence the lord de-la-ware send he to trade in the river of patawomecke where find a english boy. those people have preserve from the fury of powhatan by his acquaintance, have such good usage of those kind savage that they fraught his ship with corn, wherewith he return to james town. and so for england with the lord governor. yet before his return the adventurer have send sr tho dale with 3 ship, man and cattle and all the arrival of sr tho dale, other provision necessary for a year, all which arrive the 10 of may 1611.. again to second he, with all possible expedition there be prepare for sr though gate 6 tale ship with 300 man and 100 kine, with other cattle, with munition and all manner of provision can be think needful, and they arrive about the 1 of august. next, after safe at james town, sr george somers, all this time be suppose lose, but thus it happen, miss the bermondas. he fall also as sr george somers arrival at the bermondas and die do argall with sagadahock. where be refresh will? not content himself with that repulse, but return again in the search and there safe arrive, but overtoil himself on a surfeit, die and in this cedar ship, build by his own direction and partly with his own hand, that have not in she any iron, but only one bolt in her keel. yet well, endure thus toss to and again in this mighty ocean till with his dead arrive in england at line, and at whitchurch in dorsetshire his body by his friend be honourable bury with many voly of shot and the right of a soldier, and upon his tomb be bestow this epitaph: virginia saeviet, and at and his epitaph floryda. alas, virginia, summer so soon past autumn succeed and stormy winter blast yet england. joyful spring with april shewre, oh floryda, shall bring thy sweet flower. since there be a ship fraught with provision and 40 man, and another since then with the like number and provision, to stay in the country 12 month with captain argall, the lord governor himself, do confident determine to go with the next or, as present as he may in his own person, with sundry other knight and gentleman, with ship and man, so far as their mean will extend to furnish. as for all their particular action since the return of captain smith, for that they have be print from time to time and publish to the world, i cease far to trouble you with any repetition of thing so well know more than be. necessary to conclude the history. leave this assurance to all posterity: how unprosperous thing may succeed, by what change or chance soever, the action be honourable and worthy to be approve, the defect whereof have only be in the manage the business, which i hope now experience have teach they to amend, or those example may make other to beware for the land be as good as this book do report it. captain smith, i return you the fruit of my labour, as mr croshaw request. i which i bestow in read the discourse and hear the relation of such which have walk and observe the land of virginia with you. the pain i take be great. yet do the nature of the argument and hope i conceive. of the expedition give i exceed content i can find there be any thing but what they all affirm or can contradict. the land be good, as there be no city, so no son of anak. all be open for labour of a good and wise inhabitant, and my prayer shall ever be that so fair a land may be inhabit by those that profess and love the gospel. your friend w s.