a true relation of such occurrence and accident of note as have happen in virginia since the first plant of that colony which be now resident in the south part thereof, till the last return, kind sir, commendation remember, etc. you shall understand that after many cross in the down by tempest, we arrive safe upon the south-west part of the great canary within four or five day after we set sail for dominica, the 26. of april. the first land we make, we fall, with cape henry, the very mouth of the bay of chissiapiacke, which at that present we little expect have, by a cruel storm, be put to the northward anchor in this bay. twenty or thirty, go a shore with the captain and in come aboard, they be assault with certain indian which charge they within pistol, shoot, in which conflict captain archer and matthew morton be shoot, whereupon captain newport second they make a shot at they, which the indian little respect but have spend their arrow, retire without harm and in that place be the bar open wherein the counsel for virginia be nonnnated and arrive at the place where we be now seat, the counsel be swear the precedent elect which for that year be master edm maria wingfield, where be? make choice for our situation, a very fit place for the erect of a great city about which some contention pass: betwixt, captain wingfield and captain gosnold. notwithstanding all out provision be, bring a shore, and with as much speed as may be, we go about our fortification. the two and twenty day of april, captain newport and myself, with diverse other, to the number of twenty two person, set forward to discover the river some fifty or sixty mile, find it in some place broad and in some narrow the country, for the most part on each side plain, high ground, with many fresh spring. the people in all place kind entreat we, dance and feast we with strawberry, mulberry, bread, fish and other their country provision, whereof we have plenty, for which, captain newport, kind requite thei^ lest favour with bell, pin, needle, bead or glass, which so content they that his liberality. make. they follow we from place to place and ever kind to respect we, in the midway, stay to refresh ourselves in a little isle, four or five savage come unto we which describe unto we the course of the river and after, in our journey they often meet, we trade with we for such provision as we have, and arrive at ar^atecke. he who we suppose to be the chief king of all the rest, most kind entertain we, give we in a guide to go with we up the river to powhatan, of which place their great emperor take his name, where he that they honour for king use we kind. but to finish this discovery we pass on further where, within a i will we. be interrept with great craggy stone that in midst of the river where the water fall so rude and with such a violence as not any boat can possible pass and so broad disperse the stream as there be not past slay or sire foot at a low water and to the shore scarce passage with a barge. the water flow four foot and the fresh, by reason of the rock have leave mark of the inundation 8. or 9 foot. the sooth side be plain, low ground and the north side high mountain. the rock be of a grave nature, interlace with many vein of glister spangle. that night we return to powhatan. the next day be whitsunday. after dinner we return to the fall leave a. mariner in pawn with the indian for a guide of they, he that they honour for king, follow we by the river. that afternoon we trifle in, look upon the rock and river further. he will not go. so there we erect across, and that night take our man at powhatans, cap, newport, congratulate his kindness with a gown and a hatchet, return to arsetecke and stay there the next day to observe the height thereof, and so, with many slgne of love, we depart the next day. the queen of agamatack kind entreat we, her people be no less content than the rest. and from thence we go to another place, the name whereof i do not remember, where the people show we the manner of their dive for mussel in which they find pearl that night, pass by weanock, some twenty mile from our fort. they, according to their former churlish condition, seem little to affect we. but as we depart and lodge at the point of weanocke, the people the next morning seem kind to content we. yet we may perceive many sign of a more jealousy in they then before and also the hind that the king of arseteck have give we alter his resolution in, go to our fort and with many kind circumstance leave we there. this give we some occasion to doubt some mischief at. the fort. yet capt newport intend to have visit paspahegh and tappahanocke, but the instant change of the wind be fair for our return. we repair to the fort withal speed, where the first we hear be that 400.. indian the day before have assault the fort and surprise it have not, god, beyond all their expectation, by mean of the ship at who they shoot with their ordinance and musket cause they to retire. they have enter the fort with our own man, which be then busy in set corn, their arm be then in driesat and few ready, but certain gentleman of their own in which conflict, most of the counsel be hurt, a boy slay in the pinnace and thirteen or fourteen more hurt withal. speed. we pallisadeed our fort each other day for six or seven day. we have alarm by ambuscado and four or five cruel wound by be abroad. the indian loss, we know not, but as they report three be slay and diverse hurt. captain newport have set thing in order, set sail for england the 22 of june, leave provision for 13. or 14 week. the day before the ship departure, the king of pamaun^e send the indian that have meet we before in our discovery, to assure we peace. our fort be then palisadoe round and all our man in good health and comfort, albeit that through some discentented humour it do not so long. continue for the precedent and captain gosnold with the rest of the. counsel be for the most part discontent with one another in so much that thing be neither carry with that discretion nor any business effect in such good sort as wisdom will, nor our own good and safety require. thereby and through the hard deal of our precedent, the rest of the counsel be divers affect through his audarious command and for captain martin, albeit very honest and wish the best good, yet so sick and weak and myself so disgrace through other malice, through which disorder god be angry with we plague, we with such famine and sickness that the live be scarce, able so bury the dead. our want of sufficient and good, victual with continual watch, four or five each night at three bulwark be. the chief cause only of sturgeon. we have great store whereon our man will so greedy surfeit as it cost many their life. the sack, aquavitie and other preservative for our health be keep only in the precedent hand for his own diet and his few associate. short after captain gosnold fall sick and within three week die, captain ratcliff be then also very sick and weak, and myself have also taste of the extremity thereof. but by god assistance be well, recover kendal about this time, for diverse reason, depose from be of the council and short after it, please god in our extremity to move the indian to bring we corn, ere it be half ripe, to refresh we when we rather expect when they will. destroy we, about the ten of september, there be about 46.. of our man dead, at which time captain wingefield have order the affair in such sort that he be general hate of all, in which respect, with one consent, he be depose from his presidency and captain ratcliff, according to his course, be elect our provision. be now, within twenty day, spend the indian, bring we great store both of corn and bread ready make, and also there come such abundance of fowl into the river as great refresh our weak estate, whereupon many of our weak man be present, able to go abroad. as yet we have no house to cover we, our tent be rot and our cabin worse than nought our best commodity be. iron which we make into little chissel, the precedent, and captain martin, sickness constrain, i to be cape merchant and yet to spare no pain in make house for the company who, notwithstanding our misery, little cease their malice grudge and matter as at this time be most of our chief man either sick or discontent, the rest be in such despair as they will rather starve and rot with idleness, then be persuade to do any thing for their own relief, without constraint. our victual be now, within eighteen day, spend and the indian trade decrease. i be send to the mouth of the river, to kegquouhtan, a indian town, to trade for corn and try the river for fish. but our fish we can not effect. by reason of the stormy weather, the indian think we near famish. with careless kindness, offer we little piece of bread and small handful of bean or wheat for a hatchet or a piece of copper. in the like manner i entertain their kindness and in like scorn offer they like commodity. but the child or any that show extraordinary kindness, i liberal content with free gift, such trifle as well, content they find this co^^e comfort. i anchor before the town and the next day return to trade. but god, the absolute disposer of all heart, alter their conceit. for now they be no less desirous of cut commodity than we of their corn under colour. to fetch fresh water, i send a man to discover the. town their corn and force to try their intent in that they desire i up to their house, which, well understanding, with four shot i visit they with fish, oyster, bread and dear they kind trade with i and my man be no less in doubt of my intent than i of they, for well i may, with twenty man, have freight a ship with corn. the town contain eighteen house, pleasant seat upon three acre of ground, upon a plain half environ with a great bay of the great river. the other part with a bay of the other river fall into the great bay. with a little i will fit for a castle in the mouth thereof. the town adjoin to the, by a neck of land of sixty yard, with sixteen bushel of corn. i return towards our fort, by the way i encounter with two canowes of indian who come aboard. i be the inhabitant of waroskoyack, a kingdom on the south side of the river, which be in breadth 5. mile and 20 mile or near from the mouth. with these i trade, who have but their hunt provision, request i to return to their town where i shall load my boat with corn, and with near thirty bushel i return to the fort, the very name whereof give great comfort to our despair. company time thus pass away and have not above 14. day, victual leave. some motion be make about. our precedent and capt archeri go for england to procure a supply in which mean time we have reasonabl fit, we with house and our precedent, and capt martin be able to walk abroad with much ado. do it be conclude that the pinnace and barge shall go towards powhatan to trade for corn? letts be cast. who shall go in? she, the chance be i, and while she be arig, i make a voyage to topohanack. where arrive there be but certain woman and child who flee from their house. yet at last i draw they to draw near truck, they dare not. corn they have plenty. and to spoil, i have no commission in my resume to paspahegh. i trade with that churlish and treacherous nation. have load, 10 or 12 bushel of corn. they offer to take our piece and sword yet by stealth, but seem to dislike it. they be ready to assault we. yet stand upon our guard in coast. the shore, diverse out of the wood, will meet with we with corn and trade, but lest we shall be constrain either to endure overmuch wrong or direct fall to revenge. see they, dog we, from place to place, it be night and our necessity not fit for war. we take occasion to return with 10 bushel of corn, cap martin, after make 2 journey to that nation of paspahegh. but each tune return with 8. or 10. bushel. all thing be now ready for my journey to powhatan, for the. performance thereof. i have 8. man and myself for the barge as well, for discovery as trade, the pinnace, 5. mariner and 2. landman to take in out lade at convenient place. the 9 of november i set forward for the discovery of the country of chikhamania, leave the pinnace, the next tide to follow and stay for my come at point weanock, 20 mile from our fort, the mouth of this river fall into the great river at paspahegh, 8 mile above our fort. that afternoon i stay the ebb in the bay of paspahegh with the indian. towards the evening certain indian hale i, one of they be of chikahamania, offer to conduct i to his country. the paspabegheans grudge thereat. along we go by moonlight. at midnight he bring we before his town, desire one of our man to go up with he who he kind entertain and return back to the barge. the next morning i go up to the town and show they what copper and hatchet they shall have for corn. each family seek to give i most content, so long they cause i to stay that 100 at least be expect my come by the river with corn. what i like i buy. and lest they shall perceive my too great want, i go high up the river. this place be call manosquosick. a quarter of a mile from the river, contain thirty or forty house upon a exceed high land at the foot of the hill towards the river be a plain wood, water with many spring which fall twenty yard right down into the river. right against that same be a great marsh of 4. or 5. mile circuit divide in 2. land by the part of the river abound with fish and foul all sort. a mile from thence be a town call oraniocke. i further discover the town of m^nsa, apahaock, werawahone and mamanahunt. at each place, kind use, especial. at the last be the heart of the country where be assemble 200.. people with such abundance of corn as have lade our barge, as also i. may have lade a ship. i return to paspahhegh and consider that want of corn at our fort. it be night with that ebb. by midnight i arrive at our fort where i find our pinnace run aground. the next morning i unlade seven hogshead into our store. the next morning i return again. the second day i arrive at mamanahunt where the people have hear of my come be ready with 3 or 400. basket, little and great of which have lade my barge with many. sign of great kindness i return at my departure. they request i to hear our piece be in the midst of the river which, in regard of the echo, seem a peal of ordnance. many bird and fowl, they see we. daily kill. that much fear they, so desirous of trade, be they that they will follow i with their canowe and for any thing give it i rather than return it back. so i unlade again 7 or 8.. hogshead at our fort have thus, by god assistance, get good store of corn, notwithstanding some bad spirit. not content with god, providence still grow ^^^tinous, in so much that our precedent have occasion to chide the s^ith for his misdeamenor. he not only give he bad language but also offer to strike he with some of his tool, for which rebellious act the smith be by a jury condemn to be hang but be upon the ladder, continue very obstinate as hope upon a rescue when he see. no other way but death with he. he become penitent and declare a dangerous conspiracy for which captain kendal as principal, be by a jury, condemn and shoot to death this conspiracy appease. i set forward for the discovery of the river of checka hamania. this three time i discover the town of matapamient, morinogh, ascacap, moysenock, righkahauck, nechanichock, mattalunt, attamuspincke and diverse other. their plenty of corn, i find, decrease yet lade the barge. i return to our fort. our store be now indifferent. well, provide with corn. there be much ado for to have the pinnace go for england, against which captain martin and myself stand chief, against it, and in fine, after many debate, it be reolue to stay. a ^urther resolution, this matter also. quiet. i set forward to finish this discovery which as yet i have neglect in regard of the necessity we have to take in provision, whilst it be to be have 4^ mile. i pass up that river which for the most part be a quarter of a mile broad and 3. fathom and a half deep, exceed usey, many great low marsh and many high land especial about that midst, at a place call moysonicke, a peninsule of 4. mile. betwixt, two river join to the main by a neck of 40. or 50. yard, and 40. or 50 yard from the high water mark. on both side, in the very neck of the main, be high hill and dale, yet much inhabit the. i will decline. in a plain, fertile corn^ field, the low end, a low marsh, more plenty of swan, crane, goose, duck and mallard and diverse sort of fowl. none will desire more plain, fertile plant ground in such great proportion as there. i have not see of a light, black, sandy mould, the cliff, common red, white and yellow colour sand and under red and white clay, fish. great plenty and people abundance, the most of their inhabitant. in view of that neck of land where a better seat for a town can be desire. at the end of forty mile, this river environ many low land at each high water drown for a mile where it unite itself at a place call apokant. the high town inhabit 10. mile. high i discover, with the barge, in the mid way a great tree hinder my passage, which i cut in two. here the river become narrow, 8., 9 or 10. foot at a high water and 6. or 7. at a low. the stream exceed swift and the bottom hard channel the ground, most part of a low, plain sandy soil. this occasion i to suppose it may issue from some lake or some broad ford, for it can not be far the head, but rather than i will endanger the barge. yet to have be able to resolve this doubt and to discharge the imputation of malicious tongue that half suspect, i dare not for so long delay some of the company as desirous as myself. we. resolve to bier a canow and return with the barge to there, to leave the barge secure and put ourselves upon the adventur. the country only, a vast and wild wilderness, and but only that town within three or four mile. we hire a canow and 2. indian to row, we that next day a fowl have make such provision for the barge as be needful. i let she there to ride with express th^rge, not any to go ashore till my return, though some wise man may condemn this too bold attempt of too much indiscretion. yet if they well consider the friendship of the indian inconduct i, the desolatenes of the country, the propabilitie of some lack and the malicious judge of my action at home^as also to ha^e some matter of worth to encourage our adventurer in england may well have cause any honest (@) to have do the like as well, for his own discharge as for the public. g^d have 2 indian for my guide and 2 of our own company. i set forward, leave 7 in the barg, have discover 20 mile further in this desert the river still keep his depth and breadth but much more cumber with tree. here we go ashore, be some 12 mile high than that barge have be to refresh ourselves during the boil of our victual. one of the indian i to^ke with i to see the nature of the soil and to cross the boughty of the river. the other indian i lest with m robbinson and thomas emry with their match light and order to discharge a peace for my retreat, at the first sight of any indian. but within a quarter of a hour i hear a lewd cry and hollow of indian, but no warning piece. suppose they surprise and that the indian have betray we present. i seize he and bind his arm fast to my hand in a garter with my pistol ready, bend to. be revenge on he. he advise i to fly and seem dignorant of what be do. but as we go, discourse i be strike with a arrow a the right thigh, but without harm. upon this occasion i espy 2 indian draw their bow which i prevent in discharge a french pistol. by that i have charge again. 3 or 4 more do the like for the first, fall down and flee at my discharge. they do the like my hind. i make my barricado who offece not to strive 20. or 30. arrow be shoot at i, but short. 3 or 4 time i have discharge my pistol. ^re the king of pamaunck call with 200 man invironed^e each draw their bow which d^^e they lay they. upon the ground, yet without shot. my hind treat betwixt, they and i, of condition of peace. he discover i to be the captain. my request be to retire to that boat. they demand my arm. the rest, they say, be slay, only i. they will reserve the indian, importune i not to that in retire, be in the midst of, allow quagmire and mind they more than my step. i sleep fast into the quagmire and also the indian in draw i forth. thus, surprise, i resolve to try their mercy. my arm i cast from i till which none dare approach i be. cease on i. they draw i out and lead i to the king. i present he with a compass dial. describe by my best (@) the use thereof, whereat he so amaze, admire as he suffer i to proceed in a discourse of the roundness of the earth, the course of the sun, moon, star and planet. with kind speech and bread he requite i conduct i where the canow lie and john robbinson slay with 20 or 30. arrow in he emry. i see, not, i perceive by the abundance of fire all over the wood at each place. i expect when they will execute i, yet they use i. with what kindness they can approach their town, which be within 6 mile where i be, take only make as arbour and cover with mat which they remove as occasion. require all the woman and child be. advertise of this accident. come forth to meet they the king, well, guard, with 20 bowman, 5 flank and rear, and each flank before he asword and a piece, and after he the like than a bowman than i. on each hand a boweman, the rest in file in the rear, which rear lead forth among the tree in a vishion, each his bow and a handful of arrow, a quin at his back, gum paint on each flinck. a sergeant, the one run always toward the front, the other towards the rear, each a true pace and in exceed good order. this be a good time continue. they (@) themselves in a ring with a dance and (@) each man depart to his lodging. the captain conduct. i to his lodging a quarter of venison and some ten pound of bread. i have for supper what i leave be reserve for i and send with i to my l^dging each morning. 3.. woman (@) i three great platter of fine bread, more venison than ten man can devour. i have my gown point and garter, my compass and a tablet. they give i again, though, 8 ordinary guard i. i want not what they can devise to content i, and still, our long acquaintance increase our ^etter affection much. they threaten to assault our fort as they be solicit by the king of paspahegh who show at our fort great sign of sorrow for this mischance. the king too, he great delight in understand the. manner of our ship and sail the sea, the earth and sky, and of our god, what he know of the dominious he spare not to acquaint i with, as of certain man, clothe at a place call ocanahonan, clothe like i, the course of our river and that within 4 or 5 day journey of the fall be a great turn of salt water, i desire he will send a messenger to paspahegh with a letter i will write by which they shall understand how kind they use i and that i be well lest they shall revenge my death. this he grant and send three man in such weather as in reason be unpossible by any naked to be, endure their cruel mind towards the fort. i have devert in describe the ordinance and the mine in the field, as also the revenge captain newport will take of they at his return, their intent. i insert the fort, the people of ocanahonum and the back sea, this report. they after find diverse indian that confirm. the next day after my letter come a savage to my, lodging with his sword to have slay i, but be by my guard, intercept with abowe and arrow, he offer to have effect his purpose. the cause i know not till the king understand thereof. come and tell i of a man a die wound with my pistol. he tell i also of another i have slay, yet the most conceal they have any hurt. this be the. father of he. i have slay who fury to pre^ent the king present, conduct i to another kingdom, upon the top of the next northerly river call youghtanan, have feast i. he further lead i to another branch of the river call mattapament, to swo other hunt town. they lead i and to each of these country a house of the great emperor of pewhakan, who as yet i suppose to be at the fall to he. i tell he i must go, and to return to paspahegh. after this four or five day marsh, we return to rasawrack, the first town. they bring i too where, bind the mat in bundle. they march two day journey and cross the river of youghtanan, where it be as broad. as thames. so conduct i to a place call menapacute in pamaunke, where the king inhabit. the next day, another king of that nation call kekataugh, have receive some kindness of i at the fort. kind invite i to feast at his house. the people from all place flock to see i. each show to content i by this, the great king, have four or five house each contain fourscore or a hundred foot in length, pleasant seat upon a high sandy hill from whence you may see westerly, a goodly low country, the river before the which his crooked course cause many great marsh of exceed good ground. a hundred house and many large plain be here together, inhabit more abundance of fish, foul and a pleasant. seat can be. imagine the king with forty bowman to guard. i entreat i to discharge my pistol, which they there present i with a mark at six score to strike therewith. but to spoil the practice, i break the cock, whereat they be much discontent, though a chance, suppose. from hence this kind king, conduct i to a place call topahanocke, a kingdom upon another river northward. the cause of this be that the year before a ship have be in the river of pamaunke, who have be kind entertain by powhatan, their emperor, they return thence and discover the river of topahanocke, where be receive with like kindness. yet he slay the king and look of his people, and they suppose i be he, but the. people report he a great man. that be captain and use i kind. the next day we depart, this river of topahanock seem in breadth, not much less than that we dwell upon (@), the (@) of the river. be a country, call woman upward, be ma^rough: tapohanock, appamatuck and nanteng. at topmanahock, the head issue from many mountain. the next night i lodge at a hunt town of powha^ams and the next day arrive at waran^comoco, upon the river of pama^ncke, where the great king be resident. by the way, we pass by the top of another little river, which be betwixt. the two call payankatank. the most of this country, though desert, yet exceed fertile good timber, most hill and dale, in each valley a crystal. spring arrjo at weramocomoco, their emperor, proud, lie upon a bedstead, a foot high, upon seune or twelve mat rich, hang with many chain of great pearl about his neck and cover with a great coucring of rahaughcum at head. sit a woman at his foot, another on each side. sit upon a mat upon the ground, be range his chief man on each side the fire, ten in a rank, and behind they as many young woman, each a great chain of white bead over their shoulder, their head, paint in rid and with such a grave and majestical countenance as drive i into admiration to see such state in a naked, savage he kind welcome i with good word and great platter of sundry victual assure. i his friendship and my liberty within four day. he much delight in opechan comoughs relation of what i ha^ describe to he and oft examine i upon the same. he ask i the cause of our come. i tell he be in fight with the spaniard, our enemy be over pour near, put to retreat and by extreme weather put to this shore where land? at chesipiack the people shall we. but at ke^u^ughtan they kind use we. we by sign demand fresh water. they describe we up the river be all fresh water. at p^spahegh also, they kind use we one pinnsse be leak. we be enforce to stay to mend she. till captain newport, my father come to conduct we away. he demand why we. go further with our bone. i tell he- in that i will have occasion to talk of the back sea- that on the other side, the main, where be salt water, my father have a child slay, which we suppose m^nocan, his enemy, who death we intend to revenge. after good deliberation, he begin to describe: i, the country beyond the fall with many of the rest, confirm what not only opechancanoye and a indian, which have be prosoner to pewhatan, have before tell i, but some call it five day, some six, some eight, where the say water dash amongst many stone and rock each storm, which cause, off time, the head of the river to be brackish. anchanachuck he describe to be the people that have slay my brother, who death he will revenge. he describe, also upon the same sea, a mighty nation call pocoughtronack, a fierce nation that do eat man and war with the people of, and pataromerke nation upon the top or the head of the bay under his territory where the year before they have slein a hundred, he signify their crown, be shave, long hair in the neck, tie on a knot, sword like pole-ax. beyond they, he describe people with short coat and sleeve to the elbow that pass that way in ship like we many kingdom, he describe i, to the head of the bay which seem to be a mighty river issue from mighty mountain betwixt, the two sea the people clothe at ocamahowan, he also confirm, and the southerly country also as. the rest that report we to be within a day and a half of mangoge, two day of chawwonock 6.. from roo^ock to the south part of the back sea, he describe a country call anon, where they have abundance of brass and house wall as out. i require his discourse. see what pride he have in his great and spacious dominion. see that all he know be under his territory. in describe to he the territorle of europe which be subject to our great king, who subject i be, the innumerable multitude of his ship i give he to understand the noise of trumpet and terrible manner of fight. be under captain newport, my father, who i entitle the meworame, which they call king of all the. water. at his greatness he admire and not a little fear. he desire i to forsake paspaliegh and to live with he upon his river, a country call howasicke. he promise to give i corn, venison or what i want to feed we, hatchet and copper. we shall make he and none shall disturb we. this request i promise to perform and thus have, with all the kindness he can devise, seek to content i. he send i home with 4. man, one that usual carry my gown and knapsack after i, two other load with bread and one to accompany i. this river of pamaunke be not past twelve mile from that. we dwell on his course northwest and westerly, as the other, weraocomoco, be upon salt. water in breadth two mile and to keep his course without any tarry some twenty mile where, at the part of the fresh water and the salt, if divide itself into two part. the one part, to goughland, as broad as thames and navigable with a boat threescore or four score mile and with a ship (@) exceed crooked and many low ground and marsh but inhabit with abundance of warlike and tall people. the country of of no less worth, only it be low but all the soil, a fat, fertile sandy ground above manapacumter, many high sandy mountain by the river be many rock seem, if not of several, mine, the other branch, a little less in breadth, yet extend not near so far nor so. well inbabit, somewhat low, and a white sandle and a white clay soil here be their best. the month of the river, as i see in the discovery thereof with captain newport, be half a wile broad and within four mile, not above a musket, shoot the channel, exceed good and deed the river straight to the (@) kiskirk, the near nation to the entrance. their religion and ceremony, i observe, be thus three or four day after my take, seven of they in the house where i lie, each with a rattle, begin at ten a clock in the morning to sing about the fire which they environ with a circle of meal, and after a foot or two from that, at the end of each song. lay down two or three grain of wheat, continue this order till they have include six or seven hundred in a half circle, and after that two or three more circle in like manner, a hand breadth from other. that do at each song they put betwixt every three, two or five grain, a little slick, so count as a old woman. she one disguise with a great skin, his bead ^ung round, with little skin of weasel and other vermin, with a crownel of feather on his head. paint as ugly as the devil at the end of each song will make many sign and demonstration with strange and vehement action. great cake of dear suet, dear and tobacco he cast in the fire till six a. clock in the evening. their howl will continue ere they will depart. each morning in the cold frost. the principal, to the number of twenty or thirty, assemble themselves in a round circle a good distance from the town, where they tell i they there consult where to hunt the next day. so fat they feed nice that i much doubt they intend to have sacrifice i to the quiyoughquosicke, which be a superior power they worship. a more ugly thing can be describe one they have for chief sacrifice, which also they call quiyoughquosick. to cure the sick. a man with a rattle and extreme howl shout, sing, and such violent gesture and antic action over the patient will suck out blood and phlegm from the patient. out of their unable stomach or any disease place. as no labour will more tire they tobacco. they offer the water in pass in foul weather, the death of any. they lament with great sorrow and weep their king. they bury betwixt, two mat within their house with all his bead, tewel, hatchet and copper, the other in grave. like we, they acknowledge no resurrection. powhatan have three brother and two sister. each of his brother succeed other for the crown, their heir inverite, not but the first heir of the sister, and so successive, the woman heir for the king have as many woman as they will his subject. two and most but one from weramocomoco be but 12.. mile yet the indian trifle away that day. and will not go to our fort by any persuasion, but to certain old hunt house of paspahegh we lodge all night. the next morning, ere sun rise, we set forward for our fort, where we arrive within a hour, where each man with the true sign of joy they can express, welcome i, except m archer and some 2. or 3. of he who be then in my absence, swear counsellor, though not with the consent of captain martin, great blame and imputation be lay upon i by they for the loss of our two man, which the indian slay much that they purpose to depose i, but in the midst of my misery, it please god to send captain nuport, who arrive there the same night. so triple our joy. as for a while these plot against i be defer, though with much maly against i, which captain newport, in short time, do plain. see. now be master scrivener, captain martin and myself call counsellor. within five or six day after the arrival of the ship, by a mischance, our fort be burn and the most of our apparel, lodging and private provision. many of our old man disease and of our new, for want of lodging, perish. the empercur powhatan, each week, once or twice, send i many present of dear bread, raugroughcun, half always for my father who he much desire to see, and half for i, and so continual importune by messenger and present that i will come to fetch the. corn and take the country their king have. give i, as at last, captain newport resolve to go see he, such acquaintance i have among the indian ^and such confidence they have in i, as near the fort they will not come till i come to they- every of they call i by my name- will not sell any thing till i have first receive their present and what they have, that i like. they defer so my discretion. but after acquaintance they usual come into the fort at their pleasure. the precedent and the rest of the council, they kenew not. but captain newport, greatness i have so describe as they conceive, he the chief, the rest his child, officer and servant. we have agree with that. king of paspahegh to conduct two of our man to a place call panawicke, beyond where he report many man to be apparel. we lend he at warraskoyack where play the villain and delude we for reward. return within three or four day after, without go further. captain newport, master scrinener and myself find the mouth of pamauncks river, some 25. or 30. mile northward from cape henrick. the channel good as before express. arrive at weramocomoca. be jealous of the intent of this politic savage. to discover his intent the better. i, with 20. shot arm in jack, go a shore, the bay where he dwell, have in it 3. crick and a^ile and a half from the channel all be conductor to the town i find. myself mistake in the creek, for they all there be within less than a mile, the emperor son, call naukaquawis, the captain that look. i and diverse other of his chief man conduct i to their king habitation, but in the mid way i be intercept by a great creek over which they have make a bridge of grain stake and ratle the king of kiskieck and namontack, who all the journey the king have send to guide. we have conduct we this passage which cause i to suspect some mischief. the barge i have send to meet i at the right lant when i find myself first deceive and know by experience the most of their courage to proceed from other fear, though few like the passage. i intermingle the king, son, our conductor and his chief man among we and lead forward. leave half at the one end to make a guard for the passage of the front. the indian see the weakness of the bridge. come with a canow and take i in of the midst with four or slay more. bring land. we make a guard for the rest till all. be pass two in a rank. we march to the emperor house. before his house stand forty or fifty great platter of fine bread be enter the house with loud tune. they all make sign of great joy. this proud saluag, have his fine woman and the principal of his chief man assemble^, sit in rank as before, be express himself. as upon a throne at the upper end of the house, with such a majesty as i can express nor yet have often see either in pagan or christian. with a kind countenance, he have ^^ce welcome and cause a place to be make by himself to sit. i present he a suit of red cloth, a white greyhound and a hat as jewel. he esteem they and, with a great oration make by three of his noble, if there be any among savage kind, accept they with a public confirmation of a perpetual league and friendship. after that, he command the queen^ of apamatuc, a comely young savage, to give ^water^. water a turkiecocke and bread to eat be thus feast. he begin his discourse to this purpose. your kind visitation do much content i. but where be your father, who i much desire to see? be he not with you? i tell he he remain aboard, but the next day he will come unto he with a merry countenance. he ask i for certain piece i which promise he when i go to paspahegh. i tell, according to my promise, that i proffer the man that go with i four (@) coluering in that he so desire a great gun, but they re^^sed to take they whereat with aloud laughter. he desire to give he some of less burden. as for the other, i give he they be sure that none can carry they. but where be these? man you promise to come with you. i tell he, without who thereupon give order to hau^. they bring in two after two, ever maintain the guard without, and as they present themselves, ever with thanks, he will saint i and cause each of they to have four or five pound of bread. give they this, do i. ask he for the corn and ground he promise i. he tell i i shall have it. but he expect to have all these man lay their arm at his foot, as do his subject. i tell he that be a ceremony our enemy desire, but never our friend as we present ourselves unto he. yet that he shall (@) doubt of our friendship. the next day my father will give he a child of ^is, in full assurance of our love. and not only that, but when he shall think it convenient, we will deliver under his subjection the country of manacam and pocough^aonack, his enemy. this so content, he as immediate, with attentive silence, with a loud oration, he proclaim: i awerowane of powhaton, and that all his subject shall so esteem we, and no man account we, stranger, nor paspaheghans, but powhatans, and that the corn, woman and country shall be to we as to his own people. this proffer kindness, for many reason we contemn not, but with the best language and sign of thanks i can express, i take my leave. the king rise from his seat. conduct i forth and cause each of my man to have as much more bread as he can bear. give i some in a basket and as much he send a board for a present to my father, victual, you must know. be all there, wealth and the great kindness they can show. we arrive at the river. the barge be fall so low with the ebb, though i have give order and oft send to prevent the same. yet the messenger deceive i. the sky be very thick and rainy. the king understand this mischance. send his son and mamontacke to conduct i to a great house sufficient to lodge i where enter. i see it hang round with bow and arrow. the indian use all diligence. to make, we fire and give. we content the king orator present, entertain we with a kind oration, with express charge that not any shall steal or take out bow or arrow or offer any injury. present. after he send i a quarter of venison to slay my stomach in the evening, he send for i to come only with two shot, with i the company i g^ue order to stand upon their guard and to maintain two sentry at the port all night to my supper. he set before i meat for twenty man and see i can not eat. he cause it to be give to my man. for this be a general custom that what they give not to take again, but you most either. eat it, give it away or carry it with you. two or three hour we spend in our a^^ent discourse. which do i be with a fire stick light to my lodging. the next day the king conduct i to the river, show i his canawe and describe unto i how he send they over the bay for tribute bead. and also what country pay he bead, copper or (@). but see, captain nuport and master scrivener come a shore. the king return to his house and i go to meet he with a trumpet before he. we march to the king who, after his old manner, kind receive he especial a boy of thirteen year old call thomas savage, who he give he as his sanne. he requite this kindness, with each of we a great basket of bean and entertain he with the former discourse. we pass away that day and agree to bargain the next day. and so return to our pinnace the next day, coming shore in like order: the king, have kind, entertain we with a breakfast question with we in this manner, why we come arm in that sort. see he be our friend and have neither bow nor arrow. what do we doubt? i tell he it be the custom of our country. not doubt of his kindness any way, wherewith though he seem satisfy. yet, captain nuport, cause all our man to retire to the water side, which be some thirty score from thence. but to prevent the worst, master scrivener or i be either the one or other by the barge, experience have w^ll teach i to believe his friendship. till convenient opportunity suff^ed he to betrey we. but quick, this politician have perceive my absence and ^unningly send for i. i send for master scrivener to supply my place. the king will demand for he. i will again relee^^. he and they seek to satisfy our suspicion with kind language and not be agree to trade for corn. he desire to see all our hatchet and copper together, for which he will give we corn. with that ancient trick^ the chick have oft acquaint i his offer. i refuse offer first to see what he will give for one piece. he seem to despise the nature of a merchant, do scorn to sell, but we free shall give. he and he liberal will requite we. captain nuport will not, with less than twelve great copper, try his kindness, which he liberal requite with as much corn as of chickah^mania. i have for one of less proportion our hatchet he will also have at his own rate, for which kindness ^ee much seem to affect captain nuport. some few bunch of blue bead i have, which he much desire and see so few. he off^^d i a basket of two peck and that which i draw to be three peck at the least and yet seem content and desire more. i agree with he the next day for two. bushel, for the ebb now constrain we to return to our boat, although he earnest vesi^ed we to stay dinner, which be a provide and be ready, he send aboard after we, which be bread and venison sufficient for fifty or sixty person. the next day he send his son in the morning not to bring a shore with we any piece, lest his woman and child shall fear captain nuport. good belief will have satisfy that request. yet twenty or twenty five shot we get a shore, the king in portune, i to leave my arm aboard. much mislike my sword, pistol and target. i tell he, the man that slay my brother with the like term: have, persuade i and be unarm, shoot at we and so betray we. he oft entreat captain nuport that his man may lean their arm, which still he command, to the water side. this day we spend in trade for blue bead and have near straight our barge, captain nuport, return with they that come aboard, have i and master scrivener, a shore to follow in canowes into one. i get, with six of our man which be launch a stone cast from the shore, stick fast in the ose, master scrivener, see this example. with seven or eight more, pass the dreadful bridge. think to have find. deep water on the other cr^^ke, but they be in force to stay with such entertainment as a savage be force ashore with wind and rain have in his canow as common. they have his house and household instant see (@) up a house of mat which succour they from the storm (@). the indian see (@) pester in the ose call to i six or seven of the king chief man throw off their skin and to the middle in ose come to bear i out on their head their import^^acie. cause i better to like the canow then their curtes^e excuse my denial. for fear to fall into the ose desire they to bring i some w^^d fire and mat to cover i and i will. content they each present, give his help to satisfy my request. which pain a horse will scarce have endure. yet a couple of bell, rich content. they, the emperor, send his seaman in the evening with bread and victual for i and my man. he, no more scrip^^^s than the rest, seem to take a pride in show how (@) he regard that miserable, cold and d^rty passage, though a d^ggs will scarce have endure it. this kindness i find when i little expect, less than a mischief. but the black^ night part, our company ere midnight. the (@) serve to carry, we aboard the next day. we come ashore, the king with a solemn discourse, cause all to depart, but his principal man, and this be the. effect. when, as he perceive that we have a desire to invade against who he be no profess enemy yet thus far, he will assist we in this enterprise. first, he will send his spy, perfect to understand their strength and ability ^o fight with which he will acquaint we himself. captain nuport will not be see in it himself be great werowance. they will stay at home. but i, master scrivener, and two of his son and opechankanough, the king of pamaunke, shall have 100 of his man to go before, as though they be hunt. they give we notice. where be the advantage? we shall kill they, the and young child he wish. we shall spare and bring they to he only 100 or 150. of. our man he hold sufficient for this exploit. our boat shall stay at the fall where we may hew timber which we may convey each man a piece, till we be past the stone, and there join they to pass our man by water. if any be shoot, his man shall bring they back to our boat. this fair tale have almost make captain nuport undertake by this mean to discover the south sea, which will not be without treachery if we ground our intent upon his constancy. this day we spend in trade, dance and much mirth. the king of pamaunke send his messenger, as yet not know, captain nuport to come unto he who have long expect. i desire also my father to visit. he, the messenger, stay to conduct we. but powhatan understand that we have hatchet late, come from paspahegh, desire the next day to trade with we and not to go further. this new trick he cunning pot upon he, but only to have what he list and to try whether we will go or stay. opechanke^oughs messenger return that we will not come the next day. his daughter come to entreat i show her father have hurt his leg and much sorrow he can not see i, captain nuport, be not to be persuade to go in that powhatan have desire we to stay, send she away with the like answer. yet the next day, upon better consideration, entreaty prevail and we anchor at cinquoateck, the first swain, above the part of the river where dwell two king of pamaunke brother to powhatan, the one call opitchapam, the other katatough. to these i go a shore. who kind entreat i and master scrivener send some present aboard to ^ nuport. whilst we be truck with these, king opechankanough, his wife, woman and child, come to meet i with a natural kind affection. he seem to rejoice to see i, captain nuport, come a shore. with many kind discourse. we pass that forenoon and after di^^er, captain nuport go about with the pinnace to menapacant, which be twenty mile by water and not one by land. opechankanough conduct i and master scrivener by land where have build a feast house. a purpose: to entertain we with a kind orali^n. after their manner and his best provision, kind welcome we that day. he will not truck but do his best to delight we with content. captain nuport arrive towards evening who the king present with six great platter of five bread and pansa^owm^^a. the next day till none we trade the king feast, all the company and the afternoon be spend in play, dance and delight. by no mean he will have we depart till the next day he have feast. we with veni^on, for which he have send, have spend his first and second provision in expect out come the next day he perform. his promise, give more to we three, then will have suffice 30. and in that we carry not away what we le^^. he send it after we to the pinnace, with what word or sign of love he can express. we depart, captain nuport in the pinnace, leave i in the barge to dig a rock where we suppose a mine, at cinquaoreck which do ere midnight i arrive at werac^m^co where our pinnace anchor, b^ing 20.. mile from cinquao^ecke, the next day we take leave of powhatan who, in regard of his kindness give he a indian he will affect to go with he for england in steed of his son. the cause i assure i be to know our strength and country condition the next day. we arrive at kiskiack, the people, so scornful, entertain we as with what sign of scorn and discontent we can. we depart and return to our fort with 250.. bushel of corn, our precedent be not whole, recover of his sickness in discharge, his piece break and split his hand off, which he be not yet well recover. at captain nuport arrival, we be victual for tw^lue week and have furnish he of what he think good. he set sail for england the ten of april, master scrivener and myself, with our shallop accompany he to captain hendrick powhatan, have for a farewell, send he five or six man loading with torkeye for sword, which he send he. in our return to y^^ort we discover the (@) of. nausamd, a proud warlike nation as well, we may testify, at our first arrival at chesiapiack. but that injury, captain nuport well revenge at his return, where some of they in^i^^ng he to their (@) by a da^nce he perceive their intent- with a valley of musket that slay one and shoot one or two more, as themselves confess. the king, at our arrival, send for i to come unto he. i send he word what commodity i have to exchange for wheat. and if he will, as have the rest of his neighbour, conclude a peace, we be content. at last. he come down before the boat which ride at anchor some forty yard from the shore. he signify to i to come a shore and send. a canow with four or five of his man, two whereof i desire to come aboard and to stay, and i will send two to talk with their king. a shore. to this he agree, the king, we present with a piece of copper which he kind except and send for victual to entertain the messenger, master scrivener and myself also, after that go a shore. the king kind feast. we request we to stay to trade till the next day. which have do we return to the fort. this river be a musket shoot broad, each side be shall bay a narrow channel, but three fathom his course for eighteen mile, almost direct south and by west where begin the first inhabitant, for a mile it turn. direct east, towards the west, a great bay and a white chaukie island convenient for a fort. his next course, south, where within a quarter of a mile the river divide in two. the neck, a plain, high corn field. the wester buy a high plain, likewise the north-east. answerable in all respect in these plain be plant abundance of house and people. they may contain 1000 acre of most excellent fertile ground. so sweeete, so pleasant, so beautiful and so strong a prospect for a invincible, strong city with so many commodity that i know as yet i have not see this be. within one dey journey of chawwonocke, the river fall into the king river. within twelve mile of cape-hendicke, at our fort, the ^ooles, we. have be so ordinary steal by the indian. as necessity enforce we to correct their brave thievery. for he that stol^ to day dare come again the next day, one among the rest have steal two sword. i get the counsel consent to set in the bilboes the next day with three more. he come with their wooden sword in the midst of our man to steal. their custom be to take any thing they can cease off. only the people of pamaunke we have not find steal. but what other can steal their king receive i have. they depart but flourish their sword. they seem to defend what they can catch. but out of our hand. his pride urge i to turn he from among we whereat. he offer to strike i with his sword, which i prevent, strike he first the rest, eff^ing to revenge. the blow receive, suck a encounter and flee the better to affright they, i pursue they with five or six shot, and so chase they out of the island. the beginning of this broil, little expect. by his carriage we dare have resist, have even till that present, not be contradict, especial they of paspahegh. these indian, within one hour have by other savage then in the fort, understand that i threaten to be revenge, come present of themselves and fall to work upon our wear, which be then in hand by other savage who see their pride so encounter, be so, so submissive and willing to do any. thing as may be, and with tremble fear, desire to be friend. within three day after, from nawsamond, which be 30. mile from we, the king send we a hatchet which they have steal from we at our. be there the messenger, as be the custom also, we well reward and content the twenty of april. be at work in, hew down tree and set corn, a alarm cause. we, with all speed to take our arm, each expect a new assault of the savage, but understand it, a boat under sail. our doubt be pr^^ently satisfy with the happy sight of master nelson, his many peril of extreme storm and tempest. his ship, well as his company, can testify his care in spare our provision be well. but the providence thereof, as also of our stone, hatchet and other, fool only we, except which of all the rest be most necessary, which may enforce we to think either a seditious traitor to our action or a most unconscionable deceiver of our treasure. this happy arrival of master nelson in the phoenix have be, then, about three month miss after captain nuport arrival be to all our expectation lose, albeit that now at the last have be long cross with tempest^ous weather and contrary wind. his so unexpected come do so ravish. we with exceed joy that now we think ourselves as well fill as our heart can wish, both with a competent number of man as also for all other needful provision till a further. supply shall come unto we. whereupon the first thing that be conclude be that myself and master scrivener shall, with 70. man, go with the best mean we can provide to discover, beyond the fall, as in our judgement, convenient we may. six or seven day we spend only in train our man to march, fight and scirwish in the wood their willing mind to this action, so quicken their understanding. in this exercise, as in all judgement, we be better able to fight with powhatans whole force in our order of battle, among the tree for thick there be few than the fort be to rep^^s^ 400. at the first assault, with some ten or twenty shot, not know what to do nor how to use a. piece our warrant be s^aled. master nelson refuse to (@) we, with the voluntary mariner and himself as be promise, unless we will stand, bind to pay the hire for ship and mariner for the time they stay. and further there be some controversy through the diversity of contrary opinion. some allege that how profitable and to what good purpose soever our journey shall portend. yet our commission command no certain design. we shall be tax for the most indiscreete man in the world. beside the wrong we shall do to captain nuport, to who only all discovery do belong, and (@) no other. the mean for guide beside the uncertain course of the river from which we can not err much each night will fortify we in. two hour better than that. they first call the fort their town upon the river, each within one day journey of other beside our ordinary provision may well be suppose to add relief for truck and deal only, but in love and peace as with the rest. if they assault we, their town, they can defend. nor their lnggage to convey that we shall not share but admit the worst. 16. day provision we have of ch^^se, oatmeal and b^^ket beside our rand^nous. we can and may have hide in the ground with six man. captain martin will have undertake it himself, leave the rest to defend the fort and plant our corn. yet no reason can be reason to proceed^ forward though we be, go aboard to. set sail. these discontent cause so many doubt to some and discouragement to other. as our journey end, yet some of we procure petition to set, we forward only with hope o^ our own confusion. our next course be to turn husbandman to fell tree and set corn. fifty of our man we employ in this service, the rest keep the fort to do the command of the precedent. and captain martin, 30. day the ship lie, expect that trial of certain matter which for some cause i keep private. that next exploit be a indian, have steal a be be so pursue by master scrivener and they. next he as he throw it down and fly, draw his how at any that dare encounter. he within four. or five day alter master scr^uener and i be a little from the fort. among the corn, two indiant, each with a codgell and all new paint with t^rrasigillate, come circle about i as though they will have clube i like a hare. i know their feign love be towards i, not withort a deadly hatred, but to prevent the worst, i call master scrivener, retire to the fort. the indian see, i suspect they with good (@), ask i for some of their man who they will beat and go with i into our fort, ^^nding one that lie ordinary with we, only for a spy. they offer to beat he i in, persuade they to forbear. they offer to begin with, i be now four for. two other array in like manner, come in on the other side the fort, whereupon i cause to shut the port and apprehend. they the precedent and counsel be present, acquaint, remember, at the first assault they come in like manner and never else but against some villavie, conclude to commit they to prison and expect the event eight more. we cease at that present. a hour after come three or four other stranger, extraordinary fit with arrow, s^innes and shoot glove. their jealousy and fear bewray their bad intent as also their suspicious departure. the next day come first a indian than another. as ambassador for their man they desire to speak with i our discourse. be that what spade, shovel, sword or fool, they have stain. to bring home. if not the next day, they shall hang. the next news be they have. take two of our man range in the wood which mischief, no punishment will prevent, bat hang, and these they will, shall redeem their own 16. or 18. thus brave we to our door. we desire the precedent and captain martin that afternoon to sally upon they that they may but know what we dare to do and all night man our barge and burn their town and spoil and destroy what we can. but they bring our man and free, deliver they the precedent, release one the rest we bring. well guard to morning and evening prayer, our man all in arm, their tremble fear than cause they to much. sorrow which, till then, scoff and scorn at what we dare. do the counsel conclude that i shall terrifle they with some torture, to know if i co^ld know their intent. the next day i bind one in hold to the maint mast and present fire musket with match in the cock. force he to desire life to answer my demand. he can not but one of his comovodos be of the counsel of paspahegh, that can satisfy i. i release he out of sight. i affright the other, first with the rack, then with musket, which see he desire i to stay and he will confess to this execution. master scrivener, come his discourse be to this effect: that paspehegh the chickahamaniar youghtanum pamaunka mattapanient and kiskiack. these nation be altogether a hunt that take i paspahegh and chicahamanya. have intend to surprise we at work to have have our tool, powhatan and all his will s^me friend till captain nuport return that he have again his man, which he call namontack, where with a great feast he will so enamor captain nuport and his man as they shall cease on he and the like trap will be lay for (@) this trap for our fool. we suspect the chief occasion be four day before powhatan (@) send the boy he have to we with many turkey to master scrivener, and i understand i will go up into his country to destroy they, and he double it the more in that i so oft practise. my man who shoot. he hear to his own lodging that much fear his wife and child. we send he word we intend no such thing, but only to go to powhatan to seek stone to make hatchet. except his man shoot at we, as paspahegh have tell we they will, which if they do shoot but one arrow we will destroy they. and lest this mischief may happen, send the boy to acquaint he thus much and request he to send we weanock one of his subject for a guide that boy. he return back with his chest and apparel which then we have give he desire another for he the cause be he be. practise with the chikahamanias, as the boy suspect some unlanie, by their extraordinary resort and secret conference (@), whence they will send he the boy we keep now. we will send he many me^s senger and present the guide we desire be send we and withal request we to return he either the boy or some order, but none he can have. and that day these indian be apprehend, his son with other that have load at our fort, return and be out of the fart. rayl^d on i to () our () enemy, to (@) and to y^ () after w^anock, that have (@) with (), keep to have () return and secret after he. amocis toe paspaheyan, who always they keep among we for (@) who, the better to avoid suspicion present after they come to bea^e away. these presumption induce i to take any occasion not only to try the honesty of amocis the spy, but also the meaning o^ these cunning cricke of their emperor, of powhatan, who true (@) captain ma^^^n most confident plead () of m^cano^, which be the counsellor of pasp^^^gh first, i then master (@) upon their several examination ^ound by, they all confirm that paspahegh and do hate we and intend some mischief. and who? they be that take i the name of they that steal our tool and sword and that powhatan receive they, they all agree, certain vo^^lies of shot we cause to be discharge, which cause each other to think that their fellow have be slay. powhatan understanding we detain certain savage seat: his daughter, a child all ten year old, which not only for feature, countenance and proportion, much exceed any of the rest of his people, but for wit and spirit, the only nonpariel of his country. this he send by his most trusty messenger, call rawhunt. as much exceed in () person, but of a subtle wit and crafty understanding. he, with a long circumstance, tell i how well powhatan love and respect i, and in that i shall not doubt any way of his kindness. ^e have send his child, which he most esteem, to see i a dear, and bread beside, for a present desire i, that the boy may come again, which he love, exceed his little daughter he have. teach this lesson also: not take notice at all of the indian's that have be prisoner three day till that morning that she see their father be friend, come quiet and in good term to entreat their liberty. opechaukanough send also unto we that for his sake we will release two. that be his friend and for a token, send i his shoot glove and bracer which the day our man be take upon (@) himself from the rest a long time, entreat to speak with i where, in token of peace, he have prefer i the same. now all of they have find their perempsorie condition. but to increase our malice, which they see we begin to threaten to destroy they, as familiar as before, without suspicion or fear, come among we to beg liberty for their man. in the afternoon they be go, we guard they as before to the church and after prayer, give they to pocahuntas, the king daughter in regard of her father, kindness in send she after have well, feed they as all. the time of their imprisonment we give they their bow, arrow or what else they have, and with much content send they pack pocahuntas also. we requite with such trifle as content she to tell that we have. use that paspaheyans very kind in, so release they the next day. we have suspicion of some other practice for a ambuscado, but perfect, we can not discover it. two day after a paspheyan come to show we a glister mineral stone and with sign demonstrate it to be in great abundance, like unto rock, with some dozen more, i be send to seek to dig some quantity and the indean to conduct. i but suspect this some trick to delude we for to get some copper of we or. with some ambuscado to betray, we see he falter in his tale. be two mile on our way, lead he ashore where abuse we from place to place, and so seek either to have draw we with he into the (@) or to have give we the s^ppe. i show he copper which i promise to have, give he if he have perform his promise. but for his scoff and abuse we, i give he twenty lash with a rope and his bow and arrow, bid he (@) if he dare. and so let he go in. all this time our man, be all, or the most part, well, recover, and we, not willing to trifle away more time than necessity, enforce we unto. we think good for. the better content of the adventurer in some reasonable sort to ^raight home, master nelson, with cedar wood, about which our man go with willing mind, be in very good time effect and the ship send for england. we now remain, be in good health, all our man well contend, free from mutiny, in love one with another and, as we hope, in a continual peace with the indian, where we doubt not, but by god gracious assistance and the adventurer willing mind and speedy furtherance to so honourable a action in after time to see our nation to enjoy a country not only exceed, pleasant for habitation but also very profitable for commerce in general. no doubt, please, to almighty god honourable, to our gracious, sovereign and commodious general, to the whole kingdom.