a relation of the success of the galeons and the whole fleet of terra. the 22. of august 1622, the whole fleet of terra, that be to say such ship of spain and galeons belong to his majesty (@) disperse or imploy^ in the several harbour or port of america, or, if you have rather, the west-indies assemble themselves and come together into the port of havana, a place belike appoint as a rendezvous whither the navy may repair to make their return home, whereupon the general or, as you please, the admiral, on the 23 of august, by public proclamation, command that every ship shall register the gold, silver, bullion, merchandise and other movable into their book of account or office of the admiralty, because they have of august by public proclamation, command that every ship shall register the gold, silver bullion merchandise and other movable into their book of account or office of the admiralty. because they have a purpose to put to sea and set sail the 28 day. but consider the small dispatch be make and the multitude of business wherewith they be encumber, they cast many doubt of lose at all, or put from the harbour until the conjunction of the moon be past. who effect? they expect the 5. of september, whereupon the marquis governor of havana and the country call a council, summon the officer and propose to the assembly what be most necessary and befit to be do for the conveniency and security of the whole navy. so the country, call a council, summon the officer and propose to the assembly what be most necessary and befit to be do for the conveniency and security of the whole navy. so there come, according, the land-governor or general over the soldier, the admiral of the armado, the captain general of the fleet and his admiral, the supervisor or treasurer, the captain of the soldier and the pilot who, with one consent, determine that, in regard, this conjunction in september do, common in those part, bring cloud and obfuscation of air which will not vanish without tempest and turbulent wind. it be a seasonable providence and befit the security of the armado to remain quiet in harbour until the foresay conjunction be elapse, which no question the same. tempest and turbulent wind, it be a seasonable providence and befit the security of the armado to remain quiet in harbour until the foresay conjunction be elapse, which no question the same night will manifest her operation to some purpose. upon this resolution, they prepare themselves and settle their affair to tarry the time appointment and then to set forward their pretend voyage. but that evening promise such fair weather and a serene element with a pleasant and sociable gale of wind, continue two or three day together, make they all repent and wish they have take hold of opportunity and set forward their journey which cause the general to consent to their importunity and associate they, as i may say, in their hope, insomuch that after general take hold of opportunity and set forward their journey, which cause the general to consent to their importunity and associate they, as i may say, in their hope, insomuch that after general muster, on sunday, the 4 of september, by break of day they weigh, anchor and hoist their sail, accommodate the ship out of harbour to the best purpose there be 28. ship with their admiral, 8. galeons, 3. pinnace and other attendant upon the fleet. with their consort, they sail forward very prosperous and have a time of fair expectation. but monday approach, which be the day of the conjunction, the weather, according to former conjecture, seem to change and the wind come to north-east, raise both a care and a fear in the admiral beside. be the day of the conjunction. the weather, according to former conjecture, seem to change and the wind come to north-east, raise both a care and a fear in the admiral beside. the galeons forecast all the way to prevent subsequent mischief, wind up their main sail and tie they fast to their yard and advance only their missen, make use of their bosprel and, in a word, put in practice all the mean which art and industry can afford to escape the danger. but it shall seem that tempest will have their course and be inexorable, for the wind increase and so whistle that it will not hearken to the whistle of the mariner. the cloud thicken and over mantle the horizon and the air be so. inexorable, for the wind increase and so whistle that it will not hearken to the whistle of the mariner. the cloud thicken and over mantle the horizon and the air be so dark and formidable that they can not discern one ship from another. by which chance, or rather disastrous mischance, ere it be full noon, the wind continue and, as it be covenant to perpetrate some outrageousness, all the galeons be dissipate and dissever and the most part of the fleet, for their better passage, go before the wind and take a course to save themselves as well as they can. in which violence they be drive from one another and the wind continue so impetuous that it not only unloose their tackle and sail but break. themselves as well as they can, in which violence they be drive from one another. and the wind continue, so impetuous that it not only unloose their tackle and sail but break asunder their fore-mast and rend their main yard in shiver. so they have no shift but to bear no sail at all or cross the wind as they can. but as wave roll after wave, one mischief follow another. for present, the wind turn to the south which, although it give they leave the better to accommodate themselves and endure the tempest. yet it bring rain and the sea wrought as high as it do before. then they sear another misfortune to be thrust or hurry into some creek or bay of the coast of florida. bring rain and the sea wrought as high as it do before. then they sear another misfortune to be thrust or hurry into some creek or bay of the coast of florida, which they much suspect by the great and wonderful haste they have make, for they common run five or six league every glass, and then there be no hope but either split on the sand or perish on the shore. this storm and fearful tempest continue with all outrageousness until tuesday follow. then by break of day. they assume comfort that all be not lose and cast away, for they descry some ship afar off who, as it seem, determine to return to the port of havana, in which course such as have mast and sail. lose and cast away, for they descry, some ship afar off who, as it seem, determine to return to the port of havana, in which course, such as have, mast and sail, prepare themselves and the rest that be bruise and break as far as they can discern one another labour to do the like and prosecute the same course. they begin to enter the harbour the 10. of septemb and continue till the 14.. the galeons which be save be the first, and so other ship follow, after they have knowledge of one another, the same day arrive the galeon s ann de real have lose her main mast. with she come captain or admiral esteuan delgado, who ship be lade with the merchandise of the say. same day arrive the galeon s ann de real. have lose her main mast, with she come, captain or admiral esteuan delgado, who ship be lade with the merchandise of the, say, port of havana. she enter in safety without any impeachment or wreck of the tempest. the 11. enter the admiral of or the continent, with the loss of her main mast, in her company be a ship of cadiz, who sustain no detriment but have all her mast and tackle in order. the 13. arrive the admiral of manana with all her mast. the same day come the admiral real, though somewhat late, have recover 11 ship of of the fleet and certain pinnace, wherein be 50. person of the bay of tortuga who live under same day come the admiral real, though somewhat late, have recover 11 ship of of the fleet and certain pinnace, wherein be 50. person of the bay of tortuga who live under 25 degree. this admiral likewise escape without loss of a tackle. other ship which be not of the fleet come also from the land into the same harbour without impeachment. observe the time of happy and seasonable departure from the north of s domingo. what galeons and ship be lose and perish in this tempest. 1 the admiral of the whole fleet follow the storm and drive by the wind with the foresail of the middlemost mast, run northward all night and the next day, whereupon she propose to rest in some harbour or place of. storm and drive by the wind with the foresail of the middlemost mast, run northward all night and the next day, whereupon she propose to rest in some harbour or place of security on those shore. but sudden she come to shallow water and in short space run herself on ground at two fathom water and a little more, where her beak break a piece, with the loss of her people, except three, man and two boy. this be on the coast of maracumbe in florida. 2 the galcon margerita follow the same course and participate with the same fortune, for she be lose. the 8. day come to three fathom water, but she be violent, thrust on a flat or sand so that the keel stick fast. with the same fortune, for she be lose the 8. day, come to three fathom water, but she be violent, thrust on a flat or sand so that the keel stick fast. with the gust, overgreat and the billow extreme rage, the body shiver all to piece and the passenger, when it be apparent they can not escape, see as little mercy in the sea as they have endure in the wind. 3. and 4. in the same hour, with the same tempest and almost at the same place, two ship of the fleet be swallow in the sea and perish before they can approach the shore. but yet, captain, do bernardine de lugo be miraculous, save on a piece of timber, though some say a break hatch. in the sea and perish before they can approach the shore. but yet, captain, do bernardine de lugo be miraculous, save on a piece of timber, though some say a break hatch- which the sea waste towards the shore. and 60. person or soldier of his company escape upon diverse thing to the break carcase of the former admiral and so, by degree, make shift to save their life. 5- a frigate which come from cartagena with portugal, be lose at tortuga in one of those dangerous creek and unknown promontory there be in she. 56. person who all escape upon several chest and plank. 6, the admiral save himself in a little shallop which the galeon draw after he, for when he see no remedy he cut. person who all escape upon several chest and plank. 6: the admiral save himself in a little shallop which the galeon draw after he for when he see no remedy, he cut off the rope and with a convenient number, row above three league in the sea till at last they drive themselves into a straight and so come ashore. 7: the galeon of our lady rosario, wherein captain chacurretta be commander, likewise perish, not without great suspicion before hand. she run aground, as the admiral do, so that none of the ship that come into the harbour can give a account of she, until a certain bark arrive, the 22. of september at the port of havana, with letter from the, say, captain, which advertise they that the harbour can give a account of she. until a certain bark arrive the 22. of september at the port of havana with letter from the say captain which advertise they that the say galeon perish in tortuga. all the company escape miraculous, who have the fortune to save themselves with convenient, victual and necessary supplement: keep firm station on their chest, mast and such other thing. 8. and 9, moreover, two other ship be think and adjudge lose because they be not hear of after the storm. but if you will be acquaint with a wonder, indeed the pilot of the margarita be miraculous save upon the rib of a ship on which he be carry five day together in the sea and sustain his life by wonder indeed, the pilot of the margarita be miraculous, save upon the rib of a ship on which he be, carry five day together in the sea and sustain his life by a bird or reasonable big foul which come to his hand until a pinnace pass by he in a most seasonable time. take he in and bring he to safe harbour. a catalogue of those person of account which either perish in this tempest or be miraculous, preserve in the galeon n s our lady of h hocha, the admiral of the fleet. there go these person follow, who all be drown, except such as shall be afterward name to be save the admiral himself, don pedro pasquy de esparza, knight of the order of calatrava. go, these person follow, who all be drown, except such as shall be afterward name to be save, the admiral himself, don pedro pasquy de esparza, knight of the order of calatrava, of the company of captain bartholomew garcia de nodal. captain bartholomew garcia de nodal, with his ancient and sargeant he that bear his colour in the absence of the ensign: james de aranda, the drummer john de carmona, the drummer diego hermandez of soldier jeronimo, the son of john taffulla, peter baxelagayoso, the son of ferdinand of orense, francis corren de meneses, son of anthony of malaga, m jacinto rumiera, the son of michael of valladolid, john de flores, son of estevan of antequara, m gregory of filguyera, son of antonio gomes, a dweller or natural. anthony of malaga, m jacinto rumiera, the son of michael of valladolid, john de flores, son of estevan of antequara, m gregory of filguyera, son of antonio gomes, a dweller or natural of talaucra. m john de prado, son of antonio gomes of tataucra, m james ruyz, son of the same of the port of s mary, don anthony of francosa, son of alonso of tuy, m alvaro de medeos, son of the same of cartagena, m lewis, la, son of alonso of baesa, m sebastian guytan, son of andrew hernandes of cadiz, m jacinto ferrer, son of peter of valencia, sergeant john de valasio. m rodrigo diaz of cardoniga, son of alfonso of orense, m peter diaz of curdoniga, son of the same peter pardo, son of son of peter of valencia, sergeant john de valasio. m rodrigo diaz of cardoniga. son of alfonso of orense. m peter diaz of curdoniga. son of the same peter pardo. son of diego of castro. m peter ruyz de la puente. son of john of spinosa, corporal alonso de guzman. son of diego, a inhabitant of marchuela, the corporal of cast don alonso of piedrota. m diego of suntigo. son of gaspar paez of balbol of paz. m peter. son of bartholomew gomez of jaen. anthony de la chica. son of john gomez of the ensign christopher solo guren, a man well know and repute of corporal john ramos. son of diego of talanene. don lopez de vllon. son of peter of pontevedra, m matthew de solazar, son. christopher solo guren, a man well know and repute of corporal. john ramos, son of diego of talanene. don lopez de vllon, son of peter of pontevedra. m matthew de solazar, son of bartholomew de vega of pontevedra. john de torres, son of the same man of seville. amaro of nodall, son of alonzo s vincent of pontevedra. m john of the church, son of the same m. john baptista aguado, son of the same of valdalaien. john de ribas, m. john polo, son of diego of xeres. la andrew peres, son of domingo of the city, corporal john, son of bartholomew of bayon. john fustamante, son of john bautista of ronda. john peres de espinosa, son of francis of seville. john rodriguez, son of albert of tarisa. city corporal, john, son of bartholomew of bayon. john fustamante, son of john bautista of ronda. john peres de espinosa, son of francis of seville. john rodriguez, son of albert of tarisa. peter maiordomo, the son of peter baiona. baltazar of the son of jaspar of indel. alonson valentine, the son of the same man. antonio rodriguez, son of alonso of janaucra. diego cordon of contereras. son of martin of xezana. john fernandes, son of melchar of badez. thomas daniel, son of the same man, of zaragoza. francis marinez, son of john of sevilla. domingo alonso, son of john of carato. sebastian montaro, son of john rodrigues of xeres. bartholomew peres, son of john of argurre. john philippe romero, son of john of seville. john baptista de sales. son of john of carato. sebastian montaro, son of john rodrigues of xeres. bartholomew peres, son of john of argurre. john philippe romero, son of john of seville. john baptista de sales, son of the same of burgos. alonso vasques, son of sebastian of lucar. jacinto de montillo, son of diego of granoda. pasqual estcuan, son of john of madrid. gregory esteuan, son of alsonso of madrid. francis de aquirre, son of peter of gibraltar. lorenzo martinez, son of the same of sanclement, don of cavanillas and castrexon, natural of judela. sebastian ferrer, son of josehp of the port of s maria. sebastian diaz, son of the same, natural of cutatreza. don john of garibay, son of general john gutierez gariba. he be the leader of a squadron. of the port of s maria. sebastian diaz, son of the same, natural of cutatreza. don john of garibay, son of general john gutierez gariba- he be the leader of a squadron of pike of the company of bernardine de lugo. john cavallero, son of sebastian sanches, a natural of the port of s maria. john cordero, son of john viegas of faro. laureano de quinones, son of lazaro of sevil. antonio de feria, son of the same of gibraltar. john vasquez, son of diego alonso of salamanca. rodrigo, son of gracian of gibraltar. alonso romero, son of the same of caracena. diego, son of the same of vitoria. don martin of cuena, son of michael of zaragoza. don alonso farfan, son of don alonso fernandez of trexo. son of the same, of caracena. diego, son of the same, of vitoria. don martin of cuena, son of michael of zaragoza, don alonso farfan, son of don alonso fernandez of trexo, a natural or native of sevilla. diego de la cruz, son of diego of albarquerque, the sergeant antony de la cruz. rodrigo de cequiero, son of antonio peres amaro garcia, son of the same of pontevedra. michael arregin, son of sanco of the town, austin embrun, son of the licentiate embrun of sevill. there be also a soldier of don michael, company reden man, belong to sea-affaire of the say. galeon almiranta, the master of the silver, or overseer of the treasure, capt james of vreder, the surveyor, john de licaraza, master of the allowance, or. belong to sea-affaire of the say: galeon almiranta, the master of the silver, or overseer of the treasure, capt james of vreder, the surveyor, john de licaraza, master of the allowance or victual, peter camarillo the boatswain, matthew martin the guardian, francis sanchez, son of dome of s lucar, the marshal, peter rodriguez, son of the same of s lucar, the cooper, sebast martin, son of manuel of sevilla, the cooper, john de la iglesia, son of peter of sevilla, the chaplain, and anth pernandezual, priest the of the ship. john dominguez, son of peter matthew of ayamonte, the diver, john baptista moreto, son of simon of genoa, the clerk, philip martin, culderon of sevil, his son, the surgeon, cicilio de ribero, son of bernardo the john de of ayamonte the diver, john baptista moreto, son of simon of genoa the clerk, philip martin, culderon of sevil, his son, the surgeon, cicilio de ribero, son of bernardo the john de lagur, son of michael of the port of s maria, the carpenter, pet of huerta, son of the same of seu the carpenter, john de burto, son of the same of sevil, the pilot, martin ximenez, his companion, francis de cardenas, gargy mariner, diego gomez, son of simon of s lucar, gonsalo rodriguez, son of francis of ayamonte, diego martin, son of francis dias of moguer francis carasio, son of christoual of cadiz ferete, son of peter of cadiz. michael esteuan, son of francis vasquez of s lucar, peter de chavarria of cadiz lewis, jordan son, of moguer. francis carasio, son of christoual of cadiz. ferete, son of peter of cadiz. michael esteuan, son of francis vasquez of s lucar. peter de chavarria of cadiz. lewis, jordan, son of jocomo of cadiz. manuel diaz, son of diego of tavira. andrew gomez, son of simon of xerez. alonso martin, son of joseph of cadiz. jon michael, son of michael of s lucar. peter velasio, son of alonso diaz of ayamonte. francis perez, son of john of ayamonte. john dominguez, son of christovall of ayamonte. francis rodriguez, son of the same of ayamonte. melchior velasquez, son of mich general of s maria. esteuan de requaburen, son of domingo of s sebastian. john de xanregui, son of the same of bernizo. peter quintero, son of rodrigo of. velasquez, son of mich general of s maria. esteuan de requaburen, son of domingo of s sebastian. john de xanregui, son of the same of bernizo. peter quintero, son of rodrigo of huclua. andrew ximenes, son of the same of seville. lucas lorenzo, son of lorenzo. lucas of cadiz. alonzo de torris, son of melchor. alfencio of the i will tenerif. domingo pere^ra, son of gonzalo of lugos. domingo antonio, son of the same of faro. manuel ferera, son of vasco vincente of lugos. stephen rodriguez, son of the same vasco ferera. son of the same francis xavelo, son of the same domingo rodriguez, son of francis perez of lugos. gonzales t^go, son of sancho of lisboa. christopher martoquin, son of the same of lugos. antonio hermandez, son. francis xavelo, son of the same. domingo rodriguez, son of francis perez of lugos. gonzales t^go, son of sancho of lisboa. christopher martoquin, son of the same of lugos. antonio hermandez, son of peter gonzales of tanira. manuel diaz, son of the same of lisboa. martin manuel, son of matthew of vellanewa. jacome garcia, son of the same of pontevedra. shipboy christopher, son of peter martin of sanlucar. john, son of ambrosio of sanlucar. sebastian rodriguez, son of the same of sanlucar. save. john de villegaz, son of ferdinand of john. diego, son of diego. michael of sanlucar. sebanstian de arnia, son of the same of moguer. hernan diaz, son of jaspar of tunira. nicholas romero, son of john of sanlucar. peter runez, son of the same of of sanlucar sebanstian de arnia, son of the same of moguer hernan diaz, son of jaspar of tunira. nicholas romero, son of john of sanlucar, peter runez, son of the same of sanlucar. melchor rey, son of matthew rodriguez of ayamonte. francis miscino, son of matthew of sanlucar. john peres, son of gonzales of s leucar. john sobrana, son of francis of tercera. peter betinez, son of damian of s leucar. jeronimo franco, son of lewis burexa of s leucar. john diaz, son of michael of s leucar. christopher de soto, son of the same of seville. mannuel of petega, son of the same of s leucar. dionysius of olivera, son of of diego rodriguez, son of francis of s lucar. peter. maria lopez, son of lazaro of seville. mannuel of petega, son of the same of s leucar. dionysius of olivera, son of of diego rodriguez, son of francis of s lucar peter. maria lopez, son of lazaro of genda. john, son of alonso diaz of ayamonte. alonso de perulfa, son of john of sanlucar martin garcia, son of alonso ruiz of monguer. john martin, son of lorenzo of seville. john suarez, son of the same of s jiago. john of ecija, son of lewis of ecija. matthew buyz, son of john of the valley of baldiniofa. diego de calatrava, son of the same. francis, son of antony of seville, save francis de silua, son of gonzule of ayamonte. dominigo roifriguez, jasper hernandes, son of domingo of portiman. alvaro fernandes, son of gregory of lugos. same. francis, son of antony of seville, save francis de silua, son of gonzule of ayamonte. dominigo roifriguez. jasper hernandes, son of domingo of portiman. alvaro fernandes, son of gregory of lugos. anthony lorenzo. sebastian hernandez, son of nicholas de tupinna, a national of the island mudera. gregory fernandes of john cordero, son of diego martin of guelua. anthony fernandes, son of christopher of borges. alfonso lorenzo, son of the same of pontevidua. john francis, servant that be lose. lazaro de medina, son of diego of san lucar. thomas de aquino, son of lazaro of s lucar. john mumioz, son of alonso of s lucar. francis rodriquez, son of bartholomew dominges of s lucar. peter de roa, son of john of seville. francis negro allezudo, son of francis. lucar, john mumioz, son of alonso of s lucar, francis rodriquez. son of bartholomew dominges of s lucar, peter de roa. son of john of seville, francis negro allezudo. son of francis perez of ayamonte. blas de iglesias, son of alvaro of s lucar, john aze^tuno, son of the same of tulunaro reyna peter de flores. son of john of s leucar, manuel de morales. son of anthonio of aymonte, peter garcia, son of john of the s marry. peter de casabon, son of the same of s lucar, sebastian ruyx, son of alonso of curtagena, gunner or officer of the ordnance. the constable lope ramos, armero, lewes de la testa. fernando, son of the same of vbeda, peter sunchez. son of the same of seville, lewis galaiz. gunner or officer of the ordnance, the constable lope ramos, armero lewes de la testa. fernando, son of the same of vbeda. peter sunchez, son of the same of seville. lewis galaiz, son of christopher, daniel of port s marry. john prieto, son of the same of seville. matthew fernandes, son of manuel of seville. francis de gusinan, son of christopher of seville. sebastian de arumbara, son of john martinez of fuenzabia. alonso palamine, rexedel, son of v^icont of seville. diego henriquez, son of gaspar of cadiz. jeronimo de luna, son of the same of s lucar^ bartholomew de cesar, son of the same of s lucar. john rodriwez, son of diego ruyz, of of matthew gomez, son of domingo de fonzecu of s leucar. john martin, son. lucar^ bartholomew de cesar, son of the same of s lucar, john rodriwez, son of diego ruyz, of of matthew gomez, son of domingo de fonzecu, of s leucar. john martin, son of anthony of seville, john, son of christopher rodriquez of seville, the passenger in the saip galeon, the admiral father, master or friar peter madriz of the order of s astin, visitor of peru. friar francis currion, his companion, friar anthony of s austin, friar christopher of don john, don martin buesso, don gunzalo tamago, the licentiate, don antony of silua, the licentiate lorrenza arius nuglaber, don diego de guzman, the justicer of cusio, don diego de guenar, don publo de silua, john delgudo of leon el moco, christopher de aspasia, the secretary, martin salyado, donna. arius nuglaber. don diego de guzman, the justicer of cusio. don diego de guenar, don publo de silua. john delgudo of leon el moco. christopher de aspasia, the secretary. martin salyado. donna maria de ayala, his wife catalina, her nurse or nurse child two girl, her servant, the licentiate fragosa. cinrinno de alcula. donna froncisin, his wife, donna isabel de pernia. lewis quintero, a neighbour of callao. donne jeronima, his wife, peter quintero, a neighbour of arica. donna luise quintaro, his daughter, michael de vzarraga. laurence of arriola, a neighbour of poto. francis arriambo, a neighbour of toledo. peter donna luisa rios, his wife, john de valuerd, his son benitt de castra, a merchant of the king who go to be employ alonso $word$, another merchant, don martin. of toledo, peter donna, luisa rios, his wife, john de valuerd, his son benitt de castra, a merchant of the king who go to be employ alonso $word$. another merchant, don martin de vergunzo, peter gonzalez, anthony de la cruz, luis mesone, a brother of john de mesones, diego de yllesio of a moor and a christian eight servant and slave of the chamber, such person as be lose in the gallion, santa margarita, the company of captain bernardine de lugo. captain don bernardine de lugo, save the ensign don diego de contreras. the sergeant don francis de burio, save auanderado. or the ensign servant john lopez, save the fife philip de beninsa. the drommer domingo perez, save of soldier captain peter martinez. aliende john lorenzo, son of. francis de burio, save auanderado. or the ensign servant, john lopez, save the fife. philip de beninsa, the drommer, domingo perez, save of soldier captain peter martinez, aliende john lorenzo, son of the same of pontivedra. master alonso guldumez, save master andrew the surgeant. christopher a horseman, master jeronimo de moron, son of martin of ^rcos. captain jeronimo ortiz. master john antonio, son of the same of cartegena in the levant, save alonso hernandez. captain michael rico, son of john of fonterraby. master gaspar deal real, son of john of carmona. john rodriguez, son of peter gonzalez of ayamonte. michael agnodo, son of anton of vilasto. antony de castro, son of peter fernandez of montilla. francis navarro, son of the same of carmona, save master john esquia^l, son. gonzalez of ayamonte. michael agnodo, son of anton of vilasto. antony de castro, son of peter fernandez of montilla. francis navarro, son of the same of carmona save master john esquia^l, son of john baatista of moron. master thomas de herreta, son of anthony of seville. diego de aliende, son of peter of vtrera. martin munnoz, son of andrew of save. hernando surabia, son of diego rodriguez of caceres. don francis of sepulu^da, son of peter of seville. francis cortes, son of john cavallero of saint lucar. don roque de valasco, son of don alonso of miranda. anthonio pedrique, son of diego of saint lucar. save don anthony de valasco, son of alonso of miranda. save francis desanda, son of the same of villareall. jusepe ribera, son of. miranda. anthonio pedrique, son of diego of saint lucar, save don anthony de valasco, son of alonso of miranda, save francis desanda, son of the same of villareall. jusepe ribera, son of peter of seville. peter de valasco, son of the same of niebla the ensign, john baptista de fantiago, alonso, son of the same of seville. jeronimo de morales, son of gabriel of seville. francis clavixo, son of peter of malaga. michael fernandez, son of the same of leon save. jayme ferrer, son of the same of elda. peter martin, son of the same of saint lucar, the sergeant, diego gomez. andrew perez, son of john lorenzo of saint lucar. martin de mora, son of the same of the city. rodrigo benet sanchez nevado, son of john. saint lucar the sergeant, diego gomez, andrew perez, son of john lorenzo of saint lucar. martin de mora, son of the same of the city, rodrigo benet sanchez nevado, son of john of caceres. peter de cabria, son of the same of reynosa. save john of villa newa, son of john stephen of saint lucar, captain anthony romero, son of francis lopes of seville, lewis de jain, son of andrew perez of seville, save peter rebollur, son of alonso garcia of carmona. save michael sanchez de auila. son of marcos sanchez of carmona. isidor de volley, son of john of villa frechosa. john de ortega, son of peter of saint lucar s^ued, bartholomew navarro, son of of carmona, fernando de acosta, son of gutierez of burguillos, anthony saint son of john of villa frechosa. john de ortega, son of peter of saint lucar s^ued. bartholomew navarro, son of of carmona. fernando de acosta, son of gutierez of burguillos, anthony. saint michael, son of diego of anthony martin, son of alonso of carmona, save peter navarro, son of the same of carmona. hernando de acosta, son of gutieres of burguilloz. anthony of saint michael, son of diego of ledesia. john inigo, son of john of valencia. john stephen, son of rodrigo of almendra lexo, the sergeant mayor, manuel of abren. save francis de alochon, son of an^res of madrid. diego reyes, son of melchor of cordona. save john de salus, son of michael of barcelona. save thomas gonzales, son of alonso of villanova de la fuente. antonio. of an^res of madrid, diego reyes, son of melchor of cordona, save john de salus, son of michael of barcelona, save thomas gonzales, son of alonso of villanova de la fuente, antonio baptista, son of the same of seville, don john de villabeta, nicholas montero, son of saluader of seville, peter de la fuentes, son of the same of seville, leandro de aquita, son of francis of granado, don anthony de montsalue and figuero, son of gaspar rio. he be soldier to gaspar and take salary of he. john rumirez ossoria, son of diego of alcuna de chucena. he be a soldier in the company of don michael de redin and take salary of he. save john zeribo of the say company. the seaman belong to the say. de chucena, he be a soldier in the company of don michael de redin and take salary of. he save john zeribo of the say company, the seaman belong to the say galeon of saint margerita the officer, the overseer of the treasure. peter gatierez espinosa, the surveyor, or his agent. austin de aquines, master of the allowance of victual. martin peroundia, the master mate or boatswain. christopher bernitez, son of the same of sanlucaar the guardian. john baptista, son of christopher sunchez of cadiz, save the steward. john de we, as son of hernando of port saint mary, the marshal for the water. lorenzo garzill, son of diego of cadiz, save the of the ship. hernando de morales, son of the same of cadiz, the cooper john. port, saint mary, the marshal for the water, lorenzo garzill, son of diego of cadiz, save the of the ship, hernando de morales, son of the same of cadiz. the cooper john michael, son of martin fovar of seville. save another cooper, hieronimo de leon, son of gasper rimero of seville. save another, lope mexia, son of alonso diuy, of save the clerk toribia de valdes, son of john of miedo. the carpenter luic garcie, son of john rumos of the harbour. the carpenter diego de rocha, save the clerk to say service the anthony ortiz ponce, he be a priest-clerke. the pilot, diego roman, his companion, (@), (@). save the surgeant john de mercubo. mariner john duarte, the son of michael of passage. he can not come. ponce, he be a priest-clerke. the pilot, diego roman, his companion, (@), (@). save the surgeant john de mercubo. mariner john duarte, the son of michael- of passage, he can not come on shipboard by reason he be sick in the hospital of havana. christopher sunchez, son of the same cadez. save francis correa. son of john rodrigo of cadiz. save rodrigo de hoieda, son of peter telley of st lucar. save john de barrios, son of the same of triana. save michael vicent, son of vicent. michael of saint lucar. save john benitez, son of the same of saint mary. save son of peter of saint lucar. save anthony cordero, son of lewis of ayamonte. save anthony zamorano, son of the same of ayamonte. save sebastian duennas. the same of saint mary, save son of peter of saint lucar, save anthony cordero, son of lewis of ayamonte. save anthony zamorano, son of the same of ayamonte. save sebastian duennas, son of alexo rodriguez. christopher rodriguez, son of stephen of xeres. christopher duran, son of the same of saint lucar, save as have embark himself in another galeone. francis correa, son of the same of ayamonte, save rodrigo alonso, son of john de moron of aumonte, save peter sanchez, son of stephan of ayamonte, save michael ruzio, son of austin of aymonte, save francis, son of john ruyz of aymonte. save peter gonzales, son of domingo of seville. john mendozu, son of cavary. michael serovimo, son of martin of cadiz, save sebastian, son of francis of. son of john ruyz of aymonte. save peter gonzales, son of domingo of seville. john mendozu, son of cavary. michael serovimo, son of martin of cadiz. save sebastian, son of francis of saint lucar. john rodriguez, save gaspar. dumian cordero, son of anthony christopher of braid. john aluarez, son of the same of tavira, save pasquil cordero. domingo of the tower, son of john of cadiz, save saluador vicente, save domingo. (@), (@). save john de lugue, save john de castilia. save bartholomew medina, save austin francisco. peter cintado, save bartholomew lopez. sebastian aluares, son of the same of lisbon. anthony hernandez, son of domingo of portugal. ship boy peter mexia, son of the former of triana. john of vriburri, son of martin of bilbao. he do not. the same of lisbon. anthony hernandez, son of domingo of portugal. ship boy peter mexia, son of the former of triana. john of vriburri, son of martin of bilbao: he do not embark himself, be sick on the shore. john de castro, son of alonso of triana, save gonzalo rodriguez, son of the same of port s marry. francis tinoco, son of the same of s lucar. laurence mendez, son of john of ayamonte, save manuel correa, son of rodrigo of lepe. save christopher carrasio, son of francis correa of aymonte. he remain sick in cartagena. domingo de las nieve, son of jaspar of ayamonte. diego martin, francisco, son of jaspar rumirez, a national of lope. andrew gonzales, son of bartholomew of ayamonte, save michael hernandez, son of. domingo de las nieve, son of jaspar of ayamonte. diego martin. francisco, son of jaspar rumirez, a national of lope. andrew gonzales, son of bartholomew of ayamonte. save michael hernandez, son of manuel rodriguez of triana. save nicholas de mendoza, son of john of carmona. michael carasco, son of francis of seville. save francis ramires, son of the same of toledo. save peter bernabe pin^da. save diego morion, son of francis of toledo, servant. francis de sierra, son of john of s peter de castillo, son of gonzales martin of s lucar. john marquez, son of peter of s lucar. francis of azenedo, son of anthonio of s leucar. diego zaez, son of the same of seville. lucus, francis, son of antonio of cadiz. anthony garcia, son of peter of s lucar, francis of azenedo, son of anthonio of s leucar, diego zaez, son of the same of seville. lucus francis, son of antonio of cadiz. anthony garcia, son of the same of sanlucar. another anthony garcia, son of adrian of s lucar, save john baptista de biedma, son of the same of seville, save the gunner of the say, galleon, the constable, marcos perez, son of alonso of sevil^, armero. john rodriguez, son of the same of seville, save diego perez, son of the same of the port. antonio periera, son of the same of san lucar. hernando de aremo, son of alonzo de vargas, son of john of seville. john suarez, son of the same of saint lucar. simon rodriguez, son of christopher of. same of san lucar, hernando de aremo, son of alonzo de vargas. son of john of seville, john suarez, son of the same of saint lucar, simon rodriguez. son of christopher of saint lucar. save john de vtrera, son of domingo of saint lucar. save gonsalo perez, son of the same of ayamonte. peter hernandez, son of the same of saint lucar, christopher ramirez, son of francis of saint lucar, francis de barrio, son of lope of saint lucar, martin aluarez, son of the same of the port. save john va^tista, son of peter of saint lucar. francis save don francis cen^o, a knight of thirty (@) a month entertainment for his estate and dignity. a gentleman, don john de cabrera. save the passenger which go in the. lucar francis. save don francis cen^o, a knight of thirty (@) a month entertainment for his estate and dignity. a gentleman, don john de cabrera, save the passenger which go in the say galeon, santa margarita. don francis de barrios, governor of caracas. gaspar de roxas. don francis of roxas, his cousin, don john de la fuente, seraphin francis of valence, son of doctor valencio. father jusepe of arr^aga, of the society of jesus, father claudio colci, his companion, francis maria lopez de estremos, a neighbour of lima. benit rodriguez. john felix. don john caro de castro. anthonio la, a neighbour of cartegena, so that there be 462.. person, as you may perceive and understand by this relation of seaman, soldier and passenger who embark themselves in these castro, anthonio la, a neighbour of cartegena, so that there be 462.. person, as you may perceive and understand by this relation of seaman, soldier and passenger who embark themselves in these two galeons, that be to say, the admiral of the fleet, call our lady of a^tocha, and the s margarite, which, as some will have it, signify the ship of pearl, among who perish 391. and 71. be save as be by the same apparent concern. the rest, i find no other mention in the original. but what be brief handle before only the author fall to some business wherein they be employ after the storm which, according i thus prosecute, not vary from the true meaning of the same, the 25. of september 1622.. the author fall to some business wherein they be employ. after the storm which, according i thus prosecute, not vary from the true meaning of the same, the 25. of september 1622.. the great marquis, aforenamed governor of havana, assemble once again a council to which all the officer be summon about the return into spain with the rest of the fleet, conclude to depart after the conjunction of october to which, it shall seem, they all condescend, except the general john de sara moran, the admiral thomas ray and two principal pilot of the armado, or the whole fleet, with the pilot of the admiral who, for diverse reason, beside the great provision and treasure in the same, do not think it fit or convenient in so dangerous. the whole fleet with the pilot of the admiral who, for diverse reason, beside the great provision and treasure in the same, do not think it fit or convenient, in so dangerous a time and after so fearful a warning to adventure, so great a substance and so rich a prize into the hand of fortune, wind or weather, but rather to return into spain at the spring of the year and make use of a more prosperous season, to which advice, as it shall seem, this naval council subscribe. the eighteen of september there depart from the port of havana three bark or frigate under the command of captain or admiral gaspar de vargaz, who charge be to search for the artillery and treasure of the lose. from the port of havana, three bark or frigate under the command of captain or admiral gaspar de vargaz, who charge be to search for the artillery and treasure of the lose galeons. and on monday, the 28. of september, after safe arrival, they there summon all the soldier, seaman and passenger who be miraculous preserve in the tempest, when the say admiral be lose, under the command of michael de cazaretta, and who, at their come in florida they find in safety and with who the say gaspar de vargas return after they have discover where the admiral lie, which they may do by the topmast appear above water and so, very fortunate, they dispatch their unfortunate business. they divide into these frigate or small bark the where the admiral lie, which they may do by the topmast, appear above water and so, very fortunate, they dispatch their unfortunate business. they divide into these frigate or small bark the most part of the artillery or ordnance which, with great labour and industry, they get out of the galeons, begin first with she that perish in the bay of tortaga, but they be much trouble and encumber with two special piece which put they to excessive ^oile. thus, be they able, in respect of the fortress of tabaco, to search further and at convenient leisure, to effect that which they come about, for this fort be build and erect of purpose, to keep the inhabitant in awe and debar stranger from any intrusion, as also to leisure to effect that which they come about, for this fort be build and erect of purpose to keep the inhabitant in awe and debar stranger from any intrusion, as also to accommodate they if, by disastrous chance, they shall be drive into these place. so watch the two perish galeons that they find what be to be find untouched. whereupon the say gaspar de vargas write of his success to the marquis and of the toil he sustain in the margarite with other adventure, as the danger and wonderful pain which the diverse endure and the sailor prove, even when they be in the waste of the lose ship who body be break to piece and lay in a manner under water. when this be do and the sailor prove, even when they be in the waste of the lose ship, who body be break to piece and lay in a manner under water when this be do, and that they can find or recover no more at a quiet and a still water. in the company of captain cazaretta, they search the creek and the bottom more narrow for the bullion and treasure of the say galleon of rosario, and have the fortune to find the most part of it, though it seem smoke, black and impeach with the owse and fret of the water. yea, after four natural day, they draw it all out with the loss only of one ingot. the next work in the harbour of havana be the curry and of the water. yea, after four natural day, they draw it all out, with the loss only of one ingot. the next work in the harbour of havana be the curry and trim such ship as have escape the tempest, whereupon to be more able to furnish the three distress galeons that come mastless into the harbour. as you have hear, they cast a cross, a ship of cadiz, and disrobe she, as i may say, take her mast, tackle and furniture whereby they supply many want and as well as they can, mast the galeons again so that they be, think fit and serviceable to prosecute the voyage of the sea. when occasion shall invite they to return into spain, the four of october there come into again, so that they be think fit and serviceable to prosecute the voyage of the sea when occasion shall invite they to return into spain. the four of october there come into the port of havana a certain frigate with twenty person and two friar, vittorian, who save themselves in a ship of new cumpechana in the first voyage. when they accompany the fleet of new spain and be cast a shore on the rock and land of bermuda have be hurry and toss two day, together with a strange storm and wonderful tempest, and yet the galeons and most of their fleet be save, god be. thank. only some ship perish among who be they in which they first embark themselves, so that there be drown 83. the galeons and most of their fleet be save, god be thank. only some ship perish, among who be they in which they first embark themselves, so that there be drown 83 person who can by no mean be provide for, because one morning, very early, all the ship be cover with water and ready to sink. whereupon the better sort procure to get into the boat which, with much ado, they effect afford leave to none to enter but themselves, lest they shall all perish. and so better, save some. they which go up provide one great basket of biscuit and a little fresh water, wherewith they sustain themselves until they come into the harbour of havana 26. day after their navigation, by which occasion many have one great basket of biscuit and a little fresh water, wherewith they sustain themselves until they come into the harbour of havana, 26. day after their navigation, by which occasion many have report that they have no other shallop but the boat of the ship. the 24. of october be sunday, the marquis call a council, again for the concurrency of all business, wherein it be propound to acquaint his majesty by some pinnace or other adventurer with their present affair, and so to provide for the furnish of the other ship for new spain. and if captain gasparo de veruas return in the mean while, then may the occurrence and particular of the scarche of the lose admiral and galeon of saint margarite be advertise all together. if captain gasparo de veruas return in the mean while, then may the occurrence and particular of the scarche of the lose admiral and galeon of saint margarite be advertise all together, according to the agreement of the court and assembly, the second of november die the general of the fleet, john de lara moran, of a calenture which over master he, don pedro de ursula, be also send into florida to make further search in the margarite and admiral for treasure and other thing, while captain gaspar de vargas go to provide especial necessary, but no man be permit to search the side of the break ship which by this time be come to the shore, but the license officer, the 18. of november, don peter ursula. no man be permit to search the side of the break ship, which by this time be come to the shore, but the license officer, the 18. of november, don peter ursula, arrive at the creek where the galeons be lose and begin his adventure for the find of more treasure. god grant a good success may crown his service.