a relation of such thing as don ferdinando de soto, the adelantado of florida, pass in seek to conquer the say country wherein be declare who he be and what some of they be that go with he and some particular and diversity of the country and whatsoever they see and happen unto they. in the same chap i, which declare who don ferdinando de soto be and how he get the government of florida, captain soto be the son of a squire, of xerez of badaioz. he go into the spanish indies when peter arias of auila be governor of the west indies. and there he be without any thing else of his own save his sword and target, and for his good quality and valour, peter. of auila be governor of the west indies. and there he be, without any thing else of his own save his sword and target, and for his good quality and valour, peter arias, make he captain of a troop of horseman, and by his commandment he go with fernando pizarro to the conquest of peru, where as many person of credit report which be there present as well at the take of atabalipa, lord of peru, as at the assault of the city of cusco and in all other place where they find resistance. wheresoever he be present, he pass all other captain and principal person for which cause beside his part of the treasure of atabalipa he have a good share whereby, in time, he gather a. be present, he pass all other captain and principal person for which cause beside his part of the treasure of atabalipa he have a good share, whereby in time he gather a hundred and fourscore thousand ducat, together with that which fall to his part, which he bring into spain, whereof the emperor borrow a certain part, which he repay again with 60000 rial of plate in the rent of the silk of granada, and all the rest be deliver. he, in the contractation house of siuil, he take servant, to wit a steward, a gentleman, usher, page, a gentleman of the horse, a chamberlain, laky, and all other officer that the house of a noble man require from siuil. he go to the court and in the usher page, a gentleman of the horse, a chamberlain, laky, and all other officer that the house of a noble man require from siuil. he go to the court and in the court there, accompany he, john danusco of siuil and lewis moscoso d'aluarado, nunno de tovar and john rodriguez lobillo. except john danusco, all the rest come with he from peru, and every one of they bring fourteen or fifteen thousand ducat. all of they go well and costly apparel and although soto of his own nature be not liberal yet, because that be the first time that he be to show himself in the court, he spend frank and go accompany with those which i have name and with his servant and many other which resort. first time that he be to show himself in the court. he spend frank and go accompany with those which i have name and with his servant and many other which resort unto he. he marry with donna isabella de bovadilla, daughter of peter arias of auila. earl of punno the emperor, make he the governor of the isle of cuba and adelantado, or precedent, of florida with a title of marquis of certain part of the land that he shall conquer. chap 2: how cabeca de vaca come to the court and give relation of the country of florida and of the company that be assemble in seville to go with don ferdinando de soto. when don ferdinando have obtain the government, there come a gentleman from the country of florida and of the company that be assemble in seville to go with don ferdinando de soto. when don ferdinando have obtain the government, there come a gentleman from the indies, to the court name cabeca de vaca, which have be with the governor, pamphilo de naruaez, which die in florida, who report that naruaez be cast away at sea with all the company that go with he and how he, with four more, escape and arrive in nueva espanna. also, he bring a relation in write of that which he have see in florida which say: in some place, in such a place i have see this and the rest which here i see, i leave to confer of between his majesty and myself. in florida which say in some place, in such a place, i have see this and the rest which here i see, i leave to confer of between his majesty and myself. general, he report the misery of the country and the trouble which he pass, and he tell some of his kinsfolk which be desirous to go into the indies and urge he very much to tell they whether he have see any rich country in florida, that he may not tell they because he and another who name be orantes, who remain in nueva espanna with purpose to return into florida, for which intent he come into spain, to beg the government thereof of the emperor, have swear not to discover some of those thing which espanna with purpose to return into florida, for which intent he come into spain? to beg the government thereof of the emperor, have swear not to discover some of those thing which they have see, because no man shall prevent they in beg the same, and he inform they florida be the rich country of the world, that it be the rich country of the world, don ferdinando de soto be very desirous to have he with he and make he a favourable offer. and after they be agree, because soto give he not a sum of money which he demand to buy a ship, they break off again. balthasar de gallegos and christopher de spindola, the kinsman of cabeca de vaca, tell he that for that which of money which he demand to buy a ship, they break off again. balthasar de gallegos and christopher de spindola, the kinsman of cabeca de vaca, tell he that for that which he have impart to they, they be resolve to pass with soto into florida, and therefore they pray he to advise they what they be best to do. cabeca de vaca tell they that the cause why he go not with soto be because he hope to beg another government and that he be loath to go under the command of another and that he come to beg the conquest of florida. but see, don ferdinando de soto have get it already. for his oath sake, he may tell they nothing of that which they will. he come to beg the conquest of florida. but see, don ferdinando de soto have get it already. for his oath sake, he may tell they nothing of that which they will know, but he counsel they to sell their good and go with he, and that in so do they shall do well. assoon, as he have opportunity, he speak with the emperor and relate unto he whatsoever he have. pass and see and come to understand of this relation, make by word of mouth to the emperor, the marquis of astorga have notice and forthwith determine to send with don ferdinando de soto his brother, don antonio osorio, and with he two kinsman of his prepare themselves, to wit francis osorio and garcia osorio, don antonio. forthwith determine to send with don ferdinando de soto his brother don antonio osorio, and with he two kinsman of his prepare themselves, to wit francis osorio and garcia osorio. don antonio dispossess himself of 60000 rial of rent which he hold by the church, and francis osorio of a town of vassal which he have in the country campos. and they make their rendezvous with the adelantado in siuil, the like do de tovar and lewis de moscoso and john rodriguez lobillo, each of who have bring from peru fourteen or fifteen thousand ducat. lewis moscoso carry with he two brother. there go also don carlos, which have marry the governors niece and take she with he from badaioz. there go peter calderan and three kinsman of. moscoso, carry with he two brother there. go also don carlos, which have marry the governors niece and take she with he. from badaioz there go peter calderan and three kinsman of the adelantado, to wit arias tinoco, alfonso romo and diego tinoco. and as lewis de moscoso pass through, * * eluas be a city in portugal. eluas, andrew de vasconcelos. speak with he and request he to speak to don ferdinando de soto, concern he and deliver he certain warrant which he have receive from the marquis of villa real wherein he give he the captainship of ceuta in barbary, that he may show they unto he and the adelantado see they and be, inform who he be and write unto he that he will favour. the captainship of ceuta in barbary, that he may show they unto he and the adelantado see they and be, inform who he be and write unto he that he will favour he in all thing and by all mean and will give he a charge of man. in florida and from eluas go, andrew de vasconcelos and fernan pegado, antonio martinez, segurado men roiz pereira, john cordero, stephen pegado, benedict fernandez and alvaro fernandez, and out of salamanca and jaen and valencia and albuquerque, and from other part of spain, many people of noble birth assemble at seville, insomuch that in saint lucar many man of good account which have sell their good remain behind for want of ship, whereas for other know and rich country they assemble at seville, insomuch that in saint lucar many man of good account which have sell their good remain behind for want of ship, whereas for other know and rich country they be wont to want man. and this fall out by occasion of that which cabeca de vaca tell the emperor and inform such person as he have conference withal touch the state of that country soto make he great offer and be agree to go with he, as i have say before, because he will not give he money to pay for a ship which he have buy. they break off and he go for governor to the river of plate. cabeca de vaca be the governor of the river of plate his kinsman christoper de. which he have buy. they break off and he go for governor to the river of plate, cabeca de vaca. be the governor of the river of plate. his kinsman, christoper de spindola and balthasar de gallegos go with soto. balthasar de gallegos sell house and vineyard and rend corn and ninety rank of olive tree in the xarafe of siuil. he have the office of mayor and take his wife with. he and there go also many other person of account with the precedent and have the office follow by great friendship because they be office desire of many, to wit antony de biedma be factor, john danusco be auditor and john gaytan, nephew to the cardinal of ciguenza, have the office of treasurer. chap 3: how? office desire of many, to wit antony de biedma be factor, john danusco be auditor and john gaytan, nephew to the cardinal of ciguenza, have the office of treasurer. chap 3: how the portugal go to siuil and from thence to s lucar, he appoint captain over the ship and distribute the people which be to go in. they, the portugal, depart from eluas the 15. of januarie and come to seville the 19 of the same month and go to the lodging of the governor and enter into a court over the which be certain gallery where he be, who come down and receive they at the stair whereby they go up into the gallery. when he be come up, he command chair to be give they. gallery where he be, who come down and receive they at the stair whereby they go up into the gallery. when he be come up, he command chair to be, give they to sit on and andrew de vasconcelos tell he who he and the other portugal be and how they all be come to accompany he and serve he in his voyage. he give he thanks and make show of great contentment for his come and offer and the table be already lay. he invite they to dinner and be at dinner. he command his steward to seek a lodging for they near unto his own where they may be lodge. the adelantado depart from seville to saint lucar with all the people which be to go. steward to seek a lodging for they, near unto his own, where they may be lodge. the adelantado depart from seville to saint lucar with all the people which be to go with he, and he command a muster to be make, at the which the portugal show themselves, arm in very bright armour, and the castellans very gallant, with silk upon silk, with many pinking and cut. the governor, because these bravary in such a action do not like, he command that they shall muster another day and every one shall come forth with his armour. at the which the portugal come as at the first arm, with very good armour, the governor place they in order, near unto the standard which the ensign-bearer carry, the castellan. armour at the which the portugal come as at the first arm with very good armour, the governor place. they in order near unto the standard which the ensign-bearer carry, the castellan for the most part do wear very bad and rusty shirt of mail and all of they headpiece and steel cap and very bad lance and some of they seek to come among the portugal. so those pass and be count and enroll which soto like and accept of and do accompany he into florida, which be in all six hundred man. six hundred man go with soto into florida. he have already buy seven ship and have all necessary provision aboard they. he appoint captain and deliver to every one his ship and give they. man go with soto into florida. he have already buy seven ship and have all necessary provision aboard they. he appoint captain and deliver to every one his ship and give they in a role. what people every one shall carry with they. chap 4: how the adelantado with his people depart from spain and come to the canary and afterward to the antiles in the year of our lord 1538.. in the month of april the adelantado deliver his ship to the captain, which be to go in they and take for himself a new ship and good of sail and give another to andrew de vasconcelos in which the portugal go. he go over the bar of s lucar on sunday be s lazarus day in. ship and good of sail and give another to andrew de vasconcelos, in which the portugal go. he go over the bar of s lucar on sunday, be s lazarus day, in the morning of the month and year aforesaid with great joy, command his trumpet to be sound and many shot of the ordinance to be discharge. he sail four day with a prosperous wind and sudden it calm. the calm continue eight day with swell sea in such wise that we make no way. the 15. day after his departure from s lucar, he come to gomera, one of the canary, on easter day in the morning, the earl of that island be apparel all in white cloak, jerkin, hose, shoe and cap, so that he come to gomera, one of the canary, on easter day in the morning the earl of that island be apparel all in white cloak, jerkin, hose, shoe and cap so that he seem a lord of the gypse. he receive the governor with much joy. he be well, lodge and all the rest have their lodging gratis and get great store of victual for their money, as bread, wine and flesh, and they take what be needful for their ship. and the sunday follow, eight day after their arrival they depart from the isle of gomera. the earl give to donna isabella, the adelantado wife, a bastard daughter, that he have to be her wait maid. they arrive at the antilles in the isle of cuba at the the earl give to donna isabella, the adelantado wife, a bastard daughter that he have to be her wait maid. they arrive at the antilles in the isle of cuba, at the port of the city of sant jago upon whitsunday assoon. as they come thither, a gentleman of the city send to the sea side a very fair roan horse and well furnish for the governor and a mule for donna isabella and all the horseman and footman that be in the town come to receive he at the seaside, the governor. be well lodge, visit and serve of all the inhabitant of that city and all his company have their lodging free. those which desire to go into the country be divide by four and four. visit and serve of all the inhabitant of that city and all his company, have their lodging free. those which desire to go into the country be divide by four and four and six, and six in the farm or grange, according to the ability of the owner of the farm, and be furnish by they with all thing necessary. chap 5 of the inhabitant which be in the city of s jago and in the other town of the island and of the quality of the soil and fruit that it yield. the city of s jago have fourscore house which be great and well contrive. the most part have their wall make of board and be cover with thatch. it have some house build with lime. s jago have fourscore house which be great and well contrive. the most part have their wall make of board and be cover with thatch. it have some house build with lime and stone and cover with tile. it have great orchard and many tree in. they differ from those of spain. there be figgetree which bear fig, great fig, as big as one fist, yellow within and of small taste. and other tree which bear a fruit which they call ananes. ananes in make and bigness like to a small pineapple. it be a fruit very sweet in taste. the shell be take away, the kernel be like a piece of fresh cheese in the grange. abroad in the country there be other great pineapple, great pineapple. very sweet in taste. the shell be take away, the kernel be like a piece of fresh cheese in the grange. abroad in the country there be other great pineapple, great pineapple, which grow on low tree and be like the * aloetree. they be of a very good smell and exceed good taste. other tree do bear a fruit, mameis, a excellent f^uit, which they call mameis of the bigness of peach. this the islander do hold for the best fruit of the country. there be another fruit which they call guayabas, guayabas like filbert, as big as fig. there be other tree as high as a javelin, have one only stock without any bough and the leaf as long as a cast dart and the fruit as big as fig. there be other tree as high as a javelin, have one only stock, without any bough and the leaf as long as a cast dart and the fruit be of the bigness and fashion of a cucumber. one bunch bear 20. or 30. and as they ripen, the tree bend downward with they. they be call in this country plantano, plantano and be of a good taste and ripen after they be gather. but those be the better which ripen upon the tree itself. they bear fruit, but once and the tree be cut down, there spring up other out of the but which bear fruit the next year. there be another fruit whereby many people be sustain and chief the slave which be be cut down. there spring up other out of the but which bear fruit the next year. there be another fruit whereby many people be sustain and chief the slave, which be call or potato. these grow now in the isle of tercera, belong to the kingdom of portugal, and they grow within the earth and be like a fruit call iname. they have almost the taste of a chestnut. the bread of this country be also make of root which be like the, the cassavi, ^oote, and the stock whereon those root do grow be like a elder tree. they make their ground in little hillock and in each of they they thrust 4. or 5. stake and they gather the root a year and a half. like a elder tree. they make their ground in little hillock and in each of they they thrust 4. or 5. stake and they gather the root a year and a half after they set they. if any one think it be a batata or potato root chance to eat of it, never so little he be in great danger of death, which be see by experience in a soldier which assoon as he have eat a very little of one of those root, he die quick. they pare these root and stamp they and squese they in a thing like a press. the juice that come from they be of a evil smell, the bread be of little taste and less substance of the fruit of spain. they in a thing like a press the juice that come from. they be of a evil smell, the bread be of little taste and less substance. of the fruit of spain there be fig and orange and they bear fruit all the year because the soil be very rank and fruitful in this country. be many good horse, store of good horse, and there be green grass all the year. there be many wild ox and hog, whereby the people of the island be well furnish with flesh without the town abroad. in the country. be many fruit and it happen sometime that a christian go out of the way and be lose 15. or 20. day because of the many path in the thick grove that be many fruit and it happen sometime that a christian go out of the way and be lose 15. or 20. day because of the many path in the thick grove that cross to and fro, make by the ox and be thus lose. they sustain themselves with fruit and palmito, for there be many great grove of palm tree through all the island. they yield no other fruit that be of any profit. the length and breadth of cuba, the isle of cuba be 300. league long from the east to the west and be in some place 30. in other, 40. league from north to south, it have 6. town of christian, to wit s jago, baracoa, bayamo, puerto s espirito and havana, every one have. in some place 30. in other 40. league from north to south, it have 6.. town of christian, to wit s jago, baracoa, bayamo, puerto s espirito and havana. every one have between 30. and 40. household, except s jago and havana which have about 60. or 80. house. they have church in each of they and a chaplain which confess they and say mass. in s jago be a monastery of franciscan friar. it have but few friar and be well provide of alm because the country be rich. the church of s jago have honest revenue and there be a curate and prebend and many priest as the church of that city which be the chief of all the island. there be in this country much. honest revenue and there be a curate and prebend and many priest as the church of that city which be the chief of all the island. there be in this country much gold and few slave to get it. for many have make away themselves because of the christian evil usage of they in the mine. a steward of vasques porcallo, a witty stratagem, which be a inhabior in that island, understand that his slave will make away themselves, stay for they with a cudgel in his hand at the place where they be to meet and tell they that they can neither do nor think any thing that he do not know before and that he come thither to kill himself with they to the end that and tell they that they can neither do nor think any thing, that he do not know before and that he come thither to kill himself with they to the end, that if he have use they bad in this world, he may use they worse in the world to come, and this be a mean that they change their purpose and turn home again to do that which he command they. chap 5, how the governor send donna isabella with the ship to havana and he with some of his people go thither by land. the governor send from s jago his nephew don carlos, with the ship in company of donna isabella to tarry for he at havana, which be a haven in the west part. the governor send from s jago his nephew, don carlos, with the ship in company of donna isabella, to tarry for he at havana, which be a haven in the west part, towards the head of the island. 180. league from the city of saint jago, the governor and those which stay with he buy horse and proceed on their journey. the first town they come unto be bayamo (@). they be lodge four and four and six and six. as they go in company and where they lodge, they take nothing for their diet, for nothing cost. they ought save the maiz or corn for their horse, because the governor go to visit they from town to town and seize they in the tribute and service of. nothing cost. they ought save the maiz or corn for their horse, because the governor go to visit they from town to town and seize they in the tribute and service of the indian bayamo. be 25.. league from the city of s jago, near unto the town, pass a great river which be call it be great than guadiana and in it be very great crocodile which sometime hurt the indian, or the cattle which pass the river. in all the country be neither wolf, fox, bear, lion nor tiger. there be wild dog which go from the house into the wood and feed upon swine. there be certain snake as big as a man thigh or big. they be very slow, they do no kind of. go from the house into the wood and feed upon swine. there be certain snake as big as a man thigh or big. they be very slow, they do no kind of hurt. from bayamo to puerto puerto, be 50. league in all the island. from town to town the way be make by stub up the underwood and if it be, leave but one year undo the wood grow so much that the way can be see and the path of the ox be so many that none can travel without a indian of the country for a guide. for all the rest be very high and thick wood. from puerto the governor go to the house of vasques porcallo by sea, in a boat for it. country for a guide for all the rest be very high and thick wood. from puerto, the governor go to the house of vasques porcallo by sea, in a boat, for it be near the sea, to know there some news of donna isabella, which at that instant, as afterward be know, be in great distress in so much that the ship lose one another and two of they fall on the coast of florida, and all of they endure great want of water and victual. when the storm be over, they meet together without know where they be. in the end they descry the cape of s anton, the cape of s antonio, a country not inhabit of the island of cuba. there they water and at where they be. in the end, they descry the cape of s anton, the cape of s antonio, a country not inhabit of the island of cuba. there they water, and at the end of 40. day, which be pass since their departure from the city of s jago, they arrive at havana. the governor be present, inform thereof and go to donna isabella. and those which go by land, which be one hundred and fifty horseman be divide into two part because they will not oppress the inhabitant, travel by s espirito, which be 60. league from puerto. the food which they carry with they be cacabe bread, which be that whereof i make mention before, and it be of such a quality that, if it be, league from puerto. the food which they carry with they be cacabe bread, which be that whereof i make mention before, and it be of such a quality that if it be wet it break present, whereby it happen to some to eat flesh without bread for many day. they carry dog with they and a man of the country which do hunt and, by the way, or where they be to lodge that night, they kill as many hog as they need. in this journey they be well provide of beef and pork and they be great trouble with muskito, especial in a lake which be call the mere of pia, which they have much ado to pass. from noon till night. the water may be some. be great trouble with muskito, especial in a lake which be call the mere of pia, which they have much ado to pass from noon till night- the water may be some half league over and to be swim about a crossbow shoot. the rest come to the waste and they wade up to the knee in the mire and in the bottom be cockle shell which cut their foot very sore in such sort that there be neither boot nor shoe sole. that be hole at half way. their clothes and saddle be pass in basket of palm tree, pass this lake, strip out of their clothes. there come many muskito upon who bite. there, arise a wheal that smart very much they strike they with their basket of palm tree, pass this lake, strip out of their clothes. there come many muskito upon who bite. there, arise a wheal that smart very much. they strike they with their hand and with the blow which they give they kill so many that the blood do run down the arm and body of the man. that night they rest very little for they, and other night also, in the like place and time, they come to santo espirito. santo espirito, which be a town of thirty house there, pass by it a little river. it be very pleasant and fruitful, have great store of orange and citron and fruit of the country. one half of the company be lodge here and the rest pass forward 25.. it be very pleasant and fruitful, have great store of orange and citron and fruit of the country. one half of the company be lodge here and the rest pass forward 25.. league to another town call la trinidad, trinidad of 15. or 20. household here be a hospital for the poor and there be none other in all the island. and they say that this town be the great in all the country and that before the christian come into this land as a ship pass along the coast there, come in it a very sick man which desire the captain to set he on shore, and the captain do so and the ship go her way. the sick man remain set on shore in that country. sick man which desire the captain to set he on shore, and the captain do so and the ship go her way. the sick man remain set on shore in that country which until then have not be haunt by christian, whereupon the indian find he, carry he home and look unto he till he be whole, and the lord of that town marry he unto a daughter of he and have war with all the inhabitant round about, and by the industry and valour of the christian he subdue and bring under his command all the people of that island. a great while after the governor diego velasques, go to conquer it and from thence discover new spain. and this christian which be with the indian do. the people of that island a great while after the governor, diego velasques, go to conquer it and from thence discover new spain and this christian which be with the indian, do pacify they and bring they to the obedience and subjection of the governor. from this town, trinidad unto havana, havana, be 80. league ' without any habitation, which they travel. they come to havana in the end of march, where they find the governor and the rest of the people which come with he from spain. the governor send from havana john dannusco with a caravele and two brigantine with 50. man to discover the haven of florida, and from thence he bring two indian which he take upon the coast wherewith aswell, because they may a caravele and two brigantine with 50. man to discover the haven of florida, and from thence he bring two indian which he take upon the coast wherewith aswell because they may be necessary for guide and for interpreter, as because they say by sign that there be much gold in florida. the governor and all the company receive much contentment and long for the hour of their departure, think in himself that this be the rich country that unto that day have be discover. chap 7, how we depart from havana and arrive in florida, and of such thing as happen unto we before our departure, the governor deprive nunno de tovar of the office of captain general and give it to porcallo de figueroa, a inhabitant. and of such thing as happen unto we before our departure. the governor deprive nunno de tovar of the office of captain general and give it to porcallo de figueroa, a inhabitant of cuba, which be a mean that the ship be well furnish with victual, for he give a great many load of casabe bread and many hog. the governor take away this office from nonno de tovar because he have fall in love with the daughter of the earl of gomera, donna isabella, weight maid who, though his office be, take from he to return again to the governors, favour though she be with child by he, yet take she to his wife and go with soto into florida. the governor leave donna isabella in havana. return again to the governors, favour though she be with child by he yet take she to his wife and go with soto into florida. the governor leave donna isabella in havana, and with she remain the wife of don carlos and the wife of balthasar de gallegos and of nonno de tovar, and he leave for his lieutenant, a gentleman of havana call john de roias, for the government of the island, may 18. 1539.. on sunday, the 18. of may, in the year of our lord, 1539. the adelantado, or precedent, depart from havana in cuba with his fleet, which be nine vessel, five great ship, two caravel and two brigantine. they sail seven day, with a prosperous wind, the 25. day of may, the day. in cuba with his fleet, which be nine vessel, five great ship, two caravel and two brigantine. they sail seven day with a prosperous wind, the 25. day of may, the day de spirito santo, which we call whitsun sunday, they see the land of florida, this place be call baya de spirito, be on the west side of florida, in 29. degree, and because of the shoal they come to a anchor a league from the shore. on friday, the 30. of may, they land in florida, two league from a town of a indian lord call vcita. they set on land two hundred and thirteen horse which they bring with they to unburden the ship that they may draw the less water he land all his. lord call vcita. they set on land two hundred and thirteen horse which they bring with they to unburden the ship that they may draw the less water he land, all his man and only the sea man remain in the ship which in eight day go up with the tide every day a little. bring they up unto the town, assoon, as the people be come on shore, he pitch his camp on the sea side, hard upon the bay which go up unto the town and present the captain, general vasques porcallo, with other 7.. the ship come up to the town of vcita, horseman forage the country half a league round about and find six indian which resist he with their arrow, which be the 7. the ship come up to the town of vcita horseman, forage the country half a league round about and find six indian which resist, he with their arrow, which be the weapon which they use to fight withal the horseman, kill two of they and the other four escape because the country be cumbersome with wood and bog where the horse stack fast and fall with their rider because they be weak with travel upon the sea. the same night follow the governor with a hundred man in the brigantine light upon a town which he find without people because that assoon as the christian have sight of land, they be descry and see along the coast many smoke which the indian have make to give advice. he find without people, because that assoon, as the christian have sight of land, they be descry and see along the coast many smoke which the indian have make to give advice the one to the other. the next day lewis de moscoso, master of the camp, set the man in order, the horseman in three squadron: the vanguard, the batallion and the rearward. and so they march that day and the day follow compass great creek which come out of the bay. they come to the town of vcita, the town of vcita june, where the governor be on sunday the first of june, be trinity sunday, the town be of seven or eight house, the lord house stand near the shore upon a very high mount. the governor be on sunday the first of june, be trinity sunday. the town be of seven or eight. house, the lord house, stand near the shore upon a very high mount, make by hand for strength. at another end of the town stand the church and on the top of it stand a foul make of wood with gild eye. here be find some pearl, some pearl find of small value, spoil with the fire, which the indian do pierce and string they like bead and wear they about their neck and handwrist and they esteem they very much. the house be make of timber and cover with palm. leave the governor lodge himself in the lord house and with he vasques porcallo and lewis de moscoso. esteem they very much. the house be make of timber and cover with palm. leave the governor lodge himself in the lord house and with he, vasques porcallo and lewis de moscoso and in other that be in the midst of the town. be the chief or justice balthasar de gallegos lodge and in the same house be set in a place by itself all the provision that come in the ship. the other house and the church be break down and every three or four soldier make a little cabin wherein they lodge the country round about. be very fenny and encumber with great and high tree. the governor command to fell the wood a crossbow, shoot round about the town that the horse may run and round about be very fenny and encumber with great and high tree. the governor command to fell the wood, a crossbow shoot round about the town that the horse may run and the christian may have the advantage of the indian if by chance they shall set upon they by night in the way and place convenient. they have their centinelle of footman by two, and two in every stand, which do watch by turn and the horseman do visit they and be ready to assist they if there be any alarm. the governor make four captain of the horseman and two of the footman. the captain of the horseman be one of they, andrew de vasconcelos, and another pedro calderan, and the other two be his kinsman. captain of the horseman and two of the footman. the captain of the horseman be one of they andrew de vasconcelos and another pedro calderan, and the other two be his kinsman, to wit arias tinoco and alfonso romo. bear likewise in badaioz the captain of the footman, the one be francisco maldonado of salamanca and the other juan rodriguez lobillo. while we be in this town of vcita, the two indian which john danusco have take on that coast and the governor carry along with he for guide and interpreter, through carelessness of two man which have the charge of they escape away one night, for which the governor and all the rest be very sorry, for they have already make some road and no indian can. which have the charge of they escape away one night, for which the governor and all the rest be very sorry, for they have already make some road and no indian can be take because the country be full of marish ground and in many place full of very high and thick wood, chap 8 of some inroad that be make into the country and how there be a christian find which have be long time in the power of a indian lord from the town of vcita. the governor send the mayor, balthasar de gallegos, with 40. horseman and 80. footman into the country to see if they can take any indian and the captain, john rodriguez lobillo, another way with 50. footman, the most of they. with 40. horseman and 80. footman into the country to see if they can take any indian and the captain john rodriguez lobillo. another way with 50. footman, the most of they be swordman and targettour and the rest be shoot and crossebowman. they pass through a country full of bog where horse can not travel half a league from the camp. they light upon certain cabin of indian near a river, certain cabin of indian, the people that be in. they leap into the river. yet they take four indian woman and twenty indian charge we, and so distress we that we be force to retire to our camp, be as they be exceed ready with their weapon. it be a people so warlike and so nimble. we, and so distress we that we be force to retire to our camp, be as they be exceed ready with their weapon. it be a people so warlike and so nimble that they care not a whit for any footman, for if their enemy charge they, they run away, and if they turn their back, they be present upon they, and the thing that they most flee be the shot of a arrow. they never stand still, but be always run and traverse from one place to another by reason whereof neither crossbow nor harquebus can aim at they, and before one crossebowman can make one shot, a indian will discharge three or four arrow, and he seldom miss what. he shoot at a arrow where it. can aim at they. and before one crossebowman can make one shot, a indian will discharge three or four arrow and he seldom miss what. he shoot at a arrow where it find no armour, pierce as deep as a crossbow, their bow be very long and their arrow be make of certain cane, like reed, very heavy and so strong that a sharp cane pass through a target. some they arm in the point with a sharp bone of a fish, like a chisel, and in other they fasten certain stone like point of diamond, for the most put. when they light upon a armour they break in the place where they be bind together. those of cane do split and pierce a coat of mail and for the most put. when they light upon a armour, they break in the place where they be bind together. those of cane do split and pierce a coat of mail and be more hurtful than the other. john rodriguez lobillo return to the camp with six man wound, whereof one die, and bring the four indian woman which balthasar gallegos have take in the cabin or cottage. two league from the town come into the plain field, he espy ten or eleven indian among, who be a christian, which be naked and scorch with the sun and have his arm raze after the manner of the indian and differ nothing at all from they and assoon as the horseman. see they, they run towards they, the indian. sun and have his arm raze after the manner of the indian and differ nothing at all from they and assoon as the horseman see they, they run towards they. the indian flee and some of they hide themselves in a wood and they overtake two or three of they which be wound. and the christian see a horseman run upon he with his lance, begin to cry out: sir, i be a christian, slay i not, nor these indian, for they have save my life. and straightway he call they and put they out of fear and they come forth of the wood unto they, the horse man take both the christian and the indian up behind they and towards night come into the camp with much fear and they come forth of the wood, unto they the horse man, take both the christian and the indian up behind they and, towards night, come into the camp with much joy. which thing be know by the governor and they that remain in the camp, they be receive with the like chap 9, how this christian come to the land of florida and who he be and what conference he have with the governor. this christian name be john ortiz. john ortiz live 12. year among the floridian of vcita and mococo and he be bear in siuil of worshipful parentage. he be 12. year in the hand of the indian. he come into this country with pamphilo de naruaez and return in the ship to be bear in siuil of worshipful parentage he be 12. year in the hand of the indian. he come into this country with pamphilo de naruaez and return in the ship to the island of cuba, where the wife of the governor, pamphilo de naruaez be, and, by his commandment, with 20. or 30. other in a brigandine, return back again to florida and come to the port. in the sight of the town, on the shore, they see a cane stick in the ground and rive at the top and a letter in it, and they believe that the governor have leave it there to give advertisement of himself when he resolve to go up into the land. and they demand it of four or five indian. they believe that the governor have leave it there to give advertisement of himself when he resolve to go up into the land and they demand it of four or five indian which walk along the sea shore and they bid they by sign to come on shore for it which, against the will of the rest, john ortiz and another do and assoon as they be on land from the house of the town, issue a great number of indian which compass they about and take they in a place where they can not flee, and the other which seek to defend himself. they present, kill upon the place and take john ortiz alive and carry he to vcita, their lord and those of the brigandine seek. and the other which seek to defend himself. they present, kill upon the place and take john ortiz alive and carry he to vcita. their lord and those of the brigandine seek not to land but put themselves to sea and return to the island of cuba. vcita command to bind john ortiz hand and foot upon four, stake aloft upon a raft and to make a fire under he that there he may be, burn but a daughter of his desire. he that he will not put he to death. allege that one only christian can do he neither hurt nor good. tell he that it be more for his honour to keep he as a captive. and vcita grant her request and command he to be. can do he neither hurt nor good. tell he that it be more for his honour to keep he as a captive, and vcita grant her request and command he to be cure of his wound and assoon as he be whole. he give he the charge of the keep of the temple because that by night the wolf do carry away the dead corpse out of the same who commend himself to god and take upon he the charge of his temple. one night the wolf gate from he the corpse of a little child, the son of a principal indian, and go after they. he throw a dart at one of the wolf and strike he that carry away the corpse who feel himself wound, leave. the son of a principal indian and go after they. he throw a dart at one of the wolf and strike he that, carry away the corpse who feel himself wound, leave it and fall down dead near the place. and he not wot what he have do because it be night, go back again to the temple the morning be come and find not the body of the child. he be very sad assoon, as vcita know thereof, he resolve to put he to death and send by the tract which he say. the wolf go and find the body of the child and the wolf dead a little beyond, whereat vcita be much content with the christian and with the watch which he keep in the go and find the body of the child and the wolf dead. a little beyond, whereat vcita be much content with the christian and with the watch which he keep in the temple, and from thence forward esteem he much, three year after he fall into his hand, there come another lord call mococo. mococo, dwell two day journey from vcita, who dwell two day journey from the port and burn his town. vcita flee to another town that he have in another sea port. thus john ortiz lose his office and favour that he have with he. these people be worshipper of the devil, be wont to offer up unto he the life and blood of their indian or of any other people they can come by. with he. these people be worshipper of the devil, be wont to offer up unto he the life and blood of their indian or of any other people. they can come by and they report that when he will have they do that sacrifice unto he. he speak with they and tell they that he be athirst and will they to sacrifice unto he. john ortiz, have notice by the damsel that have deliver he from the fire how her father be determine to sacrifice he the day follow who will he to flee to mococo? for she know that he will use he well, for she hear say that he have ask for he and say he will be glad to see he and because he know. for she know that he will use he well, for she hear say that he have ask for he and say he will be glad to see he and because he know not the way she go with he half a league out of the town by night and set he in the way and return because she will not be, discover john ortiz travail all that night and by the morning come unto a river, a river which be in the territory of mococo, and there he see two indian fish and because they be in war with the people of vcita and their language be different and he know not the language of mococo, he be afraid because he can not tell they who he be. in war with the people of vcita and their language be different and he know not the language of mococo. he be afraid because he can not tell they who he be, nor how he come thither, nor be able to answer any thing for himself that they will kill. he take, he, for one of the indian of vcita and before they espy he. he come to the place where they have lay their weapon and assoon as they see he. they flee towards the town and although he will they to stay because he mean to do they no hurt. yet they understand he not and run away as fast as ever they can and assoon as they come to the town with great outcry, many mean to do they no hurt. yet they understand he not and run away as fast as ever they can and assoon as they come to the town with great outcry. many indian come forth against he and begin to compass he to shoot at he. john ortiz, see himself in so great danger, sheild himself with certain tree and begin to shriek out and cry very loud and to tell they that he be a christian and that he be flee from vcita and be come to see and serve mococo, his lord. it please god that at that very instant there come thither a indian that can speak the language and understand he and pacify the rest, who tell they what he say, then run from. god that at that very instant there come thither a indian that can speak the language and understand he and pacify the rest, who tell they what he say, then run from thence three or four indian to bear the news to their lord, who come forth a quarter of a league from the town to receive he and be very glad of he, he cause he present to swear, according to the custom of the christian, that he will not run away from he to any other lord and promise he to entreat he very well and that if at any time there come any christian into that country, he will free let he go and give he leave to go to they and likewise take his well and that if at any time there come any christian into that country, he will free, let he go and give he leave to go to they and likewise take his oath to perform the same. according to the indian custom, about three year after, certain indian which be fish at sea two league from the town, bring news to mococo- mococo, his town, within 2. league of the sea, that they have see ship and he call john ortiz, and give he leave to go his way. who take his leave of he with all the haste he can come to the sea and find no ship. he think it to be some deceit and that the cacique have do the same to learn his mind. all the haste he can come to the sea and find no ship. he think it to be some deceit and that the cacique have do the same to learn his mind. so he dwell with mococo nine year with small hope of see any christian assoon. as our governor arrive in florida, it be know to mococo, and straightway he signify to john ortiz that christian be lodge in the town of vcita and he think he have jest with he as he have do before, and tell he that by this time he have forget the christian and think of nothing else but to serve he. but he assure he that it be so and give he licence to go unto. they say unto he that forget the christian and think of nothing else but to serve he. but he assure he that it be so and give he licence to go unto they, say unto he that if he will not do it and if the christian shall go their way, he shall not blame he, for he have fulfil that which he have promise he. the joy of john ortiz be so great that he can not believe that it be true notwithstanding, he give he thanks and take his leave of he and mococo, give he ten or eleven principal indian to bear he company. and as they go to the port where the governor be they meet with balthasar de gallegos, as i have declare before, assoon, as he be. principal indian to bear he company. and as they go to the port where the governor be, they meet with balthasar de gallegos, as i have declare before, assoon as he be come to the camp, the governor command to give he a suit of apparel and very good armour and a fair horse, and inquire of he whether he have notice of any country where there be any gold or silver. he answer no, because he never go. ten league compass from the place where he dwell, but that 30. league from thence dwell a indian lord which be call parocossi paracossi. 30. league from puert de spirito santo, to who mococo and with all the rest of that coast pay tribute and that he peradventure may. indian lord, which be call parocossi paracossi 30. league from puert de spirito santo to who mococo and with all the rest of that coast pay tribute, and that he, peradventure, may have notice of some good country and that his land be better than that of the sea coast and more fruitful and plentiful of maiz, whereof the governor receive great contentment and say that he desire no more than to find victual that he may go into the main land, for the land of florida be so large that in one place or other there can not choose but be some rich country, the cacique mococo. come to the port to visit the governor and make this speech. follow right, high and mighty lord, i be. there can not choose but be some rich country, the cacique mococo, come to the port to visit the governor and make this speech follow right. high and mighty lord, i be lesser in my own conceit for to obey you than any of those which you have under your command and great in desire to do you great service. do appear before your lordship with so much confidence of receive favour, as if, in effect, this my good will be manifest unto you in work, not for the small service i do unto you. touch the christian which i have in my power in, give he free his liberty, for i be bind to do it to preserve my honour and that which i have promise he. the christian which i have in my power in give he free his liberty, for i be bind to do it to preserve my honour and that which i have promise he, but because it be the part of great man to use great magnificence. and i be persuade that as in bodily perfection and command of good people you do exceed all man in the world, so likewise you do in the part of the mind in which you may boast of the bounty of nature, the favour which i hope for of your lordship, be that you will hold i for you and bethink yourself to command i any thing wherein i may do you service the governor. answer he that, although in free and send be that you will hold i for you and bethink yourself to command i any thing wherein i may do you service. the governor answer he that although in free and send he the christian, he have preserve his honour and promise. yet he thank he and hold it in such esteem as it have no comparison and that he will always hold he as his brother and will favour he in all thing to the utmost of his power. then he command a shirt to be give he and other thing wherewith the cacique be very well content, take his leave of he and depart to his own town. chap x: how the governor send the ship to cuba and leave a hundred man at the haven. very well content, take his leave of he and depart to his own town. chap x how: the governor send the ship to cuba and leave a hundred man at the haven spirito santo, and himself with the rest of his people go into the main land from the port spirito santo, where the governor lie. he send the mayor, balthasar de gallegos, with 50. horseman and 30. or 40. footman to the province of paracossi to view the disposition of the country and inform himself of the land far inward and to send he word of such thing as he find. likewise, he send his ship back to the island of cuba that they may return within a certain time, with victual vasques porcallo which go with of such thing as he find. likewise, he send his ship back to the island of cuba, that they may return within a certain time with victual vasques porcallo, which go with the governor as captain general, who principal intent be to send slave from florida to the island of cuba, where he have his good and mine have, make some inroad and see no indian be to be get because of the great bog and thick wood that be in the country. consider the disposition of the same determine to return to cuba and though there be some difference between he and the governor, whereupon they neither deal nor converse together, with good countenance, yet notwithstanding, with love word he ask, he leave and depart from he. there be some difference between he and the governor, whereupon they neither deal nor converse together with good countenance. yet, notwithstanding, with love word, he ask he leave and depart from he. balthasar de gallegos, come to the paracossi, paracossi there, come to he. 30. indian from the cacique which be absent from his town, and one of they make this speech: paracossi, the lord of this province, who vassal we be, send we unto your worship to know what it be that you se^ke in this his country and wherein he may do you service. balthasar de gallegos, say unto he that he thank they very much for their offer. will they to warn their lord to come to his town and that there they will talk. balthasar de gallegos say unto he that he thank they very much for their offer. will they to warn their lord to come to his town and that there they will talk and confirm their peace and friendship, which he much desire. the indian go their way and return the next day and say that their lord be ill at ease and therefore can not come, but that they come on his behalf to see what he demand. he ask they if they know or have notice of any rich country where there be gold or silver. they tell they they do, and that towards the west there be a province which be call cale and that other that inhabit other country have war with the people of. silver, they tell they they do, and that towards the west there be a province which be call cale and that other that inhabit other country have war with the people of that country, where the most part of the year be summer, and that there be much gold, and that when those their enemy come to make war with they of cale, these inhabitant of cale do wear hat of gold in manner of head piece. balthasar de gallegos, see that the cacique come. not think all that they say be feign with intent, that in the mean time they may set themselves in safety. fear that if he do let they go they will return no more. command the thi^ty indian to be chain and send in the mean time they may set themselves in safety, fear that if he do let they go they will return no more. command the thi^ty indian to be chain and send word to the governor by eight horseman. what have pass? whereof the governor, with all that be with he at the port spirito santo, receive great comfort. suppose that that which the indian report may be true. he leave captain calderan at the port with thirty horseman and seventy footman, with provision for two year, and himself with all the rest march into the main land and come to the paracossi, paracossi at who town, balthasar de gallegos be, and from thence, with all his man, take the way to cale. he pass by a little. main land and come to the paracossi- paracossi at who town, balthasar de gallegos be, and from thence, with all his man, take the way to cale. he pass by a little town call acela, acela, tocaste, and come to another call tocaste and from thence he go before with 30. horseman and 50. footman, towards cale, another town, and pass by a town whence the people be flee. they see indian a little from thence, in a lake, a lake to who the interpreter speak. they come unto they and give they a indian for a guide, a swift river, and he come to a river with a great current and upon a tree which be in the midst of it be make a bridge whereon the a guide a swift river, and he come to a river with a great current and upon a tree which be in the midst of it, be make a bridge whereon the man pass the horse, swim over by a hawser that they be, pull by from the otherside for one which they drive in at the first without it be drown from thence. the governor send two horseman to his people that be behind to make haste after he, because the way grow long and their victual short. he come to cale cale and find the town without people. he take three indian which be spy and tarry there for his people that come after, which be sore, vex with hunger and evil way because the country the town without people. he take three indian which be spy and tarry there for his people that come after, which be sore, vex with hunger and evil way because the country be very barren of maiz, low and full of water, bog and thick wood, and the victual which they bring with they from the port spirito santo be spend wheresoever any town be find there be some beet, and he that come first gather they and, sodden with water and salt, do eat they without any other thing and such as can not get. they gather the stalk of maiz and eat they which, because they be young, have no maiz in they. when they come to the river which the governor have pass, they find they gather the stalk of maiz and eat they which, because they be young, have no maiz in they. when they come to the river which the governor have pass, they find palmito, upon low palm-tree, like those of andaluzia. there they meet with the two horse man which the governor send unto they and they bring news that in cale there be plenty of maiz, at which news they all rejoice. assoon. as they come to cale, the governor command they to gather all the maiz that be ripe in the field, which be sufficient for three month. at the gather of it the indian kill three christian and one of they which be take tell the governor that within seven day journey there be a very for three month. at the gather of it, the indian kill three christian and one of they, which be take, tell the governor that within seven day journey there be a very great province and plentiful of maiz, which be call apalache. and present he depart from cale with 50. horseman and 60. footman. he leave the master of the camp, lewis de moscoso, with all the rest of the people there, with charge that he shall not depart thence until he have word from he. and because hitherto none have get any slave, the bread that every one be to eat, he be fain himself to beat in a mortar, make in a piece of timber with a pestle, and some of they do sift the flower. that every one be to eat, he be fain himself to beat in a mortar, make in a piece of timber with a pestle, and some of they do sift the flower through their shirt of mail. they bake their bread upon certain tileshare which they set over the fire in such sort as heretofore i have say they use to do in cuba. it be so troublesome to grind their maiz that there be many that will rather not eat it. then grind it and do eat the maiz, parch and sodden. chap 11, how the governor come to caliquen and carry from thence the cacique with he, go to napetuca where the indian seek to have take he from he and in a assault many of. the governor come to caliquen and carry from thence the cacique with he, go to napetuca where the indian seek to have take he from he and in a assault many of they be slay and take prisoner. the 11. day of august 1539. the governor depart from cale, he lodge in a little town call ytara, ytara, and the next day in another call potano potano, and the three day at vtinama, vtinama, and come to another town which they name the town of evil peace. the town of evil peace because a indian come in peace, say that he be the cacique and that he with his people will serve the governor and that if he will set free 28. person, man and woman which his in peace, say that he be the cacique and that he with his people will serve the governor and that if he will set free 28. person, man and woman which his man have take the night before, he will command provision to be bring he and will give he a guide to instruct he in his way. the governor command they to be set at liberty and to keep he in safeguard. the next day in the morning there come many indian and set themselves round about the town near to a wood. the indian wish they to carry he near they and that they will speak unto they and assure they and that they will do whatsoever. he command they. and when he see himself near wish they to carry he near they and that they will speak unto they and assure they and that they will do whatsoever. he command they and when he see himself near unto they he break from they and run away so swift from the christian that there be none that can overtake he and all of they flee into the wood. the governor command to lose a grayhound which be already flesh on they which pass by, many other indian catch the counterfeit cacique which have escape from the christian and hold he till they come to take he from thence. the governor lodge at a town call cholupaha c^o^up^ha, and because it have store of maiz in it, they name it villa beyond the same there. come to take he from thence. the governor lodge at a town call cholupaha, c^o^up^ha, and because it have store of maiz in it they name it villa. beyond the same there be a river, a r^^er, on which he make a bridge of timber and travel two day through a desert. the 17. of august he come to caliquen, ca^iquen, where he be inform of the province of apalache. they tell he that pamphilo de naruaez have be there and that there he take ship because he can find no way to go forward, that there be none other town at all but that on both side be all water. the whole company be very sad for these news and counsel the governor to go back to. there be none other town at all but that on both side be all water. the whole company be very sad for these news and counsel the governor to go back to the port spirito santo and to abandon the country of florida lest he shall perish as naruaez have. do, declare that if he go forward he can not return back when he will and that the indian will gather up that small quantity of maiz which be leave. whereunto the governor answer that he will not go back till he have see with his eye that which they report. say that he can not believe it and that we shall be put out of doubt before it be long and he send to lewis de moscoso. eye that which they report, say that he can not believe it and that we shall be put out of doubt before it be long, and he send to lewis de moscoso to come present from cale and that he tarry, for he here, lewis de moscoso and many other thought that from apalache they shall return back and in cale they bury their iron tool and diverse other thing. they come to caliquen with great trouble because the country which the governor have pass by be spoil and destitute of maiz. after all the people be come together, he command a bridge to be make over a river, a river that pass near the town. he depart from caliquen the 10. of september and carry the cacique. be come together. he command a bridge to be make over a river, a river that pass near the town. he depart from caliquen the 10. of september and carry the cacique with he after he have travel three day. there come indian peaceable to visit their lord and every day meet we on the way, play upon flute, which be a token that they use that man may know that they come in peace. they say that in our way, before there be a cacique who name be vzachil, a kinsman of the cacique of caliquen, their lord wait for he with many present and they desire the governor that he will lose the cacique, but he will not fear that. they will rise and will not. caliquen, their lord, wait for he with many present and they desire the governor that he will lose the cacique. but he will not fear that they will rise and will not give he any guide and send they away. from day to day, with good word, he travel five day. he pass by some small town. he come to a town call napetuca, some small town, napetuca, the 15. day of september. thither come 14. or 15. indian and beseech the governor to let loose the cacique of caliquen their lord. he answer they that he hold he not in prison but that he will have he to accompany he to vzachil. the governor have notice by john ortiz that a indian tell he how they determine. he hold he not in prison but that he will have he to accompany he to vzachil. the governor have notice by john ortiz that a indian tell he how they determine to gather themselves together and come upon he and give he battle and take away the cacique from he the day that it be agree upon the governor, command his man to be in a readiness and that the horseman shall be ready arm and on horseback, every one in his lodging, because the indian may not see they and so, more confident, come to the town. there come four hundred indian in sight of the camp with their bow and arrow and place themselves in a wood and send two indian to bid the governor. to the town. there come four hundred indian in sight of the camp with their bow and arrow and place themselves in a wood and send two indian to bid the governor to deliver. they the cacique, the governor, with six footman, lead the cacique by the hand and talk with he to secure the indian. go towards the place where they be and see a fit time command to sound a trumpet and present those that be in the town in the house, both horse and foot set upon the indian which be so sudden assault that the great care they have be which way they shall flee. they kill two horse, one be the governor and he be present horse again upon another, there be 30.. assault that the great care they have be which way they shall flee. they kill two horse, one be the governor and he be present horse again upon another there be 30. or 40. indian slay. the rest flee to two very great lake, two very great lake that be somewhat distant the one from the other. there they be, swim and the christian round about they, the calieverman and crossebowman, shoot at they from the bank, but the distance be great and shoot afar off. they do they no hurt. the governor command that the same night they shall compass one of the lake because they be so great that there be not man enough to compass. they both be beset, assoon as night, shut in the same night they shall compass one of the lake because they be so great that there be not man enough to compass. they both be beset, assoon as night shut in. the indian, with determination to run away, come, swim very soft to the bank and to hide themselves, they put a water lily leaf on their head. the horseman, assoon, as they perceive it to stir, run into the water to the horse breast and the indian flee again into the lake. so this night pass without any rest on both side. john ortiz persuade they that see, they can not escape. they shall yield themselves to the governor, which they do enforce thereunto by the coldness of the water, and one by one. he first who. they that see, they can not escape. they shall yield themselves to the governor, which they do enforce thereunto by the coldness of the water, and one by one, he first, who the cold do first overcome, cry to john ortiz, desire that they will not kill. he for he come to put himself into the hand of the governor by the morning watch. they make a end of yield themselves only 12.. principal man, be more honourable and valorous than the rest, resolve rather to die then to come into his hand, and the indian of paracossi, which be now loose out of chain, go swim to they and pull they out by the hair of their head and they be all put in chain and the of paracossi, which be now loose out of chain, go swim to they and pull they out by the hair of their head and they be all put in chain and the next day be divide among the christian for their service, be thus in captivity. a new conspiracy. they determine to rebel and give in charge to a indian which be interpreter and hold to be valiant that assoon. as the governor do come to speak with he, he shall cast his hand about his neck and choke he who, when he see opportunity, lay hand on the governor and before he cast his hand about his neck, he give he such a blow on the nostril that he make they gush out with blood and present. hand on the governor and before he cast his hand about his neck, he give he such a blow on the nostril that he make they gush out with blood and present all the rest do rise. he that can get any weapon at hand, or the handle wherewith he do grind the maiz, seek to kill his master or the first he meet before he. and he that can get a lance or sword at hand bestir himself in such sort with it as though he have use it all his life time. one indian in the market place enclose between 15. or 20. footman make a way like a bull with a sword in his hand till certain halberdier of the governor come which kill he. in the market place, enclose between 15. or 20.. footman make a way like a bull with a sword in his hand till certain halberdier of the governor come which kill he another get up with a lance to a loft make of cane, which they build to keep their maiz in, which they call a barbacoa. and there he make such a noise as though ten man have be there defend the door. they slay he with a partisan, the indian be in all about two hundred man. they be all subdue. two hundred indian take and some of the young the governor give to they which have good chain and be careful to look to they that they get not away. all the rest he command. take and some of the young the governor give to they which have good chain and be careful to look to they that they get not away. all the rest he command to be put to death, be tie to a stake in the midst of the market place and the indian of the paracossi do shoot they to death. chap 12, how the governor come to apalache and be inform that within the land there be much gold. the governor depart from napetuca the 23. of september. he lodge by a river, a river where two indian bring he a buck from the cacique of vzachil. the next day he pass by a great town call hapaluya, hapaluya, a great town, and lodge at vzachil. vzachil and. two indian bring he a buck from the cacique of vzachil. the next day he pass by a great town call hapaluya, hapaluya, a great town, and lodge at vzachil, vzachil, and find no people in it because they dare not tarry for the notice the indian have of the slaughter of napetuca. he find in that town great store of maiz, french bean and * * aboboras pompion, which be their food and that wherewith the christian there sustain themselves. the maiz be like, course, millet, and the pompion be better and more savoury than those of spain. from thence the governor send two captain, each a sundry way, to seek ^he indian. they take a hundred, man and woman, of which aswell there as in other. those of spain. from thence the governor send two captain each a sundry way to seek ^he indian. they take a hundred, man and woman, of which aswell there as in other place where they make any inroad. the captain choose one or two for the governor and divide the rest to himself and those that go with he. they lead these indian in chain with iron collar about their neck and they serve to carry their stuff and to grind their maiz and for other service that such captive can do. sometime it happen that go for wood or maiz with they. they kill the christian that lead they and run away with the chain. other file their chain by night with a piece of stone wherewith go for wood or maiz with they. they kill the christian that lead they and run away with the chain. other file their chain by night with a piece of stone wherewith they cut they and use it in stead of iron. those that be perceive pay for themselves and for the rest, because they shall not dare to do the like another time. the woman and young boy, when they be once a hundred league from their country and have forget thing, they let go loose and so they serve, and in a very short space they understand the language of the christian. from vzachil, the governor depart towards apalache and in two day journey he come to a town call axille axille, and from thence forward, space, they understand the language of the christian. from vzachil, the governor depart towards apalache and in two day journey he come to a town call axille axille and from thence forward the indian be careless because they have as yet no notice of the christian. the next day in the morning, the first of october, he depart from thence and command a bridge to be make over a river, a river which he be to pass. the deep of the river where the bridge be make be a stone cast and forward a crossbow shoot the water come to the waste and the wood whereby the indian come to see if they can defend the passage and disturb those which make the bridge be very high and the water come to the waste and the wood whereby the indian come to see if they can defend the passage and disturb those which make the bridge be very high and thick, the crossebowman so bestir themselves that they make they give back and certain plank be cast into the river whereon the man pass which make good the passage. the governor pass upon wednesday which be s francis his day, and lodge at a town which be call vitachuco, subject to apalache. he find it burn, for the indian have set it on fire. from thence forward the country be much inhabit and have great store of maiz. he pass by many grange like hamlet. on sunday, the 25. of october, october 25, he come to. from thence forward the country be much inhabit and have great store of maiz. he pass by many grange like hamlet. on sunday, the 25. of october, october 25, he come to a town which be call vzela vzela, and upon tuesday to anaica apalache, anaica, apalac^e, where the lord of all that country and province be resident, in which town the campemaster who office it be to quarter out and lodge man do lodge all the company round about within a league and half a league of it. there be other town where be great store of maiz, pompion, french bean and plum of the country which be better than those of spain, and they grow in the field without plant the victual that be think necessary. store of maiz, pompion, french bean and plum of the country, which be better than those of spain, and they grow in the field without plant. the victual that be think necessary to pass the winter be gather from these town to anaica, apalache, apalache, within 10. ^^a^ues of the sea, the governor be inform that the sea be ten league from thence he present, send a captain thither with horseman and footman, and six league on the way. he find a town which be name ochete, ochete. and so come to the sea, ^he ^^a, and find a great tree fell and cut into piece with stake, set up like manger, and see the skull of horse. he return with this news and that be hold for. and find a great tree fell and cut into piece with stake, set up like manger, and see the skull of horse. he return with this news, and that be hold for certain, which be report of pamphilo de naruaez, that there he have build the bark wherewith he go out of the land of florida and be cast away at sea. present, the governor send john danusco with 30. horseman to the port santo, where calderan be, with order that they shall abandon the port and all of they come to apalache. he depart on saturday, the 17. of november. in vzachil and other town that stand in the way, he find great store of people already careless. he will take none of the indian for not. saturday, the 17. of november, in vzachil and other town that stand in the way, he find great store of people already careless. he will take none of the indian for not hinder himself because it behoove ^im to give they no leisure to gather themselves together. he pass through the town by night and rest without the town three or four hour in ten day he come to the port spirito santo, the port santo ten day journey from apalache. he carry with he 20. indian woman which he take in ytara and potano near unto cale and send they to donna isabella in the two carau^ls which he send from the port spirito santo to cuba and he carry all the footman in the brigandine and unto cale and send they to donna isabella in the two carau^ls which he send from the port spirito santo to cuba, and he carry all the footman in the brigandine and coast along the shore, come to apalache and calderan with the horseman and some crossebowman on foot, go by land and in some place the indian set upon he and wound some of his man assoon as he come to apalache, present the governor send saw plank and spike to the seaside wherewith be make a or bark, wherein be embark 30. man well arm which go out of the bay to the sea, look for the brigandine sometime they fight with the indian which pass along the harbour in their canoe. upon saturday the 29.. arm which go out of the bay to the sea. look for the brigandine sometime. they fight with the indian which pass along the harbour in their canoe. upon saturday, the 29. of november, novem 29.. there come a indian through the watch undiscovered and set the town on fire and with the great wind that blow, two part of it be consume in a short time. on sunday, the 28. of december, decem 28.. come, john danusco, with the brigandine. the governor send francisco maldonado, a captain of footman with 50. man, to discover the coast westward and to seek some port, because he have determine to go by land and discover that part. that day there go out eight horseman, by commandment of the governor, into. coast westward and to seek some port, because he have determine to go by land and discover that part. that day there go out eight horseman by commandment of the governor into the field, two league about the town, to seek indian. for they be now so embolden that within two crossbow shoot of the camp they come and slay man. they find two man and a woman, gather french bean. the man though they may have flee yet because they will not leave the woman, which be one of their wife, they resolve to die fight and before they be slay they wound three horse, whereof one die within a few day after calderan go with his man by the sea-coast from a wood that be near fight and before they be slay they wound three horse whereof one die. within a few day after calderan go with his man by the sea-coast from a wood that be near the place the indian set upon he and make he forsake his way and many of they that go with he forsake some necessary victual which they carry with they. three or four day after the limit time give by the governor to maldonado for his go and come, be already determine and resolve if within eight day he do not come to tarry, no long for he. he come and bring a indian from a province which be call ochus ochus, 60. league west of apalache, sixty league westward from apalache, where he have find. no long for he. he come and bring a indian from a province which be call ochus, ochus, 60. league west of apalache, sixty league westward from apalache, where he have find a good port of good depth and defence against weather, and because the governor hope to find a good country forward, he be very well content. and he send maldonado for victual to havana with order that he shall tarry for he at the port of ochus, which he have discover, for he will go seek it by land, and if he shall chance to stay and not come thither that summer, that then he shall return to havana and shall come again the next summer after and tarry for he at that port, for he. to stay and not come thither that summer, that then he shall return to havana and shall come again the next summer after, and tarry for he at that port, for he say he will do none other thing but go to seek ochus. francisco maldonado depart and in his place for captain of the footman remain john de guzman, chap 11.. of those indian which be take in napetuca, the treasurer, john gaytan, have a young man which say that he be not of that country but of another, far off towards the sunrising, and that it be long since he have travel to see country, and that his country be call yupaha and that a woman do govern it and that the town where she be. that it be long since he have travel to see country and that his country be call yupaha and that a woman do govern it and that the town where she be resident be of a wonderful bigness and that many lord round about be tributary to she and some give her clothes and other gold in abundance. abundance of gold. and he tell how it be take out of the mine and be moult and refine, as if he have see it do, or the devil have teach it, he, so that all those which know any thing concern the same say that it be impossible to give so good a relation without have see it, and all of they, as if they have see it by know any thing concern the same, say that it be impossible to give so good a relation without have see it. and all of they, as if they have see it by the sign that he give, believe all that he say to be true. chap 13: how the governor depart from apalache to seek yupaha, and of that which happen unto he on wedensday, the three of march, march the 3.. 1540 of the year 1540. the governor depart from anaica, apalache, to seek yupaha. he command his man to go provide with maiz for sixty league of desert. the horseman carry their maiz on their horse and the footman at their side because the indian that be for service with their miserable life that they lead. sixty league of desert. the horseman carry their maiz on their horse and the footman at their side, because the indian that be for service with their miserable life that they lead that winter, be naked and in chain, die for the most part. within four day journey they come to a great river, a great river, and they make a or ferry boat and because of the great current they make a cable with chain which they fasten on both side of the river and the ferry boat go along by it and the horse swim over be draw with capstan, have pass the river in a day and a half. they come to a town, call upon friday, the 11. of march. they find indian in swim over be draw with capstan, have pass the river in a day and a half they come to a town, call upon friday, the 11. of march. they find indian in arm. the next day five christian go to seek mortar which the indian have to beat their maiz. and they go to certain house on the backside of the camp environ with a wood and within the wood be many indian which come to spy we of the which come, other five and set upon we one of the christian, come, run away, give a alarm unto the camp. those which be most ready answer the alarm. they find one christian dead and three sore wound. the indian flee unto a lake adjoin near a very a alarm unto the camp, those which be most ready answer the alarm. they find one christian dead and three sore wound. the indian flee unto a lake adjoin near a very thick wood where the horse can not enter. the governor depart from and pass through a desert. on wednesday, the 21. of the month, he come to a town call toalli and from thence forward there be a difference in the house. for those which be behind, we be thatch with straw, and those of toalli, toalli be cover with reed in manner of tile. these house be very clean. some of they have wall daub with clay which show like a mudwall. in all the cold country the indian have every one a house for. tile. these house be very clean. some of they have wall daub with clay which show like a mudwall. in all the cold country the indian have every one a house for the winter daub with clay within and without and the door be very little. they shut it by night and make fire within so that they be in it as warm as in a stove, and so it continue all night that they need not clothes. and beside these they have other for summer and their kitchen near they where they make fire and bake their bread and they have barbacoas wherein they keep their maiz. which be a house set up in the air upon four stake board about like a chamber and the floor. bake their bread and they have barbacoas wherein they keep their maiz. which be a house set up in the air upon four stake board, about like a chamber and the floor of it be of cane. hurdle the difference which lord or principal man house have from the rest beside they be great, be that they have great gallery in their front and under they seat make of cane in manner of bench and round about they they have many loft wherein they lie up that which the indian do give they for tribute, which be maiz, deer, skin and mantle of the country, which be like blanket. they make they of the inner rind of the bark of tree and some of a kind of grass. be maiz, deer skin and mantle of the country which be like blanket. they make they of the inner rind of the bark of tree and some of a kind of grass like unto nettle, which be beat, be like unto flax, a grass like flax. the woman cover themselves with these mantle. they put one about they from the waist downward and another over their shoulder with their right arm out, like unto the egyptian. the man wear but one mantle upon their shoulder after the same manner and have their secret hide with a deer skin make like a linen breech which be wont to be use in spain. the skin be well, corry, excellent colour, and they give they what colour they listen, so perfect. deer skin make like a linen breech which be wont to be use in spain. the skin be well, corry, excellent colour, and they give they what colour? they listen so perfect that if it be red it seem a very fine cloth in grain and the black be most fine and of the same leather. they make shoe and they die their mantle in the same colour. the governor depart from toalli the 24. of march. he come on thursday at evening to a small river, a small river where a bridge be make, whereon the people pass and benit fernandez, a portugal, fall off from it and be drown, assoon as the governor have pass the river a little distance. thence he find a town call. the people pass and benit fernandez, a portugal, fall off from it and be drown, assoon. as the governor have, pass the river a little distance thence he find a town call achese. achese. the indian have no notice of the christian. they leap into a river. some man and woman be take, among which be one that understand the youth which guide the governor to yupaha whereby that which he have report be more confirm, for they have pass through country of diverse language and some which he understand not. the governor send by one of the indian that be take to call the cacique, which be on the other side of the river. he come and make this speech follow right, high, right, mighty and excellent. of the indian that be take to call the cacique, which be on the other side of the river. he come and make this speech follow right, high, right, mighty and excellent lord, those thing which seldom happen do cause admiration. what, then, may the sight of your lordship and your people do to i, and i, who we never see especial, be mount on such fierce beast as your horse, be enter with such violence and fury into my country without my knowledge of your come. it be a thing so strange and cause such fear and terror in our mind that it be not in our power to stay and receive your lordship with the solemnity due to so high and renown a prince as your fear and terror in our mind that it be not in our power to stay and receive your lordship with the solemnity due to so high and renown a prince. as your lordship be, and trust in your greatness and singular virtue, i do not only hope to be free from blame, but also to receive favour. and the first which i demand of your lordship be that you will use i, my country and subject as your own. and the second, that you will tell i who you be and whence you come and whither you go and what you seek, that i the better may serve you. therein, the governor answer he that he thank he as much for his offer and good will as if you go and what you seek, that i the better may serve you therein. the governor answer he that he thank he as much for his offer and good will as if he have receive it and as if he have offer he a great treasure. and tell he that he be the son of the sun and come from those part where he dwell and travel through that country and seek the great lord and rich province that be in it, the cacique. tell he that far forward dwell a great lord and that his dominion be call ocute. he give he a guide and a interpreter for that province. the governor command his indian to be set free and travel through his country up a river. dominion be call ocute. he give he a guide and a interpreter for that province. the governor command his indian to be set free and travel through his country up a river very well inhabit, a (@), very (). he depart from his town the first of april and leave a very high cross of wood set up in the midst of the market place. and because the time give no more leisure, he declare to he only that that cross be a memory of the same whereon christ, which be god and man and create the heaven and the earth, suffer for our salvation. therefore, he exhort they that they shall reverence it and they make show as though they will do so, the four of april. the heaven and the earth suffer for our salvation. therefore he exhort they that they shall reverence it, and they make show as though they will do so. the four of april, the governor pass by a town call altamaca, altamaca, and the 10. of the month he come to ocute, ocute the cacique, send he two thousand indian with a present, to wit many coney and partridge, coney, patrige hen, dog, bread of maiz, two hen and many dog which among the christian be esteem as if they have be fat wether because of the great want of flesh, meat and salt, and hereof, in many place and many time, be great need, and they be so scarce that if a man fall sick there be nothing. great want of flesh, meat and salt, and hereof in many place and many time be great need, and they be so scarce that if a man fall sick, there be nothing to cherish, he withal, and with a sickness that in another place easy may have be remedy, he consume away, till nothing but skin and bone be leave, and they die of pure weakness. some of they say: if i have a slice of meat or a few corn of salt, i shall not die. the indian want no fleshmeat, for they kill with their arrow many dear hen, coney and other wild fowl, for they be very cunning at it, which skill the christian have not. and though they have it, they have no leisure. their arrow many dear hen, coney and other wild fowl, for they be very cunning at it, which skill the christian have not. and though they have it, they have no leisure to use it for the most of the time they spend in travel and dare not presume to straggle aside. and because they be thus scant of flesh, when six hundred man that go with soto come to any town and find 30. or 40. dog, he that can get one and kill it, think himself no small man. and he that kill it and give not his captain one quarter, if he know it he frown on he and make he feel it in the watch or in any other matter of labour that be. and give not his captain one quarter. if he know it, he frown on he and make he feel it in the watch or in any other matter of labour that be offer wherein he may do he a displeasure. on monday, the 12. of april, the governor depart from ocute, the cacique give he two hundred tamenes, to wit indian, to carry burden. he pass through a town, the lord whereof be name cofaqui cofaqui, and come to a province of a indian lord call patofa patofa who, because he be in peace with the lord of ocute and with the other border lord, have, many day before notice of the governor and desire to see he. he come to visit he and make this speech follow. lord of ocute and with the other border lord, have, many day before, notice of the governor and desire to see he. he come to visit he and make this speech follow, mighty lord, now, with good reason, i will crave of fortune to requite this, my so great prosperity, with some small adversity, and i will count myself very rich. see, i have obtain that which in this world i most desire, which be to see and be able to do your lordship some service. and although the tongue be the image of that which be in the heart and that the contentment which i feel in my heart, i can dissemble, yet be it not sufficient whole to manifest the same, where do this your country? be in the heart and that the contentment which i feel in my heart i can dissemble. yet be it not sufficient whole to manifest the same. where do this, your country, which i do govern, deserve to be visit of so sovereign and so excellent a prince who all the rest of the world ought to obey and serve, and those which inhabit it be so base? what shall be the issue of such happiness if their memory do not represent unto they some adversity that may betide they according to the order of fortune? if, from this day forward, we may be capable of this benefit that your lordship will hold, we, for your own, we can fail to be, favour and maintain in true justice. if, from this day forward, we may be capable of this benefit that your lordship will hold, we, for your own, we can fail to be, favour and maintain in true justice and reason, and to have the name of man for such as be void of reason and justice may be compare to brute beast. for i own part from my very heart, with reverence due to such a prince, i offer myself unto your lordship and beseech you that, in reward of this, my true good will, you will vouchsafe to make use of my own person, my country and subject: the governor. answer: he that his offer and good will declare by the effect: do high, please. he, whereof he will always be mindful to. my own person, my country, and subject the governor. answer he that his offer and good will declare by the effect: do high, please he, whereof he will always be mindful, to honour and favour he as his brother. this country, from the first peaceable cacique unto the province of patofa, which be fifty league, be a fat country, beautiful, a excellent country for 50. league and very fruitful and very well water and full of good river, and from thence to the port spirito santo, where we first arrive in the land of florida, which may be 350. league, little more or less be a barren land and the most of it grove of wild pine-tree, low and full of lake and in some place very high. may be 350.. league little more or less be a barren land, and the most of it grove of wild pine-tree, low and full of lake, and in some place very high and thick grove whither the indian that be in arm flee so that no man can find they, neither can any horse enter into they, which be a inconvenience to the christian in regard of the victual which they find convey away and of the trouble which they have in seek of indian to be their guide. chap 14: how th^ governor depart from the province of patofa and go through a desert where he and all his man fe? l into great distress and extreme misery. in the town of patofa, the youth which the the province of patofa and go through a desert where he and all his man fe? l into great distress and extreme misery. in the town of patofa, the youth which the governor carry with he for a interpreter and a guide begin to some at the mouth and tumble on the ground. as one possess with the devil. they say a gospel over he and the fit leave he and he say that four day journey from thence towards the sun rise be the province that he speak of. the indian of patofa say that towards that part they know no habitation but that towards the northwest they know a province which be call coca, a very plentiful country which have very great town in it, the towards that part, they know no habitation, but that towards the northwest, they know a province which be call coca, a very plentiful country which have very great town in it. the cacique tell the governor that if he will go thither he will give he guide and indian for burden, and if he will go whither the youth speak of that, he will likewise give he those that he need. and so, with love, word and offer of courtesy, they take their leaf the one of the other. he give he seven hundred indian to bear burden. he take maiz for four day journey. he travel six day by a path which grow narrow more and more till it be lose altogether. he go where the youth bear burden. he take maiz for four day journey. he travel six day by a path which grow narrow more and more till it be lose altogether. he go where the youth do lead. he two swift river and pass two river which be wade, each of they be two crossbow, shoot over the water, come to the stirrup and have so great a current that it be needful for the horseman to stand one before another that the footman may pass above. they lean unto they. another great river. he come to another river of a great current and largeness which be pass with more trouble because the horse do swim at the come out about a lance length. have pass this river, the governor come to. a great current and largeness which be pass with more trouble because the horse do swim at the come out about a lance length, have pass this river. the governor come to a grove of pinetree and threaten the youth and make as though he will have cast he to the dog because he have tell he a lie. say (@) day (), it be but four, day journey. and they have travel nine and every day, 7. or 8. league and the man by this time be grow weary and weak and the horse lean through the great scant of the maiz. the youth say that he know not where he be it save he that he be not cast to the dog, that there be never. through the great scant of the maiz. the youth say that he know not where he be. it save he that he be not cast to the dog, that there be never another. who, john ortiz do understand. the governor, with they two and with some horseman and footman, leave the camp in a grove of pinetree. travel that day, 5. or 6. league, to seek a way and return at night, very comfortless and without find any sign of way or town. the next day there be sundry opinion deliver whether they shall go back or what they shall do, and because backward, the country whereby they have pass be great spoil and destitute of maiz and that which they bring with they be spend and the or what they shall do, and because backward, the country whereby they have pass be great spoil and destitute of maiz and that which they bring with they be spend and the man be very weak and the horse likewise, they doubt much whether they may come to any place where they may help themselves. and beside this, they be of opinion that go in that sort out of order that any indian will presume to set upon they, so that with hunger or with war they can not escape, the governor determine to send horseman from thence every way to seek habitation, and the next day he send four captain, every one a sundry way, with eight horseman. at night they come again, lead their horse or from thence every way to seek habitation. and the next day he send four captain, every one a sundry way, with eight horseman. at night they come again, lead their horse or drive they with a stick before for they be so weary that they can not lead. they neither find they any way nor sign of habitation. the next day the governor send other four with as many horseman that can swim to pass the ose and rivers which they shall find. and they have choice horse, the best that be in the camp, the captain be balthasar de gallegos, which go up the river, and john danusco down the river. alfonso romo and john rodriguez lobillo go into the inward part of the land. the governor. captain be balthasar de gallegos, which go up the river and john danusco, down the river. alfonso romo and john rodriguez lobillo go into the inward part of the land. the governor bring with he into fl^rida thirteen sow, the great increa^e of ^^^ne and have by this time three hundred swine. he command every man shall have half a pound of hog flesh every day, and this he do three or four day after. the maiz be all spend with this small quantity of flesh and some sodden herb. with much trouble the people be sustain. the governor dismiss the indian of patofa because he have no food to give. they who desire to accompany and serve the christian in their necessity make show that it grieve. sustain. the governor dismiss the indian of patofa because he have no food to give. they who desire to accompany and serve the christian in their necessity, make show that it grieve they very much to return. until they have leave they in a people country, return to their own home. john danusco come on sunday late in the evening and bring news that he have find a little town, 12. or 13. league from thence. he bring a woman and a boy that he take there with his come and with those news the governor and all the rest be so glad that they seem at that instant to have return from death to life. upon monday, the twenty six of april, the governor depart to go. and all the rest, be so glad that they seem, at that instant, to have return from death to life. upon monday, the twenty six of april, the governor depart to go to the town which be call aymay, aymay and the christian name it the town of relief. he leave where the camp have lie at the foot of a pine-tree, a letter bury and letter carve in the bark of the pine, the content whereof be this: dig here at the foot of this pine, and you shall find a letter. and this he do because when the captain come, which be send to seek some habitation, they may see the letter and know what be become of the governor and which way he be go. do, because when the captain come which be send to seek some habitation, they may see the letter and know what be become of the governor and which way he be go. there be no other way to the town but the mark that john danusco leave make upon the tree. the governor, with some of they that have the best horse, come to it on the monday and all the rest, enforce themselves the best they can. some of they lodge within two league of the town, some within three and four. every one as he be able to go and his strength serve he there be find in the town a storehouse full of the flower of parch maiz and some maiz which be distribute by he be able to go and his strength serve he there be. find in the town a storehouse full of the flower of parch maiz and some maiz which be distribute by allowance. here be four indian take, and none of they will confess any other thing but that they know of none other habitation. a indian burn for his falsehood. the governor command one of they to be burn and present another confess that two day journey from thence there be a province that be call cutifachiqui. upon wednesday come the captain balthasar de gallegos, alfonso romo and john rodriguez lobillo, for they have find the letter and follow the way which the governor have take towards the town. two man of john rodriguez company be lose. alfonso romo and john rodriguez lobillo, for they have find the letter and follow the way which the governor have take towards the town. two man of john rodriguez company be lose because their horse tire. the governor check he very sore for, leave they behind and send to seek they and assoon as they come. he depart towards cutifachiqui, cutifachiqui in the way three indian be take which say that the lady of that country have notice already of the christian and stay for they in a town of she. the governor send by one of they to offer she his friendship and to advertise she how he be. come thither the governor come unto the town and present there come four canoe to he in one. of they, to offer she his friendship and to advertise she how he be. come thither the governor, come unto the town and present there come four canoe to he. in one of they come a sister of the lady and approach to the governor she say these word: excellent lord, my sister send unto you by i to kiss your lordship hand and to signify unto you that the cause why she come, not in person, be that she think to do you great service. stay behind as she do. give order that with all speed all her canoe be ready that your lordship may pass the river and take your rest, which shall be present. perform the governor, give her thanks and she return to the speed all her canoe be ready that your lordship may pass the river and take your rest, which shall be present, perform. the governor give her thanks and she return to the other side of the river. within a little while the lady come out of the town in a chair, whereon certain of the principal indian bring she to the river. she enter into a barge which have the stern tilt over and on the floor her mat ready lay with two cushion upon it, one upon another. where she sit, she down and with she come her principal indian in other barge which do wait upon she. she go to the place where the governor be and at her come she make this speech follow excellent. she come, her principal indian in other barge which do wait upon she. she go to the place where the governor be and at her come she make this speech follow. excellent, lord, i wish this come of your lordship into these, your country, to be most happy, although my power be not answerable to my will and my service be not according to my desire, nor such as so high a prince as your lordship deserve. yet since the good will be rather to be accept than all the treasure of the world that without it be offer, with most unfaileable and manifest affection, i offer you my person, land and subject and this small service, and therewithal she present unto he great store of clothes of it be offer. with most unfaileable and manifest affection. i offer you my person, land and subject and this small service. and therewithal. she present unto he great store of clothes of the country which she bring in other canoe, to wit mantle and skin, and take from she own neck a great cordon of pearl, a () pearl, and cast it about the neck of the governor. entertain he with very gracious speech of love and courtesy and command canoe to be bring thither wherein the governor and his people pass the river. they pass^ the rive^ cut^fa-chi^^i assoon. as he be lodge in the town. she send he another present of many hen this country be very pleasant, fat and have goodly meadow by the river. the rive^ cut^fa-chi^^i assoon as he be lodge in the town, she send he another present of many hen. this country be very pleasant, fat and have goodly meadow by the river. their wood be thin and full of walnut tree and mulberry tree. walnut tree, mulberry tree for silk. the sea two day journey, ^ff, they say. the sea be two day journey from thence, within a league and half a league about this town. be great town, dispeople and overgrow with grass which show that they have be long without inhabitant. the indian say that two year before there be a plague in that country and that they remove to other town, there be in their storehouse great quantity of clothes, mantle of th^ bark of. that two year before there be a plague in that country and that they remove to other town. there be in their storehouse great quantity of clothes, mantle of th^ bark of tree, mantle of f^athers, mantle of yarn, make of the bark of tree and other make of feather, white, green, red and yellow, very fine after their use and profitable for winter. there be also many deer skin with many compartment trace in they and some of they make into hose, stocking and shoe. and the lady perceive that the christian esteem the pearl, advise the governor to send to search certain grave that be in that town and that he shall find many and that if he will send to the dispeople town he may. advise the governor to send to search certain grave that be in that town and that he shall find many and that if he will send to the dispeople town he may load all his horse. they seek the grave of that town and there find fourteen roove of pearl. three hundred ninety two pound of pearl find and little baby and bird make of they. the people be brown, well make and well proportion and more civil than any other that be see in all the country of florida, and all of they go shod and clothe the youth. tell the governor that he begin now to enter into the land which he speak of and some credit be give he that it be so because he. and clothe. the youth tell the governor that he begin now to enter into the land which he speak of and some credit be give he that it be so because he understand the language of the indian and he request that he may be christen. for he say he desire to become a christian, he be christen and name peter, and the governor command he to be loose from a chain in which, until that time he have go, this country, as the indian report, have be much inhabit and have the same of a good country and, as it seem, the youth which be the governors guide have hear of it and that which he know by hearsay. he affirm that he have see and augment. good country and, as it seem, the youth which be the governors guide have hear of it and that which he know by hearsay, he affirm that he have see and augment at his pleasure. in this town be find a dagger and bead that have belong to christian. this town be but two day journey from the haven of santa helena, the indian report that christian have be in the haven, which be two day journey from this town. many year ago, he that come thither be the governor, the licenciate lucas vasquez de ayllon, which go to conquer this country and at his come to the port he die in the year 1525. and there be a division, quarrel and slaughter between some principal man which which go to conquer this country and at his come to the port, he die in the year 1525.. and there be a division, quarrel and slaughter between some principal man which go with he for the principal government and without know any thing of the country, they return home to hispaniola. all the company think it good to inhabit that country, it be in 32.. degree because it be in a temperate climate and that if it be inhabit, all the ship of new spain, of peru, santa martha and tierr^^rme, in their return for spain, may well touch there, because it be in their way and because it be a good country and site fit to raise commodity the governor, since his intent be to seek. spain may well touch there because it be in their way and because it be a good country and site fit to raise commodity. the governor, since his intent be to seek another treasure like that of atabalipa, lord of peru, be not content with a good country, nor with pearl, though many of they be worth their weight in gold. and if the country have be divide among the christian, those which the indian have fish for afterward will have be of more value for those which they have because they burn they in the fire do lose their colour. the governor answer they that urge he to inhabit, that in all the country there be not victual to sustain his man one month and that it fire do lose their colour. the governor answer they that urge he to inhabit, that in all the country there be not victual to sustain his man one month and that it be needful to resort to the port of ocus, where maldanado be to stay for they, and that if no rich country be find, they may return again to that whensoever they will. and in the mean time the indian will sow their field and it will be better furnish with maiz. he inquire of the indian whether they have notice of any great lord far into the land. they tell he that 12. day journey from thence chiaha, 12. day journey from santa helena, and cost 7. day journey from chiaha, at which town of? lord far into the land. they tell he that 12. day journey from thence, chiaha, 12. day journey from santa helena and cost, 7. day journey from chiaha, at which town of cost they have a ox hide, chap 16.. there be a province call chiaha, subject to the lord of coca present, the governor determine to seek that land and be a stern man and of few word, though he be glad to sift and know the opinion of all man. yet after he have deliver his own, he will not be contrary and always do what like himself and so all man do condescend unto his will. and though it seem a error to leave that country for other may have be, seek round about where. do what like himself and so all man do, condescend unto his will. and though it seem a error to leave that country, for other may have be, seek round about where the people may have be sustain until the harvest have be ready there and the maiz gather, yet there be none that will say any thing against he after they know his resolution, chap 15, how the governor depart from cutifachiqui to seek the province of coca and what happen unto he. in the way the governor depart from cutifa the three day of may, and because the indian have revolt and the will of the lady be perceive that, if she can, she will depart without give any guide or man for burden for the. may, and because the indian have revolt and the will of the lady be perceive that if she can, she will depart without give any guide or man for burden for the wrong which the christian have do to the indian, for there never want some among many of a base sort that for a little gain do put themselves and other in danger of undo. the governor command she to be, keep in safeguard and carry with he not with so good usage as she deserve for the good will she show and good entertainment that she have make he and he verify that old proverb which say: for welldoing i receive evil. and so he carry she on foot with his bondwoman to look unto she. that she have make. he and he verify that old proverb which say: for welldoing i receive evil, and so he carry she on foot with his bondwoman to look unto she. in all the town where the governor pass the lady, command the indian to come and carry the burden from one town to another. we pass through her country, a hundred league in which, as we see she be much obey for the indian, do all that she command they with great efficacy and diligence. peter, the youth that be our guide, say that she be not the lady herself but a niece of she, which come to that town to execute certain principal man by commandment of the lady which have withhold her tribute, which she be, not the lady herself but a niece of she, which come to that town to execute certain principal man by commandment of the lady which have withhold her tribute, which word be not believe because of the lie which they have find in he before. but they bear with all thing because of the need which they have of he to declare what the indian say. in seven day space the governor come to a province call chalaque, seven day journey from cutifa, the poor country of maiz that be see in florida. the indian feed upon root and herb which they seek in the field and upon wild beast which they kill with their bow and arrow, and it be a very gentle people all. indian feed upon root and herb which they seek in the field and upon wild beast which they kill with their bow and arrow, and it be a very gentle people, all of they go naked and be very lean. there be a lord which, for a great present, bring the governor two deer skin, and there be in that country many wild hen, 700. hen. in one town they make he a present of 700. hen, and so in other town they send he those which they have or can get from this province to another which be call he spend five, day, 5. day off here he find very little maiz and for this cause, though the people be weary and the horse very weak, he another which be call, he spend five, day, 5.. day off here he find very little maiz and for this cause, though the people be weary and the horse very weak, he stay no more. but two day from ocute to cutifa-chiqui may be some hundred and thirty league, whereof 80. be wilderness from cutifa-chiqui to two hundred and fifty, and it be a hilly country the governor depart from towards guaxule. he pass very rough and high hill, rough and high hill. in that journey the lady of cutifa-chiqui who the governor carry with- he, as be afore, say with purpose to carry she to guaxule because her territory reach thither- go on a day with the bondwoman which lead she, go out of the way and as be afore, say with purpose to carry she to guaxule because her territory reach thither. go on a day with the bondwoman which lead she, go out of the way and enter into a wood, say she go to ease herself. and so she deceive they and hide herself in the wood. and though they seek she, they can not find she. she carry away with her a little chest, make of cane, in manner of a coffer, which they call petaca, full of unbored pearl. some which can judge of they say that they be of great value. a indian woman that wait on she do. carry they the governor not to discontent she altogether. leave they with she. make account that in guaxule he will. be of great value, a indian woman that wait on she do. carry they the governor not to discontent she altogether, leave they with. she make account that in guaxule he will ask they of she when he give her leave to return, which coffer she carry away and go to with three slave which flee from the camp and one horseman which remain behind who fall sick of a ague, go out of the way and be lose this man who name be alimamos. deal with the slave to change their evil purpose and return with he to the christian, which two of they do, and alimamos. and they overtake the governor 50. league from thence in a province call chiaha and report how the lady remain. with he to the christian, which two of they do- and alimamos, and they overtake the governor 50. league from thence in a province call chiaha and report how the lady remain in with a slave of andrew de vasconcellos which will not come back with they and that of a certainty they live as man and wife together and mean to go both to cutifa-chiqui within five day. the governor come to guaxule, guaxule, five day ^^f the indian there give he a present of 300. dog because they see the christian, esteem they and seek they to feed on they, for among they they be not eat in guaxule and all that way be very little maiz. the governor send from thence a indian with a. seek they to feed on. they for among they they be not eat in guaxule and all that way be very little maiz. the governor send from thence a indian with a message to the cacique of chiaha to desire he to gather some maiz thither that he may rest a few day in chiaha. the governor depart from guaxule, canasagua, two day journey off great store of mulberry t^ees to make ^^lke, and in two day journey come to a town call canasagua. there meet he on the way 20. indian, every one load with a basket full of mulberry, for there be many, and those very good, from cutifa-chiqui thither and so forward in other province, and also nut and plum and the tree grow in. a basket full of mulberry, for there be many, and those very good, from cutifa-chiqui thither and so forward in other province, and also nut and plum, and the tree grow in the field without plant or dress. they and be as big and as rank as though they grow in garden dig and water. from the time that the governor depart from canasagua, he journey five day through a desert and two league before he come to chiaha. there meet he 15. indian load with maiz which the cacique have send and they tell he on his behalf that he wait his come with 20. barn full of it and far that himself, his country and subject and all thing else be at his service on the on his behalf that he wait his come with 20.. barn full of it and far that himself, his country and subject and all thing else be at his service. on the 5. day of june, the governor enter into chiaha, june 5.. chiaha, five day journey off, and ^0 league from the cacique void his own house in which he lodge and receive he with much joy say these word: follow, mighty and excellent lord, i hold myself for so happy a man in that it have please your lordship to use i that nothing can have happen unto i of more contentment, nor that i will have esteem so much from guaxule your lordship send unto i that i shall prepare maiz for you in this. can have happen unto i of more contentment, nor that i will have esteem so much from guaxule your lordship send unto i that i shall prepare maiz for you in this town for two month. here i have for you 20. barn full of the choice that in all the country can be find, if your lordship be not entertain by i in such sort as be fit for so high a prince. respect my tender age, which excuse i from blame, and receive my good will, which with much loyalty, truth and sincerity i will always show in any thing which shall concern your lordship service. the governor answer he that he thank he very much for his service and offer and that he will always will always show in any thing which shall concern your lordship service. the governor answer he that he thank he very much for his service and offer and that he will always account, he as his brother. there be in this town much butter in gourd melt like oil. they say it be the fat of bear, the fat of bear. there be find also great store of oil of walnut, oil of walnut which be clear as butter and of a good taste, and a pot full of honey of bee, honey of bee which neither before nor afterward be see in all the country. the town be in a island, chiaha seat in a island between two arm of a river and be seat nigh one. neither before nor afterward be see in all the country. the town be in a island, chiaha, seat in a island between two arm of a river and be seat nigh one of they. the river divide itself into those two branch. two crossbow shoot above the town and meet again a league beneath the same. the plain between both the branch be sometime one crossbow shoot, sometime two crossbow shoot over the branch. be very broad and both of they may be wade over. there be all along they very good meadow and many field sow with maiz. and because the indian stay in their town, the governor only lodge in the house of the cacique and his people in the field, where there be ever a. sow with maiz, and because the indian stay in their town, the governor only lodge in the house of the cacique and his people in the field. where there be ever a tree, every one take one for himself. thus the camp lie separate one from another and out of order, the governor wink at it because the indian be in peace and because it be very hot and the people shall have suffer great extremity. if it have not be so, the horse come thither, so weak that for feebleness they be not able to carry their master, because that from cutifa-chiqui they always travel with very little provender and be hunger-starved and tire ever since they come from the desert of ocute, the desert of ocute. carry their master, because that from cutifa-chiqui they always travel with very little provender and be hunger-starved and tire, ever since they come from the desert of ocute, the desert of ocute, chap 14.. and because the most of they be not in case to use in battle, though need shall require, they send they to feed in the night, a quarter of a league from the camp, the christian be there in great danger, because that if at this time the indian have set upon they, they have be in evil case to have defend themselves. the governor rest there, thirty day 30. day rest, in which time, because the country be very fruitful, the horse grow fat at the time of his departure by the importunity. themselves. the governor rest there thirty day, 30. day, rest, in which time, because the country be very fruitful, the horse grow fat. at the time of his departure, by the importunity of some which will have more than be reason, he demand of the cacique, 30. woman to make slave of. he answer that he will confer with his chief man. and before he return a answer, one night all of they, with their wife and child, forsake the town and flee away. the next day the governor purpose to go to seek they the cacique, come unto he and at his come, use these word unto the governor: mighty lord, with shame and fear of your lordship, because my subject, against my will, have do amiss. cacique. come unto he and at his come, use these word unto the governor: mighty lord, with shame and fear of your lordship, because my subject, against my will, have do amiss. in absent themselves, i go my way without your licence and know the error which i have commit. like a loyal subject, i come to yield myself into your power to dispose of i at your own pleasure. for my subject do not obey i, nor do any thing. but what a uncle of i command which govern this country. for i, until i be of a perfect age, if your lordship will pursue they and execute on they that which, for their disobedience, they deserve, i will be your guide, since at this present my be of a perfect age if your lordship will pursue they and execute on they that which, for their disobedience, they deserve. i will be your guide, since at this present my fortune will not suffer. i to perform any more. present the governor, with 30. horseman and as many footman go to seek the indian certain town and pass by some town of the principal indian which have absent themselves. he cut and destroy great field of maiz and go up the river where the indian be in a island where the horseman can not come at they. there he send they word by a indian to return to their town and fear nothing and that they shall give he man to carry burden as all those. come at they there. he send they word by a indian to return to their town and fear nothing and that they shall give he man to carry burden as all those behind have do, for he will have no indian woman. see they be so loath to part with they. the indian accept his request and come to the governor to excuse themselves and so all of they return to their town. a cacique of a province, caleld cost, come to this town to visit the governor after he have offer himself and pass with he some word of tender, his service and courtesy. the governor ask he whether he have notice of any rich country. he say yea, to wit that towards the north there be. he some word of tender, his service and courtesy. the governor ask he whether he have notice of any rich country. he say yea, to wit that towards the north there be a province name chisca and that there be a melt of copper mine of copper and gold in chisca towards the north, and of another metal of the same colour, save that it be fine and of a far more perfect colour and far better to the sight, and that they use it not so much because it be soft, and the self same thing. be tell the governor in cutifa-chiqui, where we see some little hatchet of copper which be say to have a mixture of gold. ha^chets of coppe^ hold gold, but in that thing be tell the governor in cutifa-chiqui, where we see some little hatchet of copper which be say to have a mixture of gold, ha^chets of coppe^ hold gold, but in that part the country be not well people. chisca be direct north from catifa-chiqui, which ^s within two ^aies of santa helena, and they say there be mountain which the horse can not pass, and for that cause the governor will not go from cutifa-chiqui direct thither and he make account that travel through a people country when his man and horse shall be in better plight and he be better certify of the truth of the thing, he will return towards it by mountain and a better inhabit country, whereby he may have better passage too. better plight and he be better certify of the truth of the thing. he will return towards it by mountain and a better inhabit country whereby he may have better passage too. christians s^nt from chiaha to seek chisca. he send two christian from chiaha with certain indian which know the country of chisca and the language thereof, to view it and to make report of that which they shall find, where he tell they that he will tarry for they. chap 16, how the governor depart from chiaha and at cost be in danger to have be slay by the hand of the indian and by a stratagem escape the same and what more happen unto he in this journey, and how he come to coca when. have be slay by the hand of the indian and by a stratagem, escape the same. and what more happen unto he in this journey. and how he come to coca. when the governor be determine to depart from chiaha to cost he, send for the cacique to come before he and, with gentle word, take his leave of he and give he certain thing wherewith he rest much content, (@), even (@), ^^om, ^^^aha chap ^^. in seven day he come to cost, the second of julie. he command his camp to be pitch two crossbow shoot from the town and with eight man of his guard he go where he find the cacique which, to his think, receive he with great love as he be talk. crossbow, shoot from the town and with eight man of his guard he go where he find the cacique which, to his think, receive he with great love as he be talk with he there. go from the camp, certain footman, to the town to seek some maiz. and not content with it, they ransack and search the house and take what they find. with this, despite, the indian begin to rise and to take their arm and some of they with cudgil in their hand, run upon five or six christian which have do they wrong and beat they at their pleasure. the governor see they all in a uproar and himself among they. with so few christian, to escape their hand, use a stratagem, a wise. wrong and beat they at their pleasure. the governor see they all in a uproar, and himself among they, with so few christian, to escape their hand. use a stratagem, a wise stratagem, far against his own disposition, be as he be very frank and open, and though it grieve he very much that any indian shall be so bold as, with reason or without reason, to despise the christian, he take up a cudgel and take their part against his own man, which be a mean to quiet they and present, he send word by a man, very secret, to the camp that some arm man shall come towards the place where he be, and he take the cacique by the hand, use very mild word, unto. a man, very secret to the camp, that some arm man shall come towards the place where he be, and he take the cacique by the hand- use very mild word- unto he, and with some principal indian that do accompany he, he draw they out of the town into a plain way and unto the sight of the camp. whither by little and little, with good discretion, the christian begin to come and to gather about they. thus the governor lead the cacique and his chief man until he enter with they into the camp and near unto his tent. he command they to be put in safe custody and tell they that they shall not depart without give he a guide and indian for burden and and near unto his tent. he command they to be put in safe custody and tell they that they shall not depart without give he a guide and indian for burden and till certain sick christian be come, which he have command to come down the river in canoe from chiaha, and those also which he have send to the province of chisca for they be not return, and he fear that the indian have slay the one and the other. within three day after those which be send to chisca, return those which be ^^t to seek ch^sca, return high mountain and make report that the indian have carry they through a country so poor of maiz and so rough and over so high mountain that it to seek ch^sca, return high mountain and make report that the indian have carry they through a country so poor of maiz and so rough and over so high mountain that it be impossible for the army to travel that way and that see the way grow very long and that they linger much. they consult to return from a little poor town, a little poor town where they see nothing that be of any profit, and bring a ox hide, a ox hide with hairelike wool, cap 26.. and gomara histor general, cap 215. say ^o, which the indian give they as thin as a calf skin and the hair, like a soft wool between the course and fine wool of sheep. the cacique give a guide. ^o which the indian give. they as thin as a calf skin and the hair like a soft wool between the course and fine wool of sheep. the cacique give a guide and man for burden and depart with the governors. leave the governor depart from cost the nine of julie and lodge at a town call 1 day ^^om cost the cacique come forth to receive he on the way and make this speech excellent lord and prince, worthy to be serve and obey of all the prince in the world, howsoever, for the most part by the outward physiognomy the inward virtue may be judge and that who you be and of what strength be know unto i before now. i will not infer hereupon how. part, by the outward physiognomy, the inward virtue may be judge, and that who you be and of what strength be know unto i before now i will not infer hereupon how mean i be in your presence to hope that my poor service will be grateful and acceptable, since whereas strength fail, the will do not cease to be praise and accept. and for this cause i presume to request your lordship that you will be please only to respect the same and consider wherein you will command my service. in this, your country, the governor, answer he that his good will and offer be as acceptable unto he as if he have offer he all the treasure of the world and that he will always entreat. governor, answer he that his good will and offer be as acceptable unto he as if he have offer he all the treasure of the world and that he will always entreat, favour and esteem he as if he be his own brother. the cacique command provision, necessary for two day while the governor be there to be bring thither, and at the time of his departure he give he four woman and two man which he have need of to bear burden. the governor travel six day through many town subject to the cacique of coca, many town of coca, and as he enter into his country many indian come unto he every day from the cacique and meet he on the way with message one go. coca, many town of coca. and as he enter into his country, many indian come unto he every day from the cacique and meet he on the way with message: one go and another come. he come to coca upon friday, the 26. of julie, coca, julie 26. the cacique come forth to receive he two crossbow shoot from the town in a chair which his principal man carry on their shoulder, sit upon a cushion and cover with a garment of marterns, marterns of the fashion and bigness of a woman huke. he have on his head a diadem of feather and round about he, many indian play upon flute and sing assoon. as he come unto the governor, he do his obeisance and utter these word: his head a diadem of feather, and round about he many indian play upon flute and sing assoon. as he come unto the governor, he do his obeisance and utter these word: follow excellent and mighty lord, above all they of the earth. although i come, but now to receive you yet, i have receive you many day ago in my heart, to wit from the day wherein i have first notice of your lordship, with so great desire to serve you, with so great pleasure and contentment that this which i make show of be nothing in regard of that which be in my heart. neither can it have any kind of comparison. this you may hold for certain that to obtain the dominion of the whole, nothing in regard of that which be in my heart, neither can it have any kind of comparison. this you may hold for certain: that to obtain the dominion of the whole world will not have rejoice i so much as your sight. neither will i have hold it for so great a felicity. do not look for i to offer you that which be your own, to wit my person, my land and subject. only i will busy myself, in command my man, with all diligence and due reverence, to welcome you from hence to the town with play and sing, where your lordship shall be lodge and attend upon by myself and they and all that i possess your lordship shall use as it be your. the town with play and sing, where your lordship shall be lodge and attend upon by myself and they and all that i possess your lordship shall use as it be your own, for your lordship shall do i a very great favour in so do the governor give he thanks, and with great joy they both go, confer together till they come to the town. the town and he command his indian to void their house wherein the governor and his man be lodge. there be in the barn and in the field, great store of maiz and french bean. the country be great, inhabit, with many great town, many great town and many sow field which reach from the one to the other. it be pleasant. of maiz and french bean. the country be great, inhabit, with many great town, many great town and many sow field which reach from the one to the other. it be pleasant, fat, full of good meadow, upon river. there be in the field many plum tree, many plum-tree of di^ers, sort too, sort of ^^apes aswell of such as grow in spain as of the country, and wild tall vine that run up the tree, and beside these there be other low vine with big and sweet grape, but for want of dig and dress, they have great kirnel in. they, the governor, use to set a guard over the cacique because they shall not absent themselves and carry they with he till he come out of. they have great kirnel in. they, the governor, use to set a guard over the cacique because they shall not absent themselves and carry they with he till he come out of their country, because that carry they along with he. he look to find people in the town and they give he guide and man to carry burden, and before he go out of their country he give they licence to return to their house and to their porter likewise assoon as he come to any other lordship where they give he other, the man of coca, see their lord detain, take it in evil part and revolt and hide themselves in the wood, aswell those of the town of the cacique as those of the other. of coca, see their lord detain, take it in evil part and revolt and hide themselves in the wood, aswell those of the town of the cacique as those of the other town of ^is principal subject: the governor send out four captain, every one his way, to seek they. they take many man and woman which be put into chain. they see the hurt which they receive and how little they gain in absent themselves, come again, promise to do whatsoever they be command of those which be take prisoner. some principal man be set at liberty, who the cacique demand, and every one that have any. carry the rest in chain like slave, without let they go to their country, neither do any return, but some at liberty, who the cacique demand, and every one that have any, carry the rest in chain like slave, without let they go to their country. neither do any return. but some few who fortune help they with the good diligence which they use to file off their chain by night or such as in their travel, can slip aside out of the way, see any negligence in they that keep they some escape away with the chain and with the burden and clothes which they carry. chap 17: how the governor go from coca to tascaluca. the governor rest in coca, 25. day. he depart from thence, the 20. of august, 20. of august, to seek a province call tascaluca. he carry with he the cacique of. tascaluca, the governor, rest in coca. 25. day he depart from thence, the 20. of august, 20. of august, to seek a province call tascaluca. he carry with he the cacique of coca. he pass that day by a great town call tallimuchase. tallimuchase, a great town. the people be flee. he lodge half a league far near a brook. the next day he come to a town call subject to coca. he stay there six day because of a river that pass by it, which at that time be very high, a great river, and assoon. as the river suffer he to pass. he set forward and lodge at a town name vllibahali. vllibahali. there come to he on the way on the cacique, behalf of that. assoon as the river suffer he to pass. he set forward and lodge at a town name vllibahali. vllibahali. there come to he, on the way, on the cacique behalf of that province, ten or twelve principal indian to offer he his service. all of they have their plume of feather and bow and arrow. the governor come to the town with twelve horseman and some footman of his guard, leave his people a crossbow, shoot from the town, enter into it. he find all the indian with their weapon and as far as he can guess, they seem to have some evil meaning. it be know afterward that they be determine to take the cacique of coca from the governor if he have request it. the governor. guess they seem to have some evil meaning. it be know afterward that they be determine to take the cacique of coca from the governor if he have request it. the governor command all his people to enter the town, which be wall about vllibahali, wall about and near unto it, pass a small river. the fashion of their wall, the wall aswell of that as of other, which afterward we see be of great post, thrust deep into the ground and very rough and many long rail as big as one arm lay across between they and the wall. be about the height of a lance and it be daub within and without with clay and have loop hole on the otherside of the river. be a they and the wall be about the height of a lance and it be daub within and without with clay and have loop hole on the otherside of the river. be a town, a town where, at that present, the cacique be the governor, send to call he and he come present after he have pass with the governor some word of offer his service, he give he such man for his carriage as he need and thirty woman for slave in that place. be a christian lose, call bear in salamanca, of noble parentage, which go astray to seek for grape whereof there be great store, great store of good grape and those very good. the day that the governor depart from thence, he lodge at a. go astray to seek for grape whereof there be great store, great store of good grape and those very good. the day that the governor depart from thence, he lodge at a town, a town subject to the lord of vllibahali, and the next day he come to another town call toasi. the indian give the governor thirty woman and such man for his carriage as he need. he travel ordinary 5. or 6. league a day. he travel ordinary five or six league a day. when he travel through people country and go through desert, he march as fast as he can to eschew the want of maiz from toasi, pass through some town subject to a cacique which be lord of a province call tallise. he he march as fast as he can to eschew the want of maiz from toasi, pass through some town subject to a cacique which be lord of a province call tallise. he travel five day. he come to tallise the 18. of september. tallise, a great town, september 18.. the town be great and situate near unto a main river, a main river on the other side of the river be other town and many field sow with maiz on both side. it be a very plentiful country and have store of maiz. they have void the town, the governor command to call the cacique who come and between they pass some word of love and offer of his service and he present unto he 40. indian there. the town, the governor command to call the cacique who come and between they pass some word of love and offer of his service and he present unto he 40. indian there. come to the governor in this town, a principal indian, in the behalf of the cacique of and make this speech follow, mighty, virtuous and esteem lord, the great cacique of, my lord, send by i to kiss your lordship hand and to let you understand that he have notice how you just ravish with your perfection and power all man on the earth and that every one by who your lordship pass do serve and obey you, which he acknowledge to be due unto you and desire as his life to see and to serve. and that every one, by who your lordship pass, do serve and obey you, which he acknowledge to be due unto you and desire as his life to see and to serve your lordship, for which cause, by i, he offer himself his land and subject. that, when your lordship please to go through his country, you may be receive with all peace and love, serve and obey, and that, in recompense of the desire he have to see you, you will do he the favour to let he know when you will come, for how much the soon, so much the great favour he shall receive. the governor, receive and dispatch he gracious give, he bead which among they be not much esteem and some other thing. much, the soon, so much the great favour he shall receive. the governor, receive and dispatch he gracious, give he bead, which among they be not much esteem, and some other thing to carry to his lord, and he give licence to the cacique of coca to return home to his own country, the cacique of tallise, give he such man for burden as he need, and after he have rest there, 20. day, he depart thence towards tascaluca. that day, when he go from tallise, he lodge at a great town call casiste ca^^^te, a great town, and the next day pass by another and come to a small town of tascaluca. and the next day he camp in a wood, two league from the town, where great town and the next day pass by another and come to a small town of tascaluca. and the next day he camp in a wood, two league from the town where the cacique reside and be at that time and he send the master of the camp, lewis de moscoso, with 15. horseman to let he know how he be come the cacique be, in his lodging, under a canopy and without door, right against his lodging in a high place, they spread a mat for he and two cushion one upon another where he sit, he down and his indian place themselves round about he, somewhat distant from he, so that they make a place and a void room where he sit and his chief man. sit he down and his indian place themselves round about he, somewhat distant from he, so that they make a place and a void room where he sit and his chief man be near to he and one with a shadow of deer skin which keep the sun from he. be round and of the bigness of a target quarter, with black and white, have a roundel in the midst, a far off it seem to be of taffeta, because the colour be very perfect. it be set on a small staff, stretch wide out. this be the device which he carry in his war. he be a man of a very tall stature, of great limb and spare and well proportion and be much fear of his be the device which he carry in his war. he be a man of a very tall stature, of great limb and spare and well proportion and be much fear of his neighbour and subject. he be lord of many territory and much people in his countenance. he be very grave. after the master of the camp have speak with he, he and those that go with he course their horse, prance they to and fro, and now and then towards the place where the cacique be, who, with much gravity and dissimulation, now and then lift up his eye and behold they, as it be, with disdain. at the governors come, he make no offer at all to rise the governor, take he by the hand and lift up his eye and behold they, as it be, with disdain, at the governors. come he make no offer at all to rise, the governor take he by the hand and both of they sit down together on a seat which be under the cloth of estate. the cacique say these word unto: he mighty lord, i bid your lordship right hearty welcome. i receive as much pleasure and contentment with your sight as if you be my brother, who i dear love. upon this point it be not needful to use many reason, since it be no discretion to speak that in many word which in few may be, utter how much the great the will be, so much more give it name to the work. it be no discretion to speak that in many word which in few may be utter. how much the great the will be, so much more. give it name to the work and the work. give testimony of the truth. now, touch my will. by it, you shall know how certain and manifest it be and how pure inclination i have to serve you. concern the favour which you do i, in the thing which you send i, i make as much account of they as be reason to esteem they and chief because they be. you now see what service you will command i, the governor. satisfy he with sweet word and with great brevity. when he depart from thence, he determine to carry he along with you now see what service you will command. i, the governor, satisfy he with sweet word and with great brevity. when he depart from thence, he determine to carry he along with he for some cause, and at two day journey he come to a town call piache piache, by which there pass a great river, a great riu^^. the governor demand canoe of the indian. they say they have they not, but that they will make raft of cane and dry timber on which he may pass well enough. and they make they with all diligence and speed and they govern they. and because the water go very slow, the governor and his people pass very well from the port spirito santo to apalache, which be about diligence and speed and they govern they. and because the water go very slow, the governor and his people pass very well from the port spirito santo to apalache, which be about a hundred league. the governor go from east to west and from apalache to cutifa-chiqui, which be 430. league from the south-west to the north-east and from cutifa-chiqui to which be about two hundred and fifty league from the south to the north and from which be two hundred and fifty league more, a hundred and ninety of they. he travel from east to west, to wit to the province of coca and the other 60. from coca to tascaluca, from the north to the south, have pass the river of piache, a christian go from. west, to wit to the province of coca, and the other 60. from coca to tascaluca, from the north to the south, have pass the river of piache, a christian go from his company from thence to seek a woman slave that be run away from. he and the indian either take he captive or slay he the governor, urge the cacique that he shall give account of he and threaten he that if he be not find he will never let he lose. the cacique send a indian from thence to mavilla, whither they be travel, which be a town of a principal indian, and his subject say that he send he to advise they to make ready victual and man for carriage. but as afterward appear, travel which be a town of a principal indian and his subject say that he send he to advise they to make ready victual and man for carriage, but as afterward appear, he send he to assemble all the man of war thither that he have in his country. the governor travel three day and the three day he pass all day through a people country and he come to mavilla, mavilla, 1^ o^ octob^r. upon monday, the 18. of october, he go before the camp with 15. horseman and 30. footman and from the town come a christian who he have send to the principal man three or four day before because he shall not absent himself and also to learn in what sort the indian be. come a christian who he have send to the principal man three or four day before because he shall not absent himself and also to learn in what sort the indian be, who tell he that he think they be in a evil purpose, for while he be there there come many people into the town and many weapon, and that they make great haste to fortify the wall, manilla wall. lewis de moscoso tell the governor that it will be good to lodge in the field. see the indian be of such disposition and he answer that he will lodge in the town, for he be weary of lodging in the field. when he come near unto the town, the cacique come forth to receive he with answer that he will lodge in the town, for he be weary of lodging in the field. when he come near unto the town, the cacique come forth to receive he, with many indian play upon flute and sing, and after he have offer himself he present he with three mantle of marten. 3. mantle of marterns, the governor, with both the cacique and seven or eight man of his guard and three or four horseman which alight to accompany he, enter into the town and sit he down under a cloth of estate. the cacique of request he that he will let he remain in that town and trouble he no more with travel. and see he will not give he leave in his talk he change. of request he that he will let he remain in that town and trouble he no more with travel. and see he will not give he leave. in his talk he change his purpose and dissemble feign that he will speak with some principal indian and rise up from the place where he sit with the governor and enter into a house where many indian be with their bow and arrow the governor. when he see he return, not call he, and he answer that he will not come out from thence, neither will he go any far than that town and that if he will go his way in peace he shall present, depart and shall not seek to carry he perforce out of his country. and any far than that town and that if he will go his way in peace, he shall present, depart and shall not seek to carry he perforce out of his country and territory. chap 18, how the indian rise against the governor and what ensue thereupon. the governor see the determination and furious answer of the cacique go about to pacify he with fair word, to which he give no answer, but rather with much pride and disdain, withdraw himself where the governor may not see he nor speak with he as a principal indian pass. that way, the governor call he to send he word that he may remain at his pleasure in his country and that it will please he to give he a guide. and that way. the governor call he to send he word that he may remain at his pleasure in his country and that it will please he to give he a guide and man for carriage to see if he can pacify he with mild word. the indian answer with great pride that he will not hearken unto he. balthasar de gallegos, which stand by, take hold of a gown of marten which he have on a ^^wne of (@) and he cast it over his head and leave it in his hand. and because all of they immediate begin to stir balthasar de gallegos, give he such a wound with his that he open he down the back and present all the indian with a great cry: come. they immediate begin to stir balthasar de gallegos, give he such a wound with his that he open he down the back and present all the indian with a great cry: come out of the house, shoot their arrow. the governor consider that if he tarry ^here he can not escape, and if he command his man to come in, which be without the town, the indian within the house may kill their horse and do much hurt, run out of the town and before he come out he fall twice or thrice and those that be with he do help he up again and he and those that be with he be sore wound and in a moment there be five christian slay in the town. the be with he do, help he up again and he and those that be with he be sore wound and in a moment there be five christian slay in the town. the governor come, run out of the town, cry out that every man shall stand far off, because from the wall they do. they much hurt the indian. see that the christian retire and some of they, or the most part, more than a ordinary pace, shoot with great boldness at they and strike down such as they can overtake the indian which the christian do lead with they in chain, have lay down their burden near unto the wall and assoon as the governor and his man be, retire the man of mavilla, lay they on. do lead with they in chain, have, lay down their burden near unto the wall and assoon as the governor and his man be retire, the man of mavilla. lay they on the indian back again and take they into the town and loose they present from their chain and give they bow and arrow to fight withal all the clothes and pearl of the christian be lose. thus they possess themselves of all the clothes and pearl and all that the christian have which their slave carry. and because the indian have be always peaceable until we come to this place, some of our man have their weapon in their farthel and remain unarm, and from other that have enter the town with the governor, they have until we come to this place, some of our man have their weapon in their farthel and remain unarm, and from other that have enter the town with the governor, they have take sword and halebard and fight with they. when the governor be get into the field, he call for a horse and with some that accompany he, he return and slay two or three indian. all the rest retire themselves to the town and shoot with their bow from the wall and those which presume of their nimbleness sally forth to fight a stone cast from the wall and when the christian charge they, they retire themselves at their leisure into the town. at the time that the broil begin, there be in the town a cast from the wall, and when the christian charge they they retire themselves at their leisure into the town. at the time that the broil begin, there be in the town a friar and a priest and a servant of the governor with a woman slave, and they have no time to come out of the town. and they take a house and so remain in the town. the indian be become master of the place. they shut the door with a field gate and among they be one sword which the governors servant have, and with it he set himself behind the door, thrust at the indian which seek to come into. they and the friar and the priest stand on the other side each of they. with it. he set himself behind the door, thrust at the indian which seek to come into. they and the friar and the priest stand on the other side, each of they with a bar in their hand to beat he down. that first. come in the indian. see, they can not get in by the door. begin to uncover the house top. by this time all the horseman and footman which be behind be come to mavilla. here there be sundry opinion whether they shall charge the indian to enter the town or whether they shall leave it because it be hard to enter and in the end it be resolve to set upon they chap 19, how the governor set his man in order and enter. shall leave it because it be hard to enter and in the end it be resolve to set upon. they chap 19, how the governor set his man in order and enter the town of mavilla. assoon as the battle and the rearward be come to mavilla, the governor command all those that be best arm to alight and make four squadron of footman the indian see how he be set his man in order, conclude with the cacique, a consultation of the indian to send away their cacique that he shall go his way. say unto he, as after it be know by certain woman that be take there, that he be but one man and can fight but for one man and that they have there. unto he as, after it be know by certain woman that be take there that he be but one man and can fight but for one man, and that they have there among they many principal indian, very valiant and expert in feat of arm, that any one of they be able to order the people there, and forasmuch as matter of war be subject to casualty and it be uncertain which part shall overcome, they wish he to save himself to the end, that if it fall out that they shall end their day there as they determine, rather than to be overcome, there may remain one to govern the country. for all this he will not have go away, but they urge he so much that as they determine, rather than to be overcome, there may remain one to govern the country. for all this. he will not have go away. but they urge he so much that with fifteen or twenty indian of his own he go out of the town and carry away a skarlat cloak and other thing of the christian good, as much as he be able to carry and seem best unto he. the governor be inform how there go man out of the town and he command the horseman to beset it and send in every squadron of footman, one soldier with a firebrand to set fire on the house that the indian may have no defence. all his man be set in order. he command a harcubuz. squadron of footman, one soldier with a firebrand to set fire on the house. that the indian may have no defence. all his man be set in order. he command a harcubuz to be shoot off. the sign be give. the four squadron, every one by itself, with great fury, give the onset and with great hurt on both side they enter the town. the friar and the priest and those that be with they in the house be save, which cost the life of two man of account and valiant, which come thither to succour they, the indian, fight with such courage that many time they drive our man out of the town. the fight last so long that, for weariness and great thirst, many of the they, the indian, fight with such courage that many time they drive our man out of the town. the fight last so long that, for weariness and great thirst, many of the christian go to a pool that be near the wall to drink, which be all stain with the blood of the dead, and then come again to fight. the governor see this enter among the footman into the town on horseback, with certain that accompany he, and be a mean that the christian come to set fire on the house and break and overcome the indian who run out of the town from the footman, the horseman, without drive in at the gate again where be, without all hope of life. they fight valiant and after the indian who run out of the town from the footman, the horseman, without drive in at the gate again. where be? without all hope of life. they fight valiant and after the christian come among they to handy blow, see themselves in great distress. without any succour, many of they flee into the burn house where, one upon another, they be smother and burn in the fire. the death of 2500. indian. the whole number of the indian that die in this town be two thousand and five hundred little more or less. of the christian there die eighteen, of which one be don carlos, brother in law to the governor and a nephew of he, and one, john de gamez and man rodriguez, portugal and john. christian there die, eighteen, of which one be don carlos, brother in law to the governor and a nephew of he, and one john de gamez and man rodriguez portugal and john vazquez de barca rota. all man of honour and of much valour. the rest be footman. beside those that be slay, there be a hundred and fifty wound with 700. wound of their arrow, and it please god that of very dangerous wound. they be quick heal. moreover, there be twelve horse slay and seventy hurt all the clothes which the christian carry with they to clothe themselves, withal, and the ornament to say mass and the pearl be all burn there and the christian do set they on fire themselves because they hold for a. they to clothe themselves withal and the ornament to say mass and the pearl be all burn there, and the christian do set they on fire themselves because they hold for a great inconvenience the hurt which the indian may do they from those house where they have gather all those good together than the loss of they here. the governor understand that francisco maldonado wait for he at the port of ochuse and that it be six day journey from thence, the port of ochuse, six day journey from mavilla, and he deal with john ortiz to keep it secret because he have not accomplish that which he determine to do and because the pearl be burn there which he mean to have send to cuba. for ortiz to keep it secret, because he have not accomplish that which he determine to do and because the pearl be burn there, which he mean to have send to cuba for a show that the people hear the news, may be desirous to come to that country. he fear also that if they shall have news of he without see from florida neither gold nor silver nor any thing of value, it will get such a name that no man will seek to go thither when he shall have need of people, and so he determine to send no news of himself until he have find some rich country. chap 20, how the governor depart from mavilla towards chicaca and what happen unto he from the time. determine to send no news of himself until he have find some rich country. chap 20: how the governor depart from mavilla towards chicaca and what happen unto he. from the time that the governor enter into florida until his departure from mavilla, there die a hundred and two christian, some of sickness and other which the indian slay. he stay in mavilla because of the wound man, eight and twenty day, all which time he lie in the field. it be a well inhabit and a fat country. there be some great and wall town. great and wall town and many house scatter all about the field. to wit, a crossbow shoot or two the one from the other, upon sunday, the eighteen of november 18.. of. great and wall town and many house scatter, all about the field, to wit, a crossbow shoot or two, the one from the other, upon sunday, the eighteen of november 18.. of november, when the hurt man be know to be heal. the governor depart from mavilla, every one furnish himself with maiz for two day, and they travel five day through a desert. they come to a province call pafallaya, unto a town name, and from thence they go to another call cabusto, cabusto. near unto it run a great river, a great river. the indian on the other side cry out, threaten the christian to kill they if they seek to pass it. the governor command his man to make a barge within the town because indian on the other side cry out, threaten the christian to kill they if they seek to pass it. the governor command his man to make a barge within the town because the indian shall not perceive it. it be finish in four day and be end. he command it to be carry one night upon sleds half a league up the river. in the morning there enter into it thirty man, well arm. the indian perceive what be attempt and those which be near come to defend the passage. they resist what they can till the christian come near they and see that the barge come to the shore canavarales, they flee away into the grove of cane. the christian mount on horseback and go up the the christian come near they and see that the barge come to the shore canavarales, they flee away into the grove of cane. the christian mount on horseback and go up the river to make good the passage whereby the governor and his company pass the river. there be along the river some town, well store with maiz and french bean, some town. from thence to chicaca, the governor travel five day through a desert. he come to a river, a river where on the otherside be indian to defend the passage. he make another barge in two day and when it be finish the governor send a indian to request the cacique to accept of his friendship and peaceable to expect his come. who the indian? that in two day and when it be finish, the governor send a indian to request the cacique to accept of his friendship and, peaceable, to expect his come. who, the indian that be on the other side the river, slay before his face and present, make a great shout: go their way, have pass the river. the next day be the 17. of december, december 17.. the governor come to chicaca, a small town of twenty house, and after they be come to chicaca. chicaca, they be much trouble with cold, snow and much cold, because it be now winter and it snow, while most of they be lodge in the field before they have time to make themselves house this country. be very well, people and the it be now winter and it snow, while most of they be lodge in the field before they have time to make themselves house. this country be very well. people and the house scatter like those of mavilla, fat and plentiful of maiz, and the most part of it be field. they gather as much as suffice to pass the winter. some indian be take, among which be one who the cacique esteem great. the governor send a indian to signify to the cacique that he desire to see he and to have his friendship. the cacique come unto he to offer he his person, country and subject and tell he that he will cause two other cacique to come to he in peace who, within few day. cacique come unto he to offer he his person, country and subject and tell he that he will cause two other cacique to come to he in peace who, within few day after come with he and with their indian, the one be call alimamu, the other, they give a present unto the governor of a hundred and fifty coney coney and of the country, garment to wit of mantle and skin. the cacique of chicaca come to visit he many time and sometime the governor send to call he and send he a horse to go and come. he complain unto he that a subject of his be rise against he and deprive he of his tribute, request his aid against he, for he mean to seek. go and come. he complain unto he that a subject of his be rise against he and deprive he of his tribute, request his aid against he, for he mean to seek he in his country and to punish he, according to his desert, a indian stratagem which be nothing else but a feign plot. for they determine assoon as the governor be go with he and the camp be divide into two part, the one part of they to set upon the governor and the other upon they that remain in chicaca. he go to the town where he use to keep his residence and bring with he two hundred indian with their bow and arrow. the governor take thirty horseman and eighty footman and they go. the town where he use to keep his residence and bring with he two hundred indian with their bow and arrow. the governor take thirty horseman and eighty footman and they go to saquechuma. saquechuma, for so be the province. call of that chief man a wall ^^wne, which he say have rebel. they find a wall town without any man and those which go with the cacique set fire on the house to dissemble their treason. but by reason of the great care and heedfulness that be as well in the governors people which he carry with he, as of those which remain in chicaca, they dare not assault they. at that time the governor invite the cacique and certain principal indian and give they hog flesh. carry with he, as of those which remain in chicaca, they dare not assault they. at that time the governor invite the cacique and certain principal indian and give they hog flesh to eat, and though they do not common use it yet, they be so greedy of it that every night there come indian to certain house, a crossbow shoot from the camp where the hog lay, and kill and carry away as many as they can, and three indian be take in the manner. two of they, the governor command to be shoot to death with arrow and to cut off the hand of the other, and he send he so handle to the cacique who make as though it grieve he that they have offend. death with arrow and to cut off the hand of the other. and he send he so handle to the cacique who make as though it grieve he that they have offend the governor and that he be glad that he have execute that punishment on they. he lay in a plain country half a league from the place where the christian lodge. four horseman go a straggle thither, to wit francisco osorio and a servant of the marquis of astorga call reynoso, and two servant of the governor, the one his page call ribera, and the other fuentes his chamberlain, and these have take from the indian some skin and some mantle wherewith they be offend, and forsake their house. the governor know of it and command. the other fuentes. his chamberlain and these have take from the indian some skin and some mantle wherewith they be offend and forsake their house. the governor know of it and command they to be apprehend and condemn to death franscisco osorio and the chamberlain as principal, and all of they to loss of good. the friar and priest and other principal person be earnest with he to pardon francisco osorio his life and to moderate his sentence which he will not grant for any of they. while he be ready to command they to be draw to the market place to cut off their head, there come certain indian from the cacique to complain of they john ortiz, at the request of balthasar de gallegos and other. draw to the market place to cut off their head. there come certain indian from the cacique to complain of they, john ortiz. at the request of balthasar de gallegos and other person, change their word and tell the governor that the cacique say he have notice how his lordship hold those christian in prison for his sake and that they be in no fault. neither have they do he any wrong and that if he will do he any favour, he shall set they free. and he tell the indian that the governor say he have they in prison and that he will punish they in such sort that they shall be a example to other. hereupon the governor command the prisoner to be loose assoon as have they in prison and that he will punish they in such sort that they shall be a example to other. hereupon, the governor command the prisoner to be loose, assoon as march be come. he determine to depart from chicaca and demand of the cacique two hundred man for carriage. he send. he answer that he will speak with his principal man upon twesday the eight of march, march 1541.. the governor go to the town where he be to ask he for the man. he tell he he will send they the next day. assoon as the governor be come to chicaca, he tell lewis de moscoso, the camp-master, that he mislike the indian and that he shall keep a strong watch that night, which he assoon as the governor be come to chicaca, he tell lewis de moscoso, the camp-master, that he mislike the indian and that he shall keep a strong watch. that night, which he remember but a little, the indian come at the second watch in four squadron, every one by itself, and assoon as they be descry, they sound a drum and give the assault with a great cry and with so great celerity that present. they enter with the scout that be somewhat distant from the camp chicaca set on fire by the indian and when they be perceive of they which be in the town, half the house be on fire which they have kindle. that night, three horseman chance to be scout, two of they be they be perceive of, they which be in the town, half the house be on fire which they have kindle that night, three horseman chance to be scout, two of they be of base call and the worst man in all the camp and the other, which be a nephew of the governor, which until then be hold for a tall man, show himself there as great a coward as any of they, for all of they run away and the indian, without any resistance, come and set the town on fire and tarry without behind the door for the christian which run out of the house, not have any leisure to arm themselves, and as they run hither and thither, amaze with the noise and blind with the door for the christian which run out of the house, not have any leisure to arm themselves, and as they run hither and thither, amaze with the noise and blind with the smoke and flame of the fire. they know not which way they go, neither can they light upon their weapon nor saddle their horse, neither see they the indian that shoot at they. many of the horse be burn in the stable and those which can break their halter get loose. the disorder and flight be such that every man flee which way he can, without leave any to resist the indian. but god, which chastise his according to his pleasure and in the great necessity and danger, sustain they with his hand so blind. he can, without leave any, to resist the indian, but god, which chastise his according to his pleasure, and in the great necessity and danger, sustain they with his hand. so blind the indian, that they see not what they have do and think that the horse which run loose be man on horseback that gather themselves together to set upon they, the governor, only rod on horseback, and with he a soldier, call tapia and set upon the indian and strike the first. he meet with his lance. the saddle fall with he which, with haste, be evil gird, and so he fall from his horse and all the people that be on foot be flee to a wood out of the town and there assemble themselves. haste be evil gird, and so he fall from his horse and all the people that be on foot be flee to a wood out of the town and there assemble themselves together, and because it be night and that the indian think the horse be man on horseback which come to set upon they, as i say before, they flee, and one only remain dead, and that be he who the governor slay with his lance. the town lie all burn to ash. there be a woman burn who, after she and her husband be both go out of their house, go in again for certain pearl which they have forget, and when she will have come out, the fire be so great at the door that both go out of their house, go in again for certain pearl which they have forget, and when she will have come out, the fire be so great at the door that she can not, neither can her husband succour. she other three christian come out of their lodging so cruel burn that one of they die within three day and the other two be carry many day. each of they upon a couch between staff which the indian carry on their shoulder for otherwise they can not travel there, die in this hurly-burly, eleven christian and fifty horse, and there remain a hundred hog and four hundred be burn. the increase of hog, if any perchance have save any clothes from the fire of mavilla. here they and fifty horse and there remain a hundred hog and four hundred be burn. the increase of hog, if any perchance have, save any clothes from the fire of mavilla. here they be burn, and many be clad in skin, for they have no leisure to take their coat. they endure much cold in this place and the chief remedy be great fire. they spend all night in turn without sleep, for if they warm one side they freeze on the other. some invent the weave of certain mat of dry ivy and do wear one beneath and another above. many laugh at this device who afterward necessity enforce to do the like. the christian be so spoil and in such want of saddle and weapon which be beneath and another above. many laugh at this device who afterward necessity enforce to do the like. the christian be so spoil and in such want of saddle and weapon which be burn, that if the indian have come the second night, they have overcome they with little labour. they remove thence to the town where the cacique be wont to lie, the town where the cacique lay because it be in a champion country within eight day, after there be many lance and saddle, make there be ashtree ashtrees in those part whereof they make as good lance as in biscay. chap 21, how the indian set again upon the christian and how the governor go to alimamu, beyond which town in warlike sort they tarry for. as good lance as in biscay, chap 21, how the indian set again upon the christian and how the governor go to alimamu, beyond which town, in warlike sort they tarry for he in the way, upon wednesday, the 15. of march 1541.. after the governor have lodge 8. day in a plain, half a league from the place which he have winter in. after he have set up a forge and temper the sword which in chicaca be burn and make many target saddle and lance. on tuesday night at the morning watch many indian come to assault the camp in three squadron, every one by themselves. those which watch give the alarm. the governor, with great speed, set his man in order in other three squadron. come to assault the camp in three squadron, every one by themselves. those which watch give the alarm. the governor, with great speed, set his man in order in other three squadron and leave some to defend the camp, go out to encounter they, the indian, be overcome and put to flight. the ground be champion and fit for the christian to take the advantage of they. and it be now break of day, but there happen a disorder whereby there be not pass. thirty or forty indian slay, and this it be that a friar cry out in the camp without any just occasion to the camp, to the camp, whereupon the governor and all the rest repair thither and the indian have time to save themselves. cry out in the camp, without any just occasion, to the camp, to the camp, whereupon the governor and all the rest repair thither and the indian have time to save themselves. there be some take by who the governor inform himself of the country through which he be to pass the 25. of april. 25. of april he depart from chicaca and lodge at a small town call alimamu, alimamu. they have very little maiz and they be to pass a desert of seven day journey. the next day the governor send three captain, every one his way with horseman and footman, to seek provision to pass the desert, and john dannusco, the auditor, go with fifteen horseman and 40. footman, that way that the governor be. one his way with horseman and footman to seek provision to pass the desert, and john dannusco, the auditor, go with fifteen horseman and 40. footman, that way that the governor be to go and find a strong fort, make where the indian stay, for he and many of they walk on the top of it with their weapon, have their body, thigh and arm ochered and die with black, white, yellow and red stripe, like unto pane, black, white, yellow and red colour so that they show as though they go in hose and doublet, and some of they have plume and other have horn on their head and their face black and their eye do round about with strike of red to seem more fierce assoon. and some of they have plume and other have horn on their head and their face black and their eye do round about with strike of red to seem more fierce. assoon as they see that the christian approach, with a great cry, sound, two drum, with great fury, they sally forth to receive they john dannusco and those that be with he think good to avoid they and to acquaint the governor therewith. they retire to a plain place, a crossbow shoot from the fort in sight of it. the footman, the crossebowman and targetter place themselves before the horseman that they may not hurt the horse. the indian sally out by seven and seven and eight and eight to shoot their arrow and retire again and place themselves before the horseman that they may not hurt the horse. the indian sally out by seven and seven and eight and eight to shoot their arrow and retire again. and in sight of the christian, they make a fire and take a indian, some by the foot and some by the head, and make as though they go to cast he into the fire and give he first many knock on the head, signify that they mean so. to handle the christian, john danusco send three horseman to advertise the governor hereof. he come present for his intent be to drive they from thence. say that if he do it not they will be embolden to charge he another time when they may do he more. present for his intent be to drive they from thence. say that if he do it not they will be embolden to charge he another time when they may do he more harm. he make the horseman to alight and set his man in four squadron, the sign be give. they set up-the indian which make resistance till the christian come near the fort and assoon. as they see they can not defend themselves by a place where a brook pass near the fort, they run away and from the otherside they shoot some arrow and because at that instant we know no ford for the horse to pass, they have time enough to get out of our danger. three indian be slay there and many christian be. because at that instant we know no ford for the horse to pass. they have time enough to get out of our danger. three indian be slay there and many christian be hurt, whereof within few day there die fifteen. by the way, all man think the governor to be in fault because he send not to see the disposition of the place on the other side of the river and to know the passage before he set upon they for with the hope they have to save themselves by flight that way, when they see none other, mean they fight till they be break. and it be a encouragement to defend themselves until then and to offend the christian without any danger to themselves. chap 22: how none other mean they fight till they be break, and it be a encouragement to defend themselves until then and to offend the christian without any danger to themselves. chap 22: how the governor go from alimamu to quizquiz and from thence to rio grande or the great river, three day after they have seek some maiz, whereof they find but little store. in regard of that which be needful and that for this cause as well, for their sake that be wound, it be needful for they to rest. as for the great journey they be to march, to come where store of maiz be, yet the governor be enforce to depart, present towards quizquiz, a desert of seven day. he travel seven day through a desert. be to march to come where store of maiz be. yet the governor be enforce to depart present towards quizquiz, a desert of seven day. he travel seven day through a desert of many marsh and thick wood, but it may all be travel on horseback, except some lake which they swim over. he come to a town of the province of quizquiz without be descry a town of quizquiz and take all the people in it before they come out of their house. the mother of the cacique be take there and he send unto he by a indian that he shall come to see he and that he will give he his mother and all the people which he have. take there the cacique send he. he by a indian that he shall come to see he and that he will give he his mother and all the people which he have. take there the cacique, send he, answer again that his lordship shall lose and send they to he and that he will come to visit and serve he the governor, because his people, for want of maiz, be somewhat weak and weary and the horse also be lean, determine to accomplish his request to see if he can have peace with he and so command to set free his mother and all the rest and with love word, dismiss they and send they to he. the next day, when the governor expect the cacique, there come many indian with their bow and and all the rest and with love word, dismiss they and send they to he. the next day, when the governor expect the cacique, there come many indian with their bow and arrow with a purpose to set upon the christian. the governor have command all the horseman to be arm and on horseback and in a readiness when the indian see that they be ready, they stay a crossbow shoot from the place where the governor be, near a brook, and after half a hour that they have stand there still there, come to the camp six principal indian and say they come to see what people they be and that long ago, a old prophecy- they have be inform by their forefather that a white people camp six, principal indian, and say they come to see what people they be and that long ago, a old prophecy, they have be inform by their forefather that a white people shall subdue they and that therefore they will return to their cacique and bid he come present to obey and serve the governor. and after they have present he, with six or seven skin and mantle which they bring, they take their leave of he and return with the other which wait for they by the brook side. the cacique never come again, nor send other message. and because in the town where the governor lodge another ^^^ne there be small store of maiz, he remove to another half a league from rio grande, rio grande. send other message and because in the town where the governor lodge another ^^^ne there be small store of maiz, he remove to another half a league from rio grande, rio grande (@) rio de ^^pi^^^ santo, where they find plenty of maiz. and he go to see the river and find that near unto it be great store of timber to make barge and good situation of ground to encamp. in present he remove himself thither, they make house and pitch their camp in a plain field, a crossbow shoot from the river and thither be gather all the maiz of the town which they have late pass. they begin present to cut and hew down timber and to see plank for barge. the indian come present. be gather all the maiz of the town which they have late pass. they begin present to cut and hew down timber and to see plank for barge. the indian come present, down the river, they leap on shore and declare to the governor, a^^^xo () lo^d on the westside of rio, that they be subject of a great lord who name be aquixo, who be lord of many town and govern many people on the other side of the river, and come to tell he, on his behalf, that the next day he with all his man will come to see what it will please he to command. he, the next day, with speed, the cacique, come with two hundred canoe full of indian with their bow. his man will come to see what it will please he to command. he the next day, with speed, the cacique come with two hundred canoe full of indian with their bow and arrow paint. two hundred canoe and with great plume of white feather and many other colour, with shield in their hand wherewith they defend the rower on both side. and the man of war stand from the head to the stern with their bow and arrow in their hand. the canoe wherein the cacique be have a tilt over the stern and he sit under the tilt and so be other canoe of the principal indian and from under the tilt where the chief man sit, he govern and command the other people all join. sit under the tilt and so be other canoe of the principal indian, and from under the tilt where the chief man sit, he govern and command the other people all join together and come within a stone cast of the shore. from thence the cacique say to the governor, which walk along the river side with other that wait on he, that he be come thither to visit, to honour and to obey he, because he know he be the great and mighty lord on the earth. therefore he will see what he will command he to do. the governor yield, he thanks and request he to come on shore. that they may the better communicate together. and without any answer to that point, he send he he to do the governor yield? he thanks and request he to come on shore that they may the better communicate together. and without any answer to that point, he send he three canoe, wherein be great store of fish and loaf love, make of prune, make of the substance of prune like unto brick. after he have receive all he, thank he and pray he again to come on shore and because the cacique purpose be to see if, with dissimulation, he may do some hurt, when they see that the governor and his man be in readiness, they begin to go from the shore and with a great cry, the crossebowman, which be ready, shoot at they and slay five or six of they, they retire. be in readiness. they begin to go from the shore and with a great cry, the crossebowman, which be ready, shoot at they and slay five or six of they. they retire with great order. none do leave his oar though the next to he be slay and shield themselves. they go far off. afterward they come many time and land, and when any of we come towards they, they flee unto their canoe, which be very pleasant to behold, for they be very great and well, make goodly grea^ cano^s and have their tilt, plume, pavese and flag, and with the multitude of people that be in they, they seem to be a fair army of galley in thirty day space, while the governor remain there. four. pavese and flag and with the multitude of people that be in they, they seem to be a fair army of galley in thirty day space, while the governor remain there. four barge make, they make four barge, in, three of which he command twelve horseman to enter in each of they, four in a morning, three hour before day, man which he trust will land in despite of the indian and make sure the passage or die, and some footman be crossebowman, go with they, and rower to set they on the other side. and in the other barge he command john de guzman to pass with the footman which be make captain in stead of francisco maldonado. and because the stream be swift, they go a. in the other barge. he command john de guzman to pass with the footman which be make captain in stead of francisco maldonado, and because the stream be swift, they go a quarter of a league up the river along the bank and cross over, fall down with the stream and land right over against the camp, two stone cast before they come to land the horseman go out of the barge on horseback to a sandy plot, very hard and clear ground where all of they land without any resistance. they pass over rio grande, the river here almost half a league broad, assoon, as those that pass first be on land on the other side the barge, return to the place where the governor be and the river here almost half a league broad. assoon as those that pass first be on land on the other side the barge return to the place where the governor be and within two hour after sunrising all the people be over. the river be almost half a league broad. if a man stand still on the other side it can not be discern whether he be a man or no. the river be of great depth and of a strong current. the water be always muddy. there come down the river continual many tree and timber which the force of the water and stream bring down. there be great store of fish in it of sundry sort, and the most of it differ from the freshwater fish. timber which the force of the water and stream bring down. there be great store of fish in it, of sundry sort, and the most of it differ from the freshwater fish of spain, as hereafter shall be. show chap 23, how the governor depart from aquixo to casqui and from thence to pacaha, and how this country differ from that which we have pass. have pass rio, the governor travel a league and a half and come to a great town of aquixo which be dispeople before he come. thither they espy. thirty indian come over a plain which the cacique send to discover the christian determination and assoon as they have sight of they. they take themselves to flight the horseman, pursue they and slay ten. over a plain which the cacique send to discover the christian determination and assoon. as they have sight of they, they take themselves to flight. the horseman pursue they and slay ten and took^ fifteen. and because the town whither the gove^^^ go be near unto the river, he send a captai^^ith, as many man as he think sufficient to carry (@) barge up the river. and because in his travel by land, many time he go far from the river to compass the creek that come from it, the indian take occasion to set upon they of the barge and put they in great danger because that by reason of the great current they dare not leave the shore and from the bank they shoot at they. they of the barge and put they in great danger because that, by reason of the great current, they dare not leave the shore. and from the bank they shoot at they assoon as the governor be come to the town, a town he present, send crossebowman down the river which come to rescue they. and upon the come of the barge to the town, he command they to be break and to save the iron for other when it shall be needful. he lay there one night and the day follow. he set forward to seek a province call pacaha, which he be inform to be near unto chisca. pacaha, near unto chisca, great town, where the indian tell he there be gold. he pass through great seek a province call pacaha, which he be inform to be near unto chisca, pacaha, near unto chisca, great town where the indian tell he there be gold. he pass through great town of aquixo, which be all abandon for fear of the christian, he understand, by certain indian that be take that three day journey. from thence dwell a great cacique who name be casqui. he come to a small river where a bridge be make by which they pass. that day till sunset they go all in water, which in some place come to the waste and in some to the knee. when they see themselves on dry land they be very glad because they fear they shall wander up and down as forlorn man all. the waste and in some to the knee. when they see themselves on dry land they be very glad because they fear they shall wander up and down as forlorn man all night in the water. the first town of casqui. at noon they come to the first town of casqui. they find the indian, careless because they have no knowledge of they. there be many man and woman take and store of good as mantle and skin. another town as well, in the first town as in another, which stand in a field half a league from thence, in sight of it, whither the horseman run. this country be high dry and more champion than any part border near the river that until then they have see. league from thence in sight of it, whither the horseman run. this country be high dry and more champion than any part border near the river that until then they have see. there be in the field many walnut tree, walnut ^rees with soft shell bear soft shell walnut in fashion like bullet, and in the house they find many of they which the indian have lay up in store. the tree differ in nothing else from those of spain, nor from those which we have see before, but only that they have a small lease. there be many mulberry tree and plum tree, many mulberry tree and plum tree which bear red plum, like those of spain and other gray, somewhat differ, but far better and all. there be many mulberry tree and plum tree, many mulberry tree and plum tree which bear red plum, like those of spain and other gray- somewhat differ but far better. and all the tree be all the year so fruitful as if they be plant in orchard and the wood be very thin. the governor travel two day through the country of casqui before he come to the town where the cacique be, and the most of the way be always by champion ground which be full of great town, many great town, so that from one town you may see two or three. he send a indian to certify the cacique that he be, come to the place where he be with intent to procure his friendship. one town, you may see two or three. he send a indian to certify the cacique that he be come to the place where he be with intent to procure his friendship and to hold he as his brother, whereunto he answer that he shall be welcome and that he will receive he with special good will and accomplish all that his lordship will command he. he send he a present upon the way, to wit skin, mantle and fish. and after these compliment, the governor find all the town as he pass, inhabit with people which, peaceable, attend his, come and offer he skin, mantle and fish. the cacique, accompany with many indian, come out of the town and stay half a league on the way to which, peaceable, attend his come and offer. he skin mantle and fish. the cacique, accompany with many indian, come out of the town and stay half a league on the way to receive the governor. and when he come to he, he speak these word: follow right high, right mighty and renown lord. your lordship be most hearty, welcome, assoon. as i have notice of your lordship, of your power and your perfection, although you come into my country, kill and take captive the inhabitant thereof and my subject, yet i determine to conform my will unto you and as your own, to interpret in good part all that your lordship do believe that it be convenient. it shall be so, for some just respect, to prevent some. unto you and as your own, to interpret in good part all that your lordship do believe that it be convenient. it shall be so for some just respect to prevent some future matter reveal unto your lordship and conceal from i. for well, may a mischief be permit to avoid a great, and that good may come thereof which i believe will so fall out. for it be no reason to presume of so excellent a prince that the nobleness of his heart and the effect of his will will permit he to suffer any unjust thing. my ability be so small to serve you as your lordship deserve that if you respect not my abundant good will which humble offer all kind of service i deserve. unjust thing, my ability be so small to serve you as your lordship deserve, that if you respect not my abundant good will, which humble offer all kind of service, i deserve but little in your presence. but if it be reason that this be esteem, receive the same myself, my country and subject for you, and dispose of i and they at your pleasure. for if i be lord of all the world, with the same good will, shall your lordship by i be, receive, serve and obey the governor. answer he to the purpose and satisfy he in few word within a while, after both of they use word of great offer and courtesy the one to the other and the cacique request he to lodge. and satisfy he in few word. within a while, after both of they use word of great offer and courtesy the one to the other, and the cacique request he to lodge in his house. the governor, to preserve the peace, the better excuse himself, say that he will lodge in the field and because it be very hot, they camp near certain tree a quarter of a league from the town, the chief town (@) c^^ o^ ca^qu^. the cacique go to his town and come again with many indian sing assoon. as they come to the governor, all of they prostrate themselves upon the ground. among these come two indian that be blind. the cacique make a speech to avoid tediousness. i will only tell in. to the governor. all of they prostrate themselves upon the ground. among these come two indian that be blind. the cacique make a speech. to avoid tediousness i will only tell in few word the substance of the matter. he say that see the governor be the son of the sun and a great lord. he beseech he to do he the favour to give sight to those two blind man. the blind man rise up present and very earnest request the same of the governor. he answer that in the high heaven be he that have power to give they health and whatsoever they can ask of he who servant he be, and that this lord make the heaven and the earth and man after his own. have power to give they health and whatsoever they can ask of he who servant he be, and that this lord make the heaven and the earth and man after his own likeness and that he suffer upon the cross to save mankind and rise again the three day, and that he die as he be man and as touch his divinity he be and be immortal, and that he ascend into heaven where he stand with his arm open to receive all such as turn unto he and straightway he. command he to make a very high cross of wood which be set up in the high place of the town. declare unto he that the christian worship the same. in resemblance and memory of that whereon. very high cross of wood which be set up in the high place of the town, declare unto he that the christian worship the same. in resemblance and memory of that whereon christ suffer, the governor and his man kneel down before it and the indian do the like. the governor will he that from thenceforth he shall worship the same and shall ask whatsoever they stand in need of of that lord that he tell he be in heaven. then he ask he how far it be from thence to pacaha. he say one day journey, and that at the end of his country there be a lake like a brook which fall into rio grande, and that he will send man before to make a bridge. journey and that at the end of his country there be a lake like a brook which fall into rio grande, and that he will send man before to make a bridge whereby he may pass, the same day that the governor depart thence, a town belong to casqui, other town^. he lodge at a town belong to casqui and the next day he pass in sight of other town and come to the lake which be half a crossbow, shoot over of a great depth and current. at the time of his come, the indian have make a end of the bridge, which be make of timber, lay one tree after another, and on one side it have a course of stake high than the bridge, for have make a end of the bridge, which be make of timber, lay one tree after another, and on one side it have a course of stake high than the bridge, for they that pass to take hold on the cacique of casqui, come to the governor and bring his people with. he, the governor, send word by a indian to the cacique of pacaha that though he be enemy to the cacique of casqui and though he be there yet, he will do he no disgrace nor hurt if he will attend he peaceable and embrace his friendship, but rather will entreat he as a brother. the indian which the governor send, come again and say that the cacique make none account of that which he tell. embrace his friendship but rather will entreat, he as a brother, the indian which the governor send, come again and say that the cacique make none account of that which he tell he but flee with all his man, out at the other side of the town, present the governor enter and run before with the horseman, that way by which the indian flee, and at another town, distant a quarter of a league from thence, another town, they take many indian and assoon, as the horseman have. take they, they deliver they to the indian of casqui who, because they be their enemy, with much circumspection and rejoice they bring to the town where the christian be and the great grief they have be this that they. of casqui who, because they be their enemy, with much circumspection and rejoice they bring to the town where the christian be, and the great grief they have be this that they can not get leave to kill. they there be find in the town many mantle, mantle, deer skin, l of we skin, ^eares skin and ca s skin and dear skin, lion skin and bear skin and many cat skin. many come so far poor apparel and there they clothe themselves. of the mantle they make they coat and cassock, and some make gown and line they with cat skin and likewise their cassock. of the deer skin some make they also jerkin shirt, hose and shoe, and of the bear skin they make they very. and line they with cat skin and likewise their cassock of the deer skin. some make they also jerkin shirt, hose and shoe- and of the bear skin. they make they very good cloak, for no water can pierce they. there be target of raw ox hide. find there target of raw ox hide, with which hide they arm their horse. chap 24: how the cacique of pacaha come peaceable to the governor and the cacique of casqui, absent himself, and come again to make his excuse, and how the governor make they both friend. upon wednesday, the 19 of june, the governor enter into pacaha. pacaha, a very great town beset with tower. he lodge in the town where the cacique use to reside, which be very wednesday, the 19 of june, the governor enter into pacaha. pacaha, a very great town beset with tower. he lodge in the town where the cacique use to reside, which be very great wall and beset with tower and many loopehole. be in the tower and wall and in the town be great store of old maiz and great quantity of new. in the field within a league and half a league be great town, all wall where the governor be lodge. great wall ^ownes be a great lake that come near unto the wall and it enter into a ditch that go round about the town. want but a little to environ it round from the lake to the great river. be make a wear by the. it enter into a ditch that go round about the town, want but a little to environ it round from the lake to the great river be make a wear by the which the fish come into it, which the cacique keep for his recreation and sport with net, net find that be find in the town. they take as much as they will and take they never so much. there be no want perceive there be also great store of fish in many other lake that be thereabouts, but it be soft and not so good as that which come from the river and the most of it be different from the fresh water fish of spain, the diverse sort of excellent fish in rio grande there. good as that which come from the river and the most of it be different from the fresh water fish of spain, the diverse sort of excellent fish. in rio grande there be a fish which they call bagres, the three part of it be head and it have on both side the gills and along the side great prick like very sharp awl. those of this kind that be in the lake be as big as pike and in the river there be some of a hundred and of a hundred and fifty pound weight and many of they be take with the hook. there be another fish like barbille and another like bream head, like a delicate fish call in spain between red and gray this. and many of they be take with the hook. there be another fish like barbille and another like bream head, like a delicate fish call in spain, between red and gray. this be there of most esteem. there be another fish call a peel fish. it have a snout of a cubit long and at the end of the upper lip it be make like a peel. there be another fish like a western shed and all of they have scale except the bagre and the peel fish. there be another fish which sometime the indian bring we of the bigness of a hog. they call it the fish. it have row of tooth. beneath and above the cacique of casqui send many time great present of fish. bring we of the bigness of a hog. they call it the fish. it have row of tooth beneath and above the cacique of casqui, send many time great present of fish, mantle and skin. he tell the governor that he will deliver the cacique of pacaha into his hand. he go to casqui and send many canoe up the river and come himself by land with many of his people. the governor, with 40. horseman and 60. footman, take he along with he up the river and his indian, which be in the canoe, discover where the cacique of pacaha be, in a little island situate between two arm of the river, and five christian enter into a canoe wherein don antonio osorio go before to see. where the cacique of pacaha be, in a little island situate between two arm of the river and five christian enter into a canoe wherein don antonio osorio go before to see what people the cacique have with he there be in the isle five or six thousand soul, five or six thousand indian and assoon as they see, they suppose that the indian which be in the other canoe be also christian. the cacique and certain which be in three canoe which they have there with they flee in great haste to the other side of the river. the rest, with great fear and danger, leap into the river where much people be drown, especial woman and little child present, the governor which be on land not of the river. the rest, with great fear and danger, leap into the river where much people be drown, especial woman and little child, present the governor, which be on land, not know what have happen to don antonio and those that go with. he command the christian with all speed to enter with the indian of casqui in the canoe, which be quick, with don antonio, in the little island where they take many man and woman and much good, great store of good which the indian have lay upon hurdle of cane and raft of timber to carry over to the other side. drive down the river wherewith the indian of casqui fill their canoe and, for fear lest the christian will take it from they. of timber to carry over to the other side, drive down the river, wherewith the indian of casqui fill their canoe and, for fear lest the christian will take it from they, the cacique, go home with they down the river without take his leave of the governor, whereupon the governor be high offend with he and present return to pacaha. he overrun the country of casqui, the space of two league, where he take twenty or thirty of his man, and because his horse be weary and he want time that day to go any far, he return to pacaha with determination, within three or four, day after to invade casqui and present, he let loose one of the indian of pacaha and send word by he. far. he return to pacaha with determination, within three or four day after, to invade casqui and present he let loose one of the indian of pacaha and send word by he to the cacique that if he will have his friendship he shall repair unto he and that both of they will make war upon casqui and present come many indian that belong to pacaha and bring a indian in stead of the cacique, which be discover by the cacique brother, which be take prisoner. the governor wish the indian that their master himself shall come- for he know very well that that be not he- and tell they that they can do nothing which he know not. before they think it, the cacique o^ pa a^^. come, for he know very well that that be not he, and tell they that they can do nothing, which he know not. before they think it, the cacique o^ pa a^^, c^^meth to the gover^^^^. the next day the cacique come, accompany with many indian and with a present of much fish, skin and mantle. he make a speech that all be glad to hear and conclude say that though his lordship, without his give occasion of offence have do he hurt in his country and subject, yet he will not therefore refuse to be he and that he will always be at his commandment. the governor command his brother to be loose and other principal indian that be take prisoner. that day come a indian from. he and that he will always be at his commandment. the governor command his brother to be loose and other principal indian that be take prisoner. that day come a indian from the cacique of casqui and say that his lord will come the next day to excuse himself of the error which he have commit in go away without licence of the governor. the governor will the messenger to signify unto he that if he come not in his own person, he will seek he himself and give he such punishment as he deserve. the next day, with all speed, come the cacique of casqui and bring a present to the governor of many mantle skin and fish and give he a daughter of he say that next day, with all speed come the cacique of casqui and bring a present to the governor of many mantle skin and fish and give he a daughter of. he say that he great desire to match his blood with the blood of so great a lord as he be, and therefore he bring he his daughter and desire he to take she to his wife. he make a long and discreet oration, give he great commendation and conclude, say that he shall pardon his go away without licence for that cross sake which he have leave with. he protest that he go away for shame of that which his man have do without his consent. the governor answer he that he have choose a good patron and leave with. he protest that he go away for shame of that which his man have do without his consent. the governor answer he that he have choose a good patron and that if he have not come to excuse himself, he have determine to seek he to burn his town, to kill he and his people and to destroy his country. to which he reply: say, my lord, i and i be you and my country likewise be you. therefore, if you have do so, you shall have destroy your own country and have kill your own people. whatsoever shall come unto i from your hand, i will receive, as from my lord aswell, punishment as reward, and know you that the favour which you do i your own people, whatsoever shall come unto i from your hand, i will receive, as from my lord aswell, punishment as reward, and know you that the favour which you do i in leave i the cross, i do acknowledge the same to be a very great one, and great than i have ever deserve. for you shall understand that with great drought, the field of maiz of my country be wither and assoon as i and my people kneel before the cross and pray for rain present our necessity be. relieve the governor, make he and the cacique of pacaha friend and set they with he at his table to dine with. he and the cacique fall at variance about the seat which of they shall sit. and the cacique of pacaha friend and set they with he at his table to dine with he, and the cacique fall at variance about the seat which of they shall sit on his right hand. the governor pacify. they, tell they that among the christian all be one to sit on the one side or on the other. will they so to behave themselves? see they be with he that no body may hear they and that every one shall sit in the place that first he light on. from thence he send thirty horseman and fifty footman to the province of caluca to see if from thence he may travel to chisca, gold and copper in chisca, where the indian say there be a work of. and fifty footman to the province of caluca to see if from thence he may travel to chisca, gold and copper. in chisca, where the indian say there be a work of gold and copper, they travel seven day journey through a desert and return very weary, eat green plum and stalk of maiz which they find in a poor town of six or seven house, a poor town, great store of ox. towards the north of pacaha, this be like quiu^ra. from thence forward, towards the north, the indian say that the country be very ill inhabit because it be very cold and that there be such store of ox that they can keep no corn for they, that the indian live upon their flesh. the governor. ill inhabit because it be very cold and that there be such store of ox that they can keep no corn for they that the indian live upon their flesh. the governor see that towards that part the country be so poor of maiz that in it they can not be sustain demand of the indian which way it be most inhabit, and they say they have notice of a great province and a very plentiful country which be call quigaute and that it be towards the south. chap 25, how the governor depart from pacaha to quigaute and to coligoa and come to cayas. the governor rest in pacaha forty day, in all which time the two cacique serve, he with great store of fish, mantle and to quigaute and to coligoa and come to cayas. the governor rest in pacaha forty day in all which time the two cacique serve he with great store of fish, mantle and skin and strive, who shall do he great service at the time of his departure, the cacique of pacaha give he two of his sister. say that in sign of love that he may remember he. he shall take they for his wife. the one name be macanoche and the other mochila. they be well proportion, tall of body and well flesh. macanoche be of a good countenance and in her shape and physiognomy look like a lady. the other be strong. make the cacique of casqui, command the bridge to be repair and the governor of a good countenance and in her shape and physiognomy, look like a lady. the other be strong, make the cacique of casqui, command the bridge to be repair and the governor return through his country, the c^^ que (@), and lodge in the field near his town, whither he come with great store of fish and two woman which he exchange with two christian for two shirt. he give we a guide and man for carriage. the governor lodge at a town of he, a town of casqui, and the next day at another near a river, whither he cause canoe to be bring for he to pass over another town and, with his leave return, the governor take his journey towards quigaute, the four day of. a river whither he cause canoe to be bring for he to pass over another town and, with his leave, return the governor take his journey towards quigaute, the four day of august. the four of august he come to the town where the cacique use to keep his residency. on the way, he send he a present of many mantle and skin and not dare to stay, for he in the town, he absent himself. the great town, see in florida the town be the great, that be. see in florida. the governor and his people lodge in the one half of it and within few day see the indian become liar. he command the other half to be burn because it shall not be a shelter. people lodge in the one half of it and within few day see the indian become liar. he command the other half to be burn because it shall not be a shelter for they if they come to assault he by night, nor a hindrance to his horseman for the resist of they. there come a indian very well, accompany with many indian, say that he be the cacique he deliver he over to the man of his guard to look unto he. there go and come many indian and bring mantle and skin. the counterfeit cacique see so little opportunity to execute his evil thought as he go one day abroad. talk with the governor. he show he such a pair of heel that there be no cacique see so little opportunity to execute his evil thought as he go one day abroad. talk with the governor, he show he such a pair of heel that there be no christian that can overtake he and he leap into the river, which be a crossbow, shoot from the town and assoon as he be on the other side. many indian that be thereabouts make a great cry, begin to shoot the governor, pass present over to they with horseman and footman, but they dare not tarry for he go forward on his way. he come to a town, a town where the people be flee and a little further to a lake where the horse can not pass and on the otherside be many woman, the come to a town, a town where the people be flee and a little further to a lake where the horse can not pass and on the otherside be many woman. the footman pass and take many of they and much spoil. the governor come to the camp and that night be a spy of the indian, take by they of the watch. the governor ask he whether he will bring he where the cacique be. he say he will and he go present to seek he with twenty horseman and fifty footman. and after he have seek he a day and a half, he find he in a strong wood and a soldier not know. he give he a wound on the head and he cry out. have seek he a day and a half. he find he in a strong wood and a soldier not know. he give he a wound on the head and he cry out that he shall not kill. he say that he be the cacique, so he be take and a hundred and forty of his man with he. the governor, come again to quigaute and will he to cause his man to come to serve the christian and stay some day for their come and see. they come not. he send two captain, every one his way on both side of the river with horseman and footman. they take many man and woman. now see the hurt which they sustain for their rebellion. they come to see what. way on both side of the river with horseman and footman they take many man and woman. now see the hurt which they sustain for their rebellion. they come to see what the governor will command they and pass to and fro many time and bring present of cloth, cloth and fish. the cacique and his two wife be in the lodging of the governor loose and the halberdier of his guard do keep they. the governor ask they which way the country be most inhabit. they say that towards the south, down the river, be great town and cacique which command great country, col^^oa n^^^e to cert^^ne mountain northwest and much people, and that towards the northwest there be a province near to certain mountain that be. great town and cacique, which command great country, col^^oa, n^^^e to cert^^ne mountain, northwest and much people, and that towards the northwest there be a province near to certain mountain that be call coligoa. the governor and all the rest think good to go first to coligoa, say that peradventure the mountain will make some difference of soil and that beyond they there may be some gold or silver. as for quigaute, casqui and pacaha, they be plain country, fat ground and full of good meadow. on the river where the indian sow large field of maiz. from tascaluca to rio or the great river be about 300. league it be a very low country and have many lake. from pacaha to quigaute may be a hundred league. maiz from tascaluca to rio or the great river be about 300.. league it be a very low country and have many lake, from pacaha to quigaute may be a hundred. league the governor leave the cacique of in his own town and a indian which be his guide, lead he through great wood without any way, seven day journey through a desert where at every lodging they lodge in lake and pool in very shall water there be such store of fish that they kill they with cudgil, a new way to take fish, and the indian which they carry in chain with the mud, trouble the water and the fish be therewith as it be astonish, come to the top of the water and they take. the indian which they carry in chain with the mud, trouble, the water and the fish- be therewith as it be astonish- come to the top of the water and they take as much as they list. the indian of coligoa coligoa have no knowledge of the christian and when they come so near the town that the indian see they, they flee up a river, a river which pass near the town, and some leap into it. but the christian go on both side of the river and take they. there be many man and woman take and the cacique with they. and by his commandment, within three day come many indian with a present of mantle and deer skin and two ox hide. two ox hide. woman take and the cacique with they, and by his commandment, within three day come many indian with a present of mantle and deer skin and two ox hide, two ox hide, store of ox towards the north and they report that 5. or 6. league from thence towards the north there be many of these ox and that because the country be cold, it be evil inhabit, that the best country, which they know the most plentiful and most inhabit be a province call cayas. lie towards the south: ^^^m. qui^^^^e to coli^^^ (@) 40. league from quiguate to coligoa may be 40. league. this town of coligoa stand at the foot of a hill on the bank of a mean river of the bigness of cayas. league from quiguate to coligoa may be 40. league. this town of coligoa stand at the foot of a hill, on the bank of a mean river of the bigness of cayas, the river that pass by estremadura. it be a fat soil and so plentiful of maiz that they cast out the old to bring in the new. there be also great plenty of french bean and pompion. the french bean be great and better than those of spain, and likewise the pompion and be roast they have almost the taste of chestnut. the cacique of coligoa give a guide to cayas and stay behind in his own town. we travel five day and come to the province of palisema. the province of palisema, the house of. of coligoa, give a guide to cayas and stay behind in his own town. we travel five day and come to the province of palisema. the province of palisema, the house of the cacique be find. cover with deer skin of diverse colour and work. draw in they, and with the same, in manner of carpet, be the ground of the house. cover the cacique, leave it so that the governor may lodge in it in token that he seek peace and his friendship. but he dare not tarry his come. the governor see he have absent himself, send a captain with horseman and footman to seek he. he find much people but by reason of the roughness of the country he take none save a few woman. absent himself, send a captain with horseman and footman to seek he. he find much people but by reason of the roughness of the country he take none save a few woman and child. the town be little and scatter and have very little maiz, for which cause the governor speedy depart from thence. he come to another town call tatalicoya (@) (@). he carry with he the cacique thereof which guide he to cayas from tatalicoya, be four day journey to cayas. when he come to caya^ c^^as and see the town scatter, he think they have tell he a lie and that it be not the province of cayas because they have inform he that it be well inhabit. he threaten the cacique charge he to. they have tell he a lie and that it be not the province of cayas because they have inform he that it be well inhabit. he threaten the cacique charge he to tell he where he be and he and other indian which be take near about that place, affirm that this be the town of cayas and the best that be in that country and that though the house be distant the one from the other, yet the ground that be inhabit be great and that there be great store of people and many field of maiz. this town be call tanico tanico. he pitch his camp in the best part of it, near unto a river. the same day that the governor come thither he go. of maiz. this town be call tanico tanico. he pitch his camp in the best part of it, near unto a river. the same day that the governor come thither, he go a league far with certain horseman and without find any people, he find many skin in a pathway which the cacique have leave there that they may be find in token of peace, for so be the custom in that country. chap 26, how the governor discover the province of tulla and what happen unto he, the governor, rest a month in the province of cayas, in which time the horse fatten and thrive more then in other place in a long time, with the great plenty of maiz and the leave thereof which i think. of cayas, in which time the horse fatten and thrive more. then in other place, in a long time, with the great plenty of maiz and the leave thereof, which i think be the best that have be see, and they drink of a lake of very hot water and somewhat brackish, a lake of hot and somewhat brackish water. store of salt make at cayas, and they drink so much that it swell in their belly when they bring they from the water. until that time the christian want salt and there they make good store which they carry along with they. the indian do carry it to other place to exchange it for skin and mantle. they make it along the river which, when it ebb, store which they carry along with they, the indian do carry it to other place to exchange it for skin and mantle. they make it along the river which, when it ebb, leave it upon the upper part of the sand and because they can make it without much sand mingle with it. they throw it into certain basket which they have for that purpose, broad at the mouth and narrow at the bottom, and set it in the air upon a bar and throw water into it and set a small vessel under it wherein it fall, be strain and set to boil upon the fire. when the water be sod away, the salt remain in the bottom of the pan on both side of the river. it fall, be strain and set to boil upon the fire. when the water be sod away, the salt remain in the bottom of the pan. on both side of the river the country be full of sow field and there be store of maiz. the indian dare not come over where we be, and when some of they show themselves, the soldier that see, they, call unto they. then the indian pass the river and come with they where the governor be. he ask they for the cacique. they say that he remain quiet but that he dare not show himself. the governor present. send he word that he shall come unto he and bring he a guide and a interpreter for his journey, if he make that he dare not show himself, the governor present send he word that he shall come unto he and bring he a guide and a interpreter for his journey. if he make account of his friendship, and if he do not, so he will come himself to seek he and that it will be the worse for he. he wait three day and see he come not. he go to seek he and bring he prisoner with 150. of his man. he ask he whether he have notice of any great cacique and which way the country be best inhabit. he answer that the best country thereabouts be a province towards the south, a day and a half journey, which be call tulla, and that he can give. country be best inhabit. he answer that the best country thereabouts be a province towards the south, a day and a half journey, which be call tulla, and that he can give he a guide, but no interpreter, because the speech of that country be different from he and because he and his ancestor have always war with the lord of that province. therefore they have no commerce nor understand one another language. immediate the governor, with certain horseman and 50. footman, depart towards tulla to see if the country be such as he may pass through it with all his company and assoon. as he arrive there, tulla and be espy of the indian, the country gather together and assoon as 15. and 20. indian can assemble. through it with all his company and assoon. as he arrive there, tulla and be espy of the indian. the country gather together and assoon as 15. and 20. indian can assemble themselves. they set upon the christian and see that they do handle they shrewd and that the horseman overtake they. when they flee they get up into the top of their house and seek to defend themselves with their arrow and be beat down. from one they get up upon another and while our man pursue some other, set upon they another way. thus the skirmish last so long that the horse be tire and they can not make they run. the indian kill there one horse and some be hurt. there be 15. indian slay. the skirmish last so long that the horse be tire and they can not make they run. the indian kill there one horse and some be hurt. there be 15. indian slay there and 40. woman and boy be take prisoner for whatsoever indian do shoot at they. if they can come by he they put he to the sword. the governor determine to return towards cayas before the indian have time to gather a head and present that evening. go part of the night to leave tulla. he lodge, by the way, and the next day come to cayas. the governor come again to tulla with all his company and within three day after he depart thence towards tulla with all his company, he carry the cacique. day come to cayas, the governor come again to tulla with all his company and within three day after he depart thence towards tulla with all his company, he carry the cacique along with he, and among all his man there be not one find that can understand the speech of tulla. he stay three day, by the way, and the day that he come thither he find the town abandon, for the indian dare not tarry his come, but assoon as they know that the governor be in tulla the first night about the morning watch. they come in two squadron, two several way, with their bow and arrow and long staff, like pike, assoon as they be, descry both horse and foot, sally out upon they. watch. they come in two squadron, two several way, with their bow and arrow and long staff like pike, assoon as they be descry, both horse and foot sally out upon they, where many of the indian be slay and some christian and horse be hurt. some of the indian be take prisoner, whereof the governor send six to the cacique indian, have their right hand and nose cut off, with their right hand and nose cut off, and send he word that if he come not to he to excuse and submit himself that he will come to seek he and that he will do the like to he and as many of he as he can find, as he have do to those which he have. will come to seek he and that he will do the like to he and as many of he as he can find, as he have do to those which he have, send he and give he three day respite for to come. and this he give they to understand by sign as well as he can for there be no interpreter. at the three day end there come a indian lade with ox hide, ox hide. he come, weep with great sob and come to the governor, cast himself down at his foot. he take he up and he make a speech but there be none that understand. he the governor by sign, command he to return to the cacique and to will he to send he. he up and he make a speech but there be none that understand he the governor, by sign command he to return to the cacique and to will he to send he a interpreter which can understand the man of cayas. the next day come three indian lade with ox hide, ox hide, and within three day after come 20.. indian, and among they one that understand they of cayas who, after a long oration of excuse of the cacique and praise of the governor, conclude with this that he and the other be come thither on the cacique behalf to see what his lordship will command he to do. for he be ready at his commandment the governor and all his company be very glad for in. on the cacique behalf to see what his lordship will command he to do for he be ready at his commandment. the governor and all his company be very glad, for in no wise can they travel without a interpreter. the governor command he to be keep safe and bid he tell the man that come with he that they shall return to the cacique and signify unto he that he pardon he for that which be past and thank he much for his present and interpreter which he have send he and that he will be glad to see he and that he shall come the next day to talk with he. after three day the cacique come the cacique of tulla and 80. indian with he. be glad to see he and that he shall come the next day to talk with he. after three day the cacique come, the cacique of tulla, and 80. indian with he, and himself and his man come, weep into the camp in token of obedience and repentance for the error pass. after the manner of that country many ox hide with wool on they as oft as sheep wool. comara h, stor gener, cap 2^5. many ox toward the north. he bring a present of many ox hide which, because the country be cold, be very profitable and serve for coverlet because they be very soft and woll like sheep. not far from thence towards the north be many ox. the christian see they not, nor come. very profitable and serve for coverlet because they be very soft and woll like sheep. not far from thence towards the north, be many ox- the christian see they not, nor come into the country where they be because those part be evil inhabit and have small store of maiz where they be breed. the cacique of tulla make a oration to the governor wherein he excuse himself and offer he his country, subject and person. aswell this cacique as the other t^e great eloquence o^ the ^^dians and all those which come to the governor on their behalf deliver their message or speech in so good order that no orator can utter the same more eloquent. chap 27: how the governor go from tulla to where he. on their behalf, deliver their message or speech in so good order that no orator can utter the same more eloquent. chap 27: how the governor go from tulla to where he pass the winter. the governor inform himself of all the country round about and understand that towards the west be a scatter dwelling and that towards the southeast be great town, especial in a province call ten day journey from tulla, which may be about 80. league, and that it be a plentiful country of maiz. and because winter come on and that they can not travel two or three month in the year for cold, a winter of tw^ or tree month, water and snow, and fear that if they shall stay so long in. can not travel two or three month in the year for cold, a winter of tw^ or tree month, water and snow, and fear that if they shall stay so long in the scatter dwelling they can not be sustain. and also because the indian say that near to be a great water and according to their relation the governor think it be some arm of the sea. and b^cause he now desire to send news of himself to cuba that some supply of man and horse may be send unto he, for it be above three year since donna isabella, which be in havana, or any other person in chr^stendome have hear of he and by this time he have lose 250. man and 150. horse. he. three year since donna isabella, which be in havana, or any other person in chr^stendome have hear of he, and by this time he have lose 250. man and 150. horse. he determine to winter in and the next spring to go to the sea cost and make two brigantine and send one of they to cuba and the other to nueva espanna, that that which go in safety may give news of he h^ping with the good which he have in cuba to furnish himself again and to attempt the discovery and conquest towards the west, for he have not yet come where cabeca de vaca have be. thus, have send away the two cacique of cayas and tulla, he take his journey towards quipana. five day. west, for he have not yet come where cabeca de vaca have be. thus, have send away the two cacique of cayas and tulla, he take his journey towards quipana, five day ^u^^^e from tul^a ^ee travel five day over very rough mountain and come to a town call quipana, where no indian can betake for the roughness of the country and the town be between hill there be a ambush lay wherewith they take two indian which tell they that be six day journey from thence and that there be another province towards the south, eight day journey off, plentiful of maiz and very well people^, which be call guahate, guahate. but because be near and the most of the indian agree of it, the governor make eight day journey off, plentiful of maiz and very well people^, which be call guahate guahate. but because be near and the most of the indian agree of it, the governor make his journey that way. in three day he come to a town call anoixi. he send a captain before with 30. horseman and 50. footman and take the indian careless. he take many man and woman prisoner. within two day after the governor come to another town call catamaya catamaya and lodge in the field of the town, two indian come with a false message from the cacique. to know his determination, he bid they tell their lord that he shall come and speak with he. the indian return and come, no more, nor any other. message from the cacique to know his determination. he bid they tell their lord that he shall come and speak with he. the indian return and come, no more. nor any other message from the cacique. the next day the christian go to the town which be without people. they take as much maiz as they need. that day they lodge in a wood. and the next day they come to si^e^ (@) ournie from qui^ana. they find much maiz lay up in store and ^r^nch bean and walnut and prune great store of all sort. they take some indian which be gather together the stuff which their wine have ^idden. this be a champion country and well inhabit. the governor lodge in the best part of the. they take some indian which be gather together the stuff which their wine have ^idden. this be a champion country and well inhabit. the governor lodge in the best part of the town and command present to make a fence of timber round about the camp, distant from the house, that the indian may not hurt they without by fire, and measure the ground by pace. he appoint every one his part to do according to the number of indian which he have present. the timber be bring by they and in three day there be a enclosure make of very high and thick post thrust into the ground and many rail lay across hard by this town, pass a river, a (@) that come out of the a enclosure make of very high and thick post thrust into the ground and many rail lay across. hard by this town pass a river, a (@) that come out of the province of and above and beneath it be. very well, people thither come indian on the cacique behalf with a present of mantle and skin and a halt cacique subject to the lord of lord of a town call tietiquaquo. tietiquaquo come many time to visit the governor and to bring he present of such as he have the cacique of send to know of the governor how long time he mean to stay in his country and understand that he mean to stay above three day. he never send any more indian, nor any other. of the governor how long time he mean to stay in his country and understand that he mean to stay above three day. he never send any more indian nor any other message but conspire with the lame cacique to rebel. diverse inroad be make wherein there be many man and woman take, and the lame cacique among the rest. the governor respect the service which he have receive of he reprehend and admonish he and set he at liberty and give he two indian to carry he in a chair upon their shoulder. the cacique of desire to thrust the governor out of his country, set, spy over he and a indian. come one night to the gate of the enclosure a soldier that watch espy he. of desire to thrust the governor out of his country, set spy over he and a indian. come one night to the gate of the enclosure- a soldier that watch espy he- and step behind the gate as he come in. he give he such a thrust that he fall down, and so he carry he to the governor and as he ask he wherefore he come, not be able to speak, he fall down dead the night. follow the governor, command a soldier to give the alarm great providence and to say that he have see indian to see how ready they will be to answer the alarm. and he do so sometime as well, there as in other place, when he think that his man be. see indian to see how ready they will be to answer the alarm. and he do so sometime as well, there as in other place, when he think that his man be careless and reprehend such as be slack, and as well for this cause as in regard of do their duty, when the alarm be give, every one seek to be the first that shall answer. they stay in three month with great plenty of maiz, french bean, walnut, prune and coney. three month abode in which, until that time, they know not how to catch and in the indian, teach they how to take, they which be with great sprindge, which lift up their foot from the ground and the snare be make with a strong. catch and in the indian teach they how to take they which be with great sprindge, which lift up their foot from the ground and the snare be make with a strong string, whereunto be fasten a knot of a cane which run close about the neck of the coney because they shall not gnaw the string. they take many in the field of maiz, especial when it freeze or snow, frost and snow. a month of snow, the christian stay there one whole month so enclose with snow that they go not out of the town. and when they want firewood the governor with his horseman go and come many time to the wood which be two crossbow shoot from the towme make a pathway whereby the town and when they want firewood, the governor with his horseman go and come many time to the wood which be two crossbow, shoot from the towme make a pathway whereby the footman go for wood. in this mean space, some indian which go loose kill many coney with their give and with arrow. these coney be of two sort, coney of two sort. some be like those of spain and the other of the same colour and fashion and as big as great hare, long and have great loin. chap 28, how the governor go from to nilco and from thence to guacoya upon monday the six of march 1542, march 6. 1542.. the governor depart from to seek nilco, which the indian say be near the. from to nilco and from thence to guacoya, upon monday, the six of march 1542, march 6. 1542.. the governor depart from to seek nilco, which the indian say be near the great river, with determination to come to the sea and procure some succour of man and horse. for he have now but three hundred man of war and forty horse, and some of they lame, which do nothing but help to make up the number. and for want of iron, they have go above a year unshod. and because they be use to it in the plain country, t^e death of jo^n o^ti^ an^ the great (@). he be he interpreter. it do they no great harm. john ortiz di^d, in which grieve the governor very. in the plain country t^e death of jo^n o^ti^ an^ the great (@). he be he interpreter. it do they no great harm john ortiz di^d, in which grieve the governor very much because t^at without a interpreter he fear to enter far into the land where he may be lose, from thence forward a youth that be take in, do serve for interpreter which have, by that t^me learn somewhat of the christian language. the death of john ortiz be so great a mischief for the discover inward or go out of the land that to learn of the indian that which in four word he de^l^red, they need a whole day with the youth. and most common, he understand, quite contrary, that w^ich be, ask he. to learn of the indian that which, in four word, he de^l^red. they need a whole day with the youth and most common, he understand, quite contrary that w^ich be, ask he, whereby it often happen^^ that the way that they go one day and sometime two or three day, they turn back and go astray through the wood. here and there the governor spend ten day in travel from to a province call ayays ayays, a river, and come to a town that stand near the river, that pass by cayas, and there he command a barge to be make wherewith he pass the river. when he have pass the river, there fall out such weather that four day he can not travel for snow, great snow. a barge to be make wherewith he pass the river. when he have pass the river, there fall out such weather that four day he can not travel for snow, great snow about the twentieth of march, assoon as it give over snow, he go three day journey through a wilderness and a country so low and so full of lake and evil way that he travel one time a whole day in water, sometime knee deep, sometime to the stirrup and sometime they swim. he come to a town call tutelpinco, abandon and without maiz. tutelpinco, there pass by it a lake that enter into the river, a great lake which carry a great stream and force of water. five christian pass over it in a which. tutelpinco. there pass by it a lake that enter into the river, a great lake which carry a great stream and force of water. five christian pass over it in a which the governor have send with a captain. the overset, some take hold on it, some on the tree that be in the lake, one, francis sebastian, a honest man of villa barca rota, be drown there. the governor go a whole day along the lake, seek passage and can find none, nor any way that do pass to the other side. come again at night to the town, he find two peaceable indian which show he the passage and which way he be to go there. they make of cane and of the timber of house. night to the town he find two peaceable indian which show he the passage and which way he be to go there. they make of cane and of the timber of house thatch with cane, raft wherewith they pass the lake, raft wherewith they pass the lake. they travel three day and come to a town of the territory of nilco call tianto, tianto th^re. they take thirty indian and among they two principal man of this town. the governor, send a captain with horseman and footman before to nilco, because the indian may have no time to carry away the provision. they pass through three or four great town, three or ^^u^e great ^^^^es, and in the town where the cacique be resident, which be two league. time to carry away the provision, they pass through three or four great town, three or ^^u^e great ^^^^es, and in the town where the cacique be resident, which be two league from the place where the governor remain, they find many indian with their bow and arrow, in manner as though they will have stay to fight, which do compass the town and assoon as they see the christian come near they. without misdoubt, they they set the cacique house on fire and flee over a lake that pass near the town, through which the horse can not pass. the next day be wednesday, the 29. of march, march 29. the governor come to nilco, nilco, he lodge with all his man in the cacique town, which horse can not pass. the next day be wednesday, the 29. of march, march 29.. the governor come to nilco. nilco, he lodge with all his man in the cacique town, which stand in a plain field, which be inhabit for the space of a quarter of a league and within a league and half a league be other very great town, v^rie, great town, wherein be great store of maiz, of french bean, of walnut and prune. this be the best inhabit country, the be^t country of fl^rida that be see in florida, and have most store of maiz except coca and apalache. there come to the camp a indian, accompany with other, and in the cacique name, give the governor a mantle of marterns, skin m^r^erns. most store of maiz, except coca and apalache there. come to the camp a indian, accompany with other, and in the cacique name, give the governor a mantle of marterns skin, m^r^erns skin, a cordon of pearl, and a cordon of pearl the governor, give he a few small margarite, which be certain bead much esteem in peru, and other thing wherewith he be very well content. he promise to return within two day but never come again. but on the contrary, the indian come by night in canoe and carry away all the maiz they can and make. they cabin on the other side of the river in the thick of the wood because they may flee if we shall go to seek they, the governor, see. can and make they cabin on the other side of the river in the thick of the wood because they may flee if we shall go to seek they. the governor, see he come not at the time, appoint, command a ambush to be lay about certain storehouse near the lake whither the indian come for maiz, where they take two indian who tell the governor that he which come to visit he be not the cacique but be send by he under pretence to spy whether the christian be careless and whether they determine to settle in that country or to go forward. present the governor send a captain with footman and horseman over the river and in their passage they be descry of the indian and settle in that country or to go forward present the governor send a captain with footman and horseman over the river and in their passage they be descry of the indian, and therefore he can take but ten or twelve man and woman with who he return to the camp. this river which pass by nilco, be that which pass by cayas and and fall into rio, a river fall into rio, or the great river which pass by pachaha and aquixo, near unto the province of guachoya, and the lord thereof come up the river in canoe to make war with he of nilco. on his behalf, there come a indian to the governor and say unto he that he be his servant and pray he so. in canoe to make war with he of nilco on his behalf. there come a indian to the governor and say unto he that he be his servant and pray he so to hold he and that within two day he will come to kiss his lordship hand. and at the time appoint he come with some of his principal indian which accompany he, and with word of great offer and courtesy he give the governor a present of many mantle and deer skin. the governor give he some other thing in recompense and honour he much. he ask he what town ther^ be down the river. he answer that he know none other but his own, and on the other side of the river a province of. much. he ask he what town ther^ be down the river. he answer that he know none other but his own, and on the other side of the river a province of a cacique call quigalia. so he take his leave of the governor and go to his own town. within few day the governor determine to go to guachoya to learn there whether the sea be near or whether there be any habitation near where he may relieve his company while the brigantine be make which he mean to send to the land of the chris^i^^^. as he pass the river of nilco, there come in c^^^es indian of guachoya up the stream and when they see ^im suppose that he come to seek they to do. chris^i^^^. as he pass the river of nilco there come in c^^^es, indian of guachoya, up the stream and when they see ^im suppose that he come to seek they to do they some hurt. they return down the river and inform the cacique thereof who, with all his people, spoil the town of all that they can carry away, pass that night over to the other side of rio, gr^nde or the great river. the governor send a captain with fifty man in six canoe down the river and go himself by land. with the rest he come to guachoya, g^^choya, upon sunday, the 17. of april. he lodge in the town of the cacique, which be enclose about and seat a crossbow shoot, distant from the rest. he come to guachoya, g^^choya, upon sunday, the 17. of april. he lodge in the town of the cacique, which be enclose about and seat a crossbow shoot distant from the river. here the river be call tamaliscu ^^^e na^^s (@) rio, and in nilco, and in coca mico and in the port or mouth ri. chap 29 of the message which the governor send to quigalta and of the answer which he return and of the thing which happen in this time assoon: as the governor come to guachoya, he send john danusco with as many man as can go in the canoe up the river, for when they come down from nilco they see on the other side the river new cabin ^^de john danusco. as many man as can go in the canoe up the river. for when they come down from nilco they see on the other side the river, new cabin, ^^de, john danusco. go and bring the canoe load with maiz, french bean, prune, and many loaf make of the substance of prune, many loaf make of prune. that day come a indian to the governor from the cacique of guachoya and say that his lord will come the next day. the next day they see many canoe come up the river and on the other side of the great river they assemble together in the space of a hour. they consult whether they shall come or not and at length conclude to come and cross the river in. of the great river. they assemble together in the space of a hour. they consult whether they shall come or not and at length conclude to come and cross the river in. they come the cacique of guachoya and bring with he many indian with great store of fish, dog deer skin and mantle and assoon. as they land, they go to the lodging of the governor and present he their gift and the cacique utter these word: mighty and excellent lord, i beseech your lordship to pardon i the error which i commit in absent myself and not tarry in this town to have receive and serve your lordship, since to obtain this opportunity of time, be and be as mu^h as a great u^ct^rie to i. myself and not tarry in this town to have receive and serve your lordship, since to obtain this opportunity of time, be and be as mu^h as a great u^ct^rie to i, but i fear that which i need not to have fear, and so do that which be not reason to do, but as haste make waste and i remove without deliberation. so as soon as i think on it, i determine not to follow the opinion of the foolish which be to continue in their error, but to imitate the wise and discreet in change my counsel. and so i come to see what your lordship will command i to do, that i may serve you in all thing that be in my power. the governor. change my counsel, and so i come to see what your lordship will command i to do, that i may serve you in all thing that be in my power. the governor receive he with much joy and give he thanks for his present and offer he. a^ked he whether he have any notice of the sea. he answer no, nor of any town down the river on that side, save that two league from thence be one town of a principal indian, a subject of he, and on the other side of the river, three day journey from thence down the river, be the province of quigalta, which be the great lord that be in that country. the governor think that the cacique lie unto he to. day journey from thence down the river be the province of quigalta, which be the great lord that be in that country. the governor think that the cacique lie unto he to rid he out of his own town and send john danusco with eight horseman down the river to see what habitation there be and to inform himself if there be any notice of the sea. he travel eight day and at his return he say that in all that time he be not able to go above 14 or 15 league because of the great creek that come out of the river and grove of cane and thick wood that be along the bank of the river, and that he have find no habitation. the governor, great creek that come out of the river and grove of cane and thick wood that be along the bank of the river and that he have find no habitation, the governor fall into great dump to see how hard it be to get to the sea and worse, because his man and horse every day diminish, be without succour to sustain themselves in the country. and with that think he fall sick. the governor fall sick of thought. but before he take his bed he send a indian to the cacique of quigalta to tell he that he be the child of the sun and that all the way that he come, all man obey and serve he. that he request he to accept of his friendship. he that he be the child of the sun and that, all the way that he come, all man obey and serve he, that he request he to accept of his friendship and come unto he, for he will be very glad to see he and, in sign of love and obedience, to bring something with he of that which, in his country, be most esteem. the cacique answer by the same indian that, whereas he say he be the child of the sun, if he will dry up the river he will believe he. a most witty and st^ut answer of t^e ca^^que, ^f, q^^galta and touch the rest that he be wont to visit none, but rather that all those of who he have notice do. most witty and st^ut answer of t^e ca^^que, ^f q^^galta and touch the rest, that he be wont to visit none, but rather that all those of who he have notice do visit he, serve, obey and pay he tribute, willing or perforce. therefore, if he desire to see he, it be best he shall come thither. that if he come in peace he will receive he with special goodwill, and if in war, in like manner, he will attend he in the town where he be, and that for he or any other, he will not shrink one foot back by that time the indian return. with this answer the governor have betake himself to bed, be evil, handle with fever and be much aggrieve that he. not shrink one foot back by that time. the indian return with this answer. the governor have betake himself to bed, be evil, handle with fever and be much aggrieve that he be not in case to pass present the river and to seek he to see if he can abate that pride of he consider the river go now very strong in those part, for it be near half a league broad and 16. fathom deep and very furious and run with a great current, and on both side there be many indian and his power be not now so great, but that he have need to help himself, rather by slight, then by force. the indian of guachoya come every day with fish in such number. power be not now so great but that he have need to help himself, rather by slight, then by force. the indian of guachoya come every day with fish in such number that the town be full of they, the cacique, say that on a certain night he of quigalta will come to give battle to the governor, which the governor, imagine that he have devise to drive he out of his country and command he to be put in hold. and that night and all the rest, there be good watch keep. he ask he, wherefore quigalta come. not, he say that he come, but that he see, he prepare and therefore dare not give the attempt- and he be earnest with he- to send his captain. wherefore quigalta come not. he say that he come but that he see he prepare and therefore dare not give the attempt, and he be earnest with he to send his captain over the river and that he will aid he with many man to set upon quigalta. the governor tell he that, assoon as he be recover himself, will seek he out and see how many indian come daily to the town and what store of people be in that country fear they shall all conspire together and plot some treason against he. and because the town have some open gap which be not make a end of enclose beside the gate which they go in and out by, because the indian shall not think he fear. the town have some open gap which be not make a end of enclose beside the gate which they go in and out by. because the indian shall not think he fear they, he let they all a^one unrepaired and command the horseman to be appoint to they and to the gate. and all night the horseman go the round and two and two of every squadron ride about and visit the scout that be without the town in their stand by the passage and the crossebowman that keep the canoe in the river. and because the indian shall stand in fear of they, he determine to send a captain to nilco for those of guachoya have tell he that it be inhabit that by use they cruel. the indian shall stand in fear of they. he determine to send a captain to nilco for those of guachoya have tell he that it be inhabit, that by use they cruel, neither the one nor the other shall presume to assail he. and he send de tovar with fifteen horseman and john de guzman, captain of the footman, with his company in canoe up the river the cacique of guach^ya. send for many canoe and many warlike indian to go with the christian and the captain of the christian call tou^r, go by land with his horseman and two league, before he come to nilco he stay for john de guzman and in that place they pass the river by night. the horseman come first and in. his horseman and two league before he come to nilco, he stay for john de guzman and in that place they pass the river. by night the horseman come first, and in the morning, by break of day, in sight of the town, they light upon a spy which, assoon as he perceive the christian, cry out, amain flee to the town to give warning. de tovar and his company make such speed that before the indian of the town can full come out, they be upon they, it be chan^i^^ ground that be inhabit, which be about a quarter of a l^ague. there be about five or six thousand people in the town () and as many people come out of the house and flee from one. be about a quarter of a l^ague. there be about five or six thousand people in the town () and as many people come out of the house and flee from one house to another and many indian come flock together from all part. there be never a horseman that be not alone among many. the captain have command that they shall not spare the life of any male. their disorder be so great that there be no indian that shoot a arrow at any christian. the shriek of woman and child be so great that they make the ear deaf of those that follow they. there be slay a hundred indian, little more or less, and many be wound with great wound who they suffer to escape. they make the ear deaf of those that follow. they there be slay a hundred indian, little more or less, and many be wound, with great wound, who they suffer to escape, to strike a terror in the rest that be not there. there be some so cruel and butcherlike that they kill old and young and all that they meet, though they make no resistance. and those which presume of themselves for their valour and be take for such break through. the indian bear down, many with their stirrup and breast of their horse, and some they wound with their lance, and so let they go, and when they see any youth or woman, they take they and deliver they to the footman. these man sin by some they wound with their lance and so let they go. and when they see any youth or woman, they take they and deliver they to the footman. these man sin by god permission light on their own head who, because they will seem valiant, become cruel, show themselves extreme coward in the sight of all man, when, as most need of valour be require. and * *, chap 37.. afterward they come to a shameful death of the indian of nilco, be take prisoner fourscore woman and child and much spoil the indian of guachoya, keep back before they come at the town and stay without behold the success of the christian with the man of nilco, and when they see they put to flight and the keep back before they come at the town and stay without behold the success of the christian with the man of nilco. and when they see they put to flight and the horseman busy in kill of they, they hasten to the house to rob and fill their canoe with the spoil of the good and return to guachoya before the christian and wonder much at the sharp deal which they have see they use towards the indian of nilco. they tell their cacique all that have pass with great astonishment chap 30 of the death of the adelantado fernando de soto, and how lewis moscoso de aluarado be elect governor in his stead. the governor feel in himself that the hour approach wherein he be to leave. of the adelantado, fernando de soto, and how lewis moscoso de aluarado be elect governor in his stead. the governor feel in himself that the hour approach wherein he be to leave this present life and call for the king, officer, captain and principal person to who he make a speech, say that now he be to go to give a account before the presence of god, of all his ^ife past and since. it please he t^ take he in such a time, and that the time be come that he know his death, that he, his most unworthy servant, use. yield he many thanks, therefore, and desire all that be present and absent, who he confess himself to be much behold unto for their singular virtue. he, his most unworthy servant use. yield he many thanks, therefore, and desire all that be present and absent, who he confess himself to be much behold unto for their singular virtue, love and loyalty, which himself have well try, in the travel which they have suffer, which, always in his mind, he do hope to satisfy and reward, when it shall please god, to give he rest with more prosperity of his estate. that they will pray to god for he, that for his mercy he will forgive he his sin and receive his soul into eternal glory, and that they will qu^^ and free he of t^e charge which he have over they and aught unto they all, and that they will pardon he for some. into eternal glory and that they will qu^^ and free he of t^e charge which he have over they and aught unto they all, and that they will pardon he for some wrong which they may have receive of he. and to avoid some division which, upon his death, may fall out upon the choice of his successor, he request they to elect a principal person and able to govern of who all shall like well, and when he be elect, they shall swear before he to obey he, and that he will thank they very much in so do because the grief that he have will somewhat be assuage and the pain that he feel because he leave they in so great confusion, to wit in leave. much in so do because the grief that he have will somewhat be assuage, and the pain that he feel because he leave they in so great confusion, to wit in leave they in a strange country where they know not where they be. balthasar de gallegos answer in the name of all the rest. and first of all, comfort he. he set before his eye how short the life of this world be and with how many trouble and misery it be accompany, and how god show he a singular favour which soon leave it. tell he many other thing fit for such a time. and for the last point, that, since it please god to take he to himself although his death, do just grieve they. tell he many other thing fit for such a time. and for the last point, that since it please god to take he to himself, although his death do just grieve they much. yet as well, he as all the rest aught of necessity to conform themselves to the will of god and touch the governor which he command they shall elect. he beseech he that it will please his lordship to name he which he think fit, and he they will obey and present. he name lewis de aluarado, his captain general and present. he be, swear by all that be present and elect for governor the next day. the death of don ferdinando de soto, the 21. of may 1542 at guacoya, be the 21. of. be swear by all that be present and elect for governor the next day. the death of don ferdinando de soto, the 21. of may 1542, at guacoya be the 21. of may 1542.. depart out of this life the valorous, virtuous and valiant captain, don fernando de soto, governor of cuba and adelantado of florida, who fortune advance as it use to do other that he may have the high fall. he depart in such a place and at such a time as, in his sickness, he have but little comfort and the danger wherein all his people be of perish in that country, which appear before their eye, be cause sufficient why every one of they have need of comfort and why they do not visit. all his people be of perish in that country, which appear before their eye, be cause sufficient why every one of they have need of comfort and why they do not visit nor accompany he as they ought to have. do lewis de moscoso determine to conceal his death from the indian? because ferdinando de soto have make they believe that the christian be immortal and also because they take he to be hardy, wise and valiant, and if they shall know that he be dead, they will be bold to set upon the christian, though they live peaceable by they in regard of their disposition, and because they be nothing constant and believe all that be tell they the adelantado make they believe that he know some. they live peaceable by they in regard of their disposition, and because they be nothing constant and believe all that be, tell they the adelantado make they believe that he know some thing that pass in secret among themselves, without their knowledge, how or in what manner he come by they and that the figure which appear in a glass, a w^tt^e stratagem which he show, they do. tell he whatsoever they practise and go about, and therefore neither in word nor deed dare they attempt any thing that may be prejudicial unto he. assoon as he be dead, luis de moscoso. command to put he secret in a house where he remain three day and remove he from thence. command he to be bury in the night. he be dead. luis de moscoso command to put he secret in a house where he remain three day and remove he from thence. command he to be bury in the night at one of the gate of the town, within the wall, and as the indian have, see he sick and miss he. so do they suspect what may be and pass by the place where he be bury, see the earth move. they look and speak one to another. lewis de moscoso understand of it. command he to be take up by night and to cast a great deal ^f s^^^d into the mantle wherein he be, wind up, wherein he be carry in a canoe and throw into the midst of the river the cacique. to cast a great deal ^f s^^^d into the mantle wherein he be wind up, wherein he be carry in a canoe and throw into the midst of the river. the cacique of guachoya inquire, for he demand what be become of his brother and lord. the governor, lewis de moscoso, tell he that he be go to heaven, as many other time he do, and because he be to stay there certain day, he have leave he in his place. the cacique thought with himself that he be dead and command two young and well proportion indian to be bring thither and say this be also the custom of the old tartar, that the use of that country be, when any lord die, to kill indian to. proportion indian to be bring thither and say this be also the custom of the old tartar, that the use of that country be when any lord die to kill indian to wait upon he and serve he. by the way, and for that purpose, by his commandment, be those come thither and pray. lewis de moscoso to command they to be behead, that they may attend and serve his lord and brother. lewis de moscoso, tell he that the governor be not dead but go to heaven and that of his own christian soldier he have take such as he need to serve he and pray he, to command those indian to be loose and not to use any such bad custom from thenceforth. straightway he command. have take such as he need to serve he and pray he, to command those indian to be loose and not to use any such bad custom from thenceforth. straightway, he command they to be loose and to get they home to their house, and one of they will not go say that he will not serve he, that without desert have judge he to death, but that he will serve he as long as he live, which have save his life. lewis de moscoso cause all the good of the governor to be sell at a outcry, to wit two man slave and two woman slave and three horse and 700 hog, seven hundred hog. for every slave or horse they give two or three thousand ducat. a outcry. to wit, two man slave and two woman slave and three horse and 700 hog, seven hundred hog for every slave or horse. they give two or three thousand ducat which be to be pay at the first melt of gold or silver or at the division of their portion of inheritance, and they enter into bond, though in the country there be not wherewith to pay it within a year after and put in surety for the same, such as in spain. have no good to bind. give two hundred ducat for a hog, give assurance after. the same manner, those which have any good in spain buy with more fear and buy the less. from that time forward most of the company have swine. hog, give assurance. after the same manner, those which have any good in spain buy with more fear and buy the less. from that time forward, most of the company have swine and bring they up and feed upon they and observe friday and saturdays and the evening of feast which before they do not. for sometime in two or three month they do eat no flesh and whensoever they can come by it they do eat it. chap 31, how the governor, lewis de moscoso, depart from guachoya and go to chaguate and from thence to aguacay. some be glad of the death of don ferdinando de soto. hold for certain that lewis de moscoso, which be give to his ease, will rather desire to be among. to aguacay. some be glad of the death of don ferdinando de soto. hold for certain that lewis de moscoso, which be give to his ease, will rather desire to be among the christian at rest. then, to continue the labour of the war in subdue and discover of country whereof they be already weary, see the small profit that ensue thereof. the governor command the captain and principal person to meet to consult and determine what they shall do and be, inform what people habitation be round about. he understand that to the west the country be most inhabit and that down the river, beyond quigalta, be uninhabited and have little store of food. he desire, they all, that every one will give his opinion in writing. country be most inhabit and that down the river beyond quigalta be uninhabited and have little store of food. he desire they all, that every one will give his opinion in writing and set his hand to it, that they may resolve by general consent whether they shall go down the river or enter into the main land. all be of opinion, their general resolution to travel by land westward, that it be best to go by land towards the west, because nueva espanna, be that way, hold the voyage by sea more dangerous and of great hazard, because they can make no ship of any strength to abide a storm. neither have they master nor pilot, compass nor chart, neither know they how far the sea be. great hazard because they can make no ship of any strength to abide a storm. neither have they master nor pilot, compass nor chart. neither know they how far the sea be off, nor have any notice of it, nor whether the river do make any great turn into the land or have any great fall from the rock where all of they may be cast away. and some which have see the sea-chart do find that from the place where they be by the sea coast to espanna may be 400.. league, little more or less, and say that though they go somewhat about by land in seek a people country, if some great wilderness which they can not pass do not hinder they by spend that. less and say that, though they go somewhat about by land in seek a people country, if some great wilderness which they can not pass do not hinder they by spend that summer in travel, find provision to pass the winter in some people country, that the next summer, after they may come to some christian land, and that it may fortune in their travail by land to find some rich country where they may do themselves good. the governor, although he desire to get out of florida in short time, see the inconvenience they lay before he in travel by sea, determine to follow that which seem good to they all. on monday, the five of june, the five o^ june, he depart from guachoya, the cacique. before he, in travel by sea, determine to follow that which seem good to they all. on monday, the five of june, the five o^ june, he depart from guachoya. the cacique give he a guide to chaguate and stay at home in his own town. they pass through a province call catalte catalt^ and have pass a wilderness of six day journey. the twenty day of the month he come to chaguate ^^aguate. the cacique of this province have visit the governor, don ferdinando de soto, at whither he bring he present of skin and mantle and salt. and a day before lewis de moscoso come to his town, we lose a christian that be sick, which he suspect that the indian have slay. he send the. mantle and salt. and a day before lewis de moscoso come to his town, we lose a christian that be sick, which he suspect that the indian have slay. he send the cacique word that he shall command his people to seek he up and send he unto he and that he will hold he as he do for his friend, and if he do not, that neither he nor he shall escape his hand and that he will set his country on fire. present the cacique come unto he and bring a great present of mantle and skin and the christian that be lose and make this speech follow right. excellent lord, i will not deserve that conceit which you have of i, for all the treasure. mantle and skin and the christian that be lose and make this speech follow right. excellent lord, i will not deserve that conceit which you have of i. for all the treasure of the world, what enforce i to go to visit and serve the excellent lord, governor, you father, in which you shall have remember, where i offer myself with all loyalty, faith and love during my life to serve and obey he? what, then, can be the cause i have receive favour of he, and neither you nor he have do i any wrong that shall move i to do the thing which i ought not believe this of i that neither wrong nor any worldly interest be able to make i to have do it. that shall move i to do the thing which i ought not believe this of i, that neither wrong nor any worldly interest be able to make i to have do it, nor shall be able to blind i. but as in this life, it be a natural course that after one pleasure, many sorrewe do follow so by your indignation. fortune will moderate the joy which my heart conceive with your presence, and that i shall err where i think sure to have hit the mark in harbour, this christian which be lose and use he in such manner as he may tell himself. think that herein i do you service with purpose, to deliver he unto you in chaguate and to serve you to the uttermost. he in such manner as he may tell himself, think that herein i do you service with purpose to deliver he unto you in chaguate and to serve you to the uttermost of my power. if i deserve punishment for this, i will receive it at your hand as from my lord, as if it be a favour for the love which i do bear to the excellent governor and which i bear to you have no limit. and like as you give i chastisement, so will you also show i favour, and that which now i crave of you be this: to declare your will unto i and those thing wherein i may be able to do you the most and best service. the governor answer. he i crave of you be this: to declare your will unto i and those thing wherein i may be able to do you the most and best service. the governor answer he that because he do not find he in that town he be incense against. he think he have absent himself, as other have do. but see, he now know his loyalty and love. he will always hold he as a brother and favour he in all his affair. the cacique go with he to the town where he reside, which be a day journey from thence. they pass through a small town, a small town where there be a lake, where the indian make salt, salt make of salt spring of water and the christian make from thence they pass through a small town, a small town where there be a lake where the indian make salt, salt make of salt spring of water and the christian make some, one day, while they rest there, of a brackish water which spring near the town in pond like fountain. the governor stay in chaguate six day there. he be inform of the habitation that be towards the west. they tell he that three day journey from thence be a province call aguacay. the day that he depart from chaguate, a christian call francisco de guzman, the base son of a gentleman of seville, stay behind and go to the indian with a indian woman which he keep as his concubine for fear he shall be. de guzman, the base son of a gentleman of seville, stay behind and go to the indian with a indian woman which he keep as his concubine, for fear he shall be punish for game debt that he do owe. the governor have travel. two day before he miss he he send the cacique word to seek he up and to send he to aguacay whither he travel, which he do not perform, from the cacique of aguacay. before they come into the country there meet he on the way 15. indian with a present of skin fish and roast venison. the governor come to his town on wednesday, the four of julie. he find the town without people and lodge in it. he stay there about a skin fish and roast venison. the governor come to his town on wednesday, the four of julie. he find the town without people and lodge in it. he stay there about a day, during which he make some road and take many man and woman there. they have knowledge of the south sea, knowledge of the south sea. here there be great store of salt make of sand, which they gather in a vain of ground like pebble, stone, store of salt make, and it be make as they make salt in cayas, chap 32, how the governor go from aguacay to naguatex and what happen unto he. the same day that the governor depart from aguacay, he lodge in a small town, a small town subject to. the governor go from aguacay to naguatex. and what happen unto he? the same day that the governor depart from aguacay, he lodge in a small town, a small town subject to the lord of that province. the camp pitch hard by a lake of salt water and that evening they make some salt there. the day follow, he lodge between two mountain in a thin grove of wood salt make here. the next day he come to a small town call pato pato. the four day after his departure from aguacay he come to the first habitation of a province call amaye amaye. there a indian be take which say that from thence to naguatex be a day and a half journey which they travel, find all. first habitation of a province call amaye. amaye. there a indian be take which say that from thence to naguatex be a day and a half journey, which they travel, find all the way inhabit place, have pass the people country of amaye (@). on saturday, the 20. of julie, they pitch their camp at noon between amaye and naguatex along the corner of a grove of very fair tree. in the same place certain indian be discover which come to view they the horseman, go out to they and kill six and take two. who the governor ask wherefore they come, they say to know what people he have and what order they keep and that the cacique of naguatex, their lord, have send they and that the governor ask wherefore they come. they say to know what people he have and what order they keep, and that the cacique of naguatex, their lord, have send they and that he, with other cacique which come to aid he determine that day to bid he battle. while they be occupy in these question and answer, there come many indian by two way in two squadron and when they see they be descry, give a great cry. they assault the christian, each squadron by itself, but see what resistance the christian make they. they turn their back and betake themselves to flight in which many of they lose their life and most of the horseman follow they in chase, careless of the camp. other two squadron of. their back and betake themselves to flight in which many of they lose their life and most of the horseman follow. they in chase, careless of the camp. other two squadron of indian which lie in ambush, set upon the christian that be in the camp, which also they resist, who also have their reward as the first. after the flight of the indian and that the christian be retire, they hear a great noise, a crossbow shoot from the place where they be. the governor send twelve horseman to see what it be. they find six christian, four footman and two horseman among many indian. the horseman defend the footman with great labour. these be of they that chase the first two squadron have, lose themselves and six christian, four footman and two horseman among many indian. the horseman defend the footman with great labour. these be of they that chase the first, two squadron have lose themselves and come to recover the camp, fall among those with who they be fight, and so they and those that come to succour they slay many of the indian and bring one alive to the camp. who the governor examine who they be, that come to bid he battle. he tell he that they be the cacique of naguatex and of amaye and another of a province call hacanac, hacanac, a lord of great country and many subject, and that the cacique of naguatex come for captain and chief of they all. the governor command his right. a province call hacanac. hacanac, a lord of great country and many subject, and that the cacique of naguatex come for captain and chief of they all, the governor command his right arm and nose to be cut off and send he to the cacique of naguatex. charge he to tell he that the next day he will be in his country to destroy he and if he will withstand his entrance he shall stay for he that night. he lodge there and the next day he come to the habitation of naguatex, naguatex, which be very scatter. he inquire where the cacique, chief town, be. they tell he that it be on the other side of a river, a river that pass. thereby he travel thitherward and very scatter. he inquire where the cacique chief town be. they tell he that it be on the other side of a river, a river that pass. thereby he travel thitherward and come unto it. and on the other side he see many indian that tarry for he make show as though they will defend the passage. and because he know not whether it can be wade, nor where the passage be, and that some christian and horse be hurt, that they may have time to recover, he determine to rest certain day in the town where he be. so he pitch his camp a quarter of a league from the river, because the weather be very hot, near unto the town in a thin grove of very where he be. so he pitch his camp a quarter of a league from the river, because the weather be very hot, near unto the town, in a thin grove of very fair and high tree, near a brook side, and in that place be certain indian take who he examine whether the river be wadeable or no (@). they say yea, at some time and in some place. within ten day after he send two captain with fifteen horseman a piece upward and down the river with indian to show they where they shall go ever to see what habitation be on the other side. and the indian withstand. they both defend the passage of the river as far as they be able, but they pass in. ever to see what habitation be on the other side. and the indian withstand. they both defend the passage of the river as far as they be able, but they pass in despite of they. they pass the river and on the other side of the river they see great habitation and great store of victual. and with these news return to the camp, chap 33, how the cacique of naguatex come to visit the governor and how the governor depart from naguatex and come to nondacao. the governor send a indian from naguatex, where he lay, to command the cacique to come to serve and obey he and that he will forgive he all that be pass and if he come, not that he will seek he. lay to command the cacique to come to serve and obey he and that he will forgive he all that be pass and if he come, not that he will seek he and give he such punishment as he have deserve for that which he have do against he. within two day the indian return and say that the cacique will come the next day, which, the same day when he come, send many indian before he, among who ^here be some principal man. he send they to see what countenance they find in the governor to resolve with himself whether he shall go or not. the indian let he understand that he be come and go away present and the cacique come within two hour, accompany with to resolve with himself whether he shall go or not. the indian let he understand that he be, come and go away present and the cacique come within two hour, accompany with many of his man. they come all in a rank, one before another on both side, leave a lane in the midst where he come. they come where the governor be all of. they weep after the manner of tulla. tulla, not far from naguatex, eastward, which be not far from thence towards the east. the cacique make his due obedience and this speech follow right. high and mighty lord, who all the world ought to serve and obey, i be bold to appear before your lordship have commit so heinous and abominable a act as follow right, high and mighty lord, who all the world ought to serve and obey. i be bold to appear before your lordship. have commit so heinous and abominable a act as only for i to have imagine deserve to be punish. trust in your greatness that, although i deserve to obtain no pardon, yet for your own sake only, you will use clemency towards i. consider how small i be in comparison of your lordship, and not to think upon my weakness which, to my grief and for my great good, i have know and i believe that you and you be immortal and that your lordship be lord of the land of nature. see that you subdue all thing and they obey even the very heart. i believe that you and you be immortal and that your lordship be lord of the land of nature. see that you subdue all thing and they obey even the very heart of man. for when i behold the slaughter and destruction of my man in the battle which, through my ignorance and the counsel of a brother of i which die in the same, i give your lordship present, i repent, i in my heart of the error which i have commit and desire to serve and obey you. and to this end i come that your lordship may chastise and command i as your own. the governor answer he that he forgive he all which be past, that from thenceforth he shall do his duty and that your lordship may chastise and command i as your own, the governor, answer he that he forgive he all which be past, that from thenceforth he shall do his duty and that he will hold he for his friend and that he will favour he in all thing. within four day he depart thence and come to the river. he can not pass the ^^uer g^^^e, ^^pass^le (@) at naguatex, because it be grow very big, which seem to he a thing of admiration. be at that time that it be. and since it have not rain a month before, the indian say that it increase many time after that manner, without rain in all the country. co^^^^res ^a s^a to the ^^^^a^d, it be suppose that not rain a month before. the indian say that it increase many time after that manner, without rain, in all the country. co^^^^res ^a s^a to the ^^^^a^d. it be suppose that it may be the tide that come into it. it be learned that the flood come always from above and that the indian of all that country have no knowledge of the sea. the governor return unto the place where he have lodge before and understand within eight day after that the river be passeable. he depart, he pass over and find the town without people, a town. he lodge in the field and send the cacique word to come unto he and to bring he a guide to go forward and some day be past. without people, a town, he lodge in the field and send the cacique word to come unto he and to bring he a guide to go forward and some day be past. see the cacique come not nor send any body. he send two captain sundry way to burn the town, town burn and to take such indian as they can find. they burn great store of victual and take many indian. the cacique see the hurt that he receive in his country. send six principal indian with three man for guide which know the language of the country through which the governor be to pass. he depart present from naguatex and within three day journey come to a town of four or five house which belong to. of the country through which the governor be to pass. he depart present from naguatex and within three day journey come to a town of four or five house which belong to the cacique of that province, which be call nissoone. nissoone it be evil inhabit and have little maiz. two day journey forward, the guide which guide the governor if they be to go westward, guide he to the east and sometime go up and down through very great wood. out of the way the governor command they to be, hang upon a tree and a woman that they take in nissoone guide he and go back again to seek the way. in two day he come to another miserable town call lacane. lacane, a indian be. a woman that they take in nissoone, guide he and go back again to seek the way. in two day he come to another miserable town call lacane. lacane, a indian be take in that place. that say that the country of nondacao. nondacao be a country of great habitation and the house scatter the one from the other as they use to be in mountain and have great store of maiz. the cacique come with his man, weep like they of naguatex, for this be their use. in token of obedience, he make he a present of much fish and offer to do what he will command he. he take his leave and give he a guide to the province of soacatino. chap 34: how the governor present of much fish and offer to do what he will command he. he take his leave and give he a guide to the province of soacatino. chap 34: how the governor go from nondacao to soacatino and guasco and pass through a desert from whence, for want of a guide and a interpreter, he return to nilco. the governor depart from nondacao towards soacatino and, in five day journey, come to a province call aays aays, the indian which inhabit it have no notice of the christian but assoon. as they see that they enter into their country, they assemble themselves and as they come together, 50. or 100, they come forth to fight. while some fight, other come and charge our man another way, and while into their country. they assemble themselves and as they come together, 50. or 100, they come forth to fight. while some fight, other come and charge our man another way, and while they follow some other, follow they the fight last the great part of the day till they come to their town, a town, some horse and man be wound, but not to any hurt of their travel, for there be no wound that be dangerous. there be a great spoil make of the indian that day that the governor depart from thence, the indian that guide. he say that in nondacao he have hear say that the indian of soacatino have see other christian whereof they all be very glad, think it may be true and that guide. he say that in nondacao he have hear say that the indian of soacatino have see other christian, whereof they all be very glad, think it may be true, and that they may have enter into those part by nueva espanna and that if it be so, it be in their own hand to go out of florida if they find nothing of profit, for they fear they shall lose themselves in some wilderness. this indian lead he two day out of the way, the governor command to torture he. he say that the cacique of nondacao, his lord, have command he to guide they so because they be his enemy and that he be to do as his lord command he, the governor command he. cacique of nondacao. his lord have command he to guide they so, because they be his enemy and that he be to do as his lord command he, the governor, command he to be cast to the dog. and another guide he to soacatino. soacatino, whither he come, the day follow it be a very poor country. there be great want of maiz in that place. he ask the indian whether they know of any other christian. they say that a little from thence, towards the south, they hear they be. he travel 20. day through a country evil inhabit, 20. day travel towards the south where they suffer great scarcity and trouble for that little maiz which the indian have. they have hide and bury in the a country evil inhabit, 20. day travel towards the south, where they suffer great scarcity and trouble for that little maiz which the indian have. they have hide and bury in the wood where the christian, after they be well weary with their travel, at the end of their journey go to seek by dig what they shall eat. at last come to a province that be call guasco guasco. here they find some turkey stone and mantle of cotton wool- chap 35.. they find maiz, wherewith they load their horse and the indian that they have. from thence they go to another town call naquiscoca. naquiscoca. the indian say they have no notice of any other christian. the governor command to torment they. they say that they. have. from thence they go to another town call naquiscoca, naquiscoca. the indian say they have no notice of any other christian. the governor command to torment they. they say that they come first to another lordship which be call nacacahoz, nacacahoz and from thence return again to the west. from whence they come. the governor come in two day to nacacahoz. some woman be take there among who there be one which say that she have see christian and have be take by they and have run away. the governor send a captain with 15. horseman to the place where the woman say she have see they to see if there be any sign of horse or any token of their be there after they have go. horseman to the place where the woman say she have see they to see if there be any sign of horse or any token of their be there. after they have go three or four league the woman that guide, they say that all that she have tell they be untrue and so they hold all the rest that the indian have say of see christian in the land of florida and because the country that way be poor of maiz and towards the west there be no notice of any habitation, they return to guasco. they return to gua^co. the indian tell they there that 10. day journey from thence towards the west be a river call daycao, whither they go sometime a hunt and kill of. they return to gua^co, the indian tell they there that 10. day journey from thence towards the west be a river call daycao, whither they go sometime a hunt and kill of deer, and that they have see people on the other side but know not what habitation be there. there the christian take such maiz as they find and can carry and go 10. day journey through a wilderness, the river of daycao, which see^^th to be r^o. they come to the river which the indian have tell they of ten horseman which the governor have send before, pass over the same and go in a way that lead to the river and light upon a company of indian that dwell in very little cabin, who assoon. have send before, pass over the same and go in a way that lead to the river and light upon a company of indian that dwell in very little cabin, who assoon as they see. they take themselves to flight, leave that which they have, all which be nothing but misery and poverty. the country be so poor that among they all there be not find half a peck of maiz. the horseman take two indian and return with they to the river where the governor stay for they. he seek to learn of they what habitation be towards the west. there be none in the camp that can understand their language. the governor assemble the captain and principal person to determine with their advice what they shall. habitation be towards the west, there be none in the camp that can understand their language. the governor assemble the captain and principal person to determine, with their advice, what they shall do, and the most part say that they think it best to return back to rio or the great river of guachoya, because that in nilco and thereabouts be store of maiz. say that they will make pinnace that winter and the next summer pass down the river to the seaward in they and come to the sea. they will go along the coast to nueva espanna, for, though it seem a doubtful thing and difficult by that which they have already allege yet, it be the last remedy they have, for by land they can. to nueva espanna, for, though it seem a doubtful thing and difficult by that which they have already allege, yet it be the last remedy they have, for by land, they can not go for want of a interpreter, no travel by land without a interpreter. and they hold that the country beyond the river of daycao, where they be, be that which cabeca de vaca mention in his relation that he pass, of the indian which live like the alarbes, have no settle place and feed upon and root of the field and wild beast that they kill, which, if it be so, if they shall enter into it and find no victual to pass the winter, they can not choose but perish for they be enter. that they kill, which, if it be so, if they shall enter into it and find no victual to pass the winter, they can not choose but perish, for they be enter already into the beginning of october, and if they stay any long, they be not able to return for rain and snow, nor to sustain themselves in so poor a country. the governor that desire long to see himself in a place where he may sleep his full sleep rather than to conquer and govern a country where so many trouble present themselves present, return back that same way that he come. chap 35, how they return to nilco and come to minoya, where they agree to make ship to depart out of the land of return back that same way that he come, chap 35, how they return to nilco and come to minoya where they agree to make ship to depart out of the land of florida. when that which be determine be publish in the camp, there be many that be great grieve at it, for they hold the sea voyage as doubtful for the evil mean they have and of as great danger as the travel by land, and they hope to find some rich country before they come to the land of the christian, by that which cabeca de vaca have tell the emperor, and that be this: that after he have find clothes make of cotton, wool, gold, silver and precious (), he see gold and silver and cabeca de vaca, have tell the emperor, and that be this, that after he have find clothes make of cotton, wool, gold, silver and precious () he see gold and silver and stone of great value and they have not yet come wh^re he have be, for until that place he always travel by the sea coast and they travel far within the land and that go towards the west. of necessity they shall come where he have be, for he say that in a certain place he travel many day and enter into the land towards the north, and in guasco they have already find some turkey stone, tu^kie stone and man () and mantle of cotton wool which the indian signify by sign that they have. towards the north, and in guasco they have already find some turkey stone, tu^kie stone and man () and mantle of cotton wool, which the indian signify by sign that they have from the west and that hold that course they shall draw near to the land of the christian, but though they be much discontent with it, and it grieve many to go backward, which will rather have adventure their life and have die in the land of florida, then to have go poor out of it. yet be they not a sufficient part to hinder that which be determine because the principal man agree with the governor and afterward there be one that say he will put out one of his own eye to put out. hinder that which be determine because the principal man agree with the governor and afterward there be one that say he will put out one of his own eye to put out another of luis de moscoso, because it will grieve he much to see he prosper because aswell himself as other of his friend have cross that which he dare not have. do see that within two day he shall leave the government from daycao, where now they be, to rio or the great river, be 150 league, 150 league between the river of daycao and rio, which, unto that place they have go westward and, by the way, as they return back they have much ado to find maiz to eat for where they have pass. and rio which, unto that place, they have go westward and by the way, as they return back they have much ado to find maiz to eat for where they have pass, the country be destroy and some little maiz that be leave. the indian have hide the town which, in naguatex, naguatex, they have burn, whereof it repent. they be repair again and the house full of maiz. this country be well inhabit and plentiful in that place. be vessel make of clay, fine earthen vessel which differ very little from those of estremoz or montemor. in chaguate, chaguate, the indian, by commandment of the cacique, come peaceable and say that the christian which remain there will not come the governor, write unto he and send he. montemor in chaguate, chaguate the indian by commandment of the cacique. come peaceable and say that the christian which remain there will not come. the governor write unto he and send he ink and paper that he may answer. the substance of the word of the letter be to declare unto he his determination, which be to go out of the land of florida and to put he in remembrance that he be a christian, that he will not remain in the subjection of infidel, that he pardon he the fault which he have do in go away to the indian, that he shall come unto he and if they do stay he, that he will advertise he thereof by write. the indian go with the letter and go away to the indian that he shall come unto he, and if they do stay he that he will advertise he thereof by write: the indian go with the letter and come again without any more answer, then on the back side his name and his seal that they may know he be alive. the governor send twelve horseman to seek he, but he which have his spy so hide himself that they can not find he. for want of maiz, the governor can not stay any long to seek he. he depart from chaguete and pass the river by aays, a^ys go down by it. he find a town call chilano c^ila^o, which as yet th^y have not see. they come to nilco n^l^^ and find and pass the river by aays, a^ys go down by it. he find a town call chilano c^ila^o, which as yet th^y have not see. they come to nilco n^l^^ and find so little maiz as can not suffice till they make their ship, because the christian be in guachoya in the seed time, the indian, for fear of they, dare not come to sow the ground of nilco and they know not thereabouts any other country, where any maiz be and that be the most fruitful soil that be thereaway and where they have most hope to find it. every one be confound and the most part think it bad caunsall to come back from the river of daycao and not to have follow their fortune go. hope to find it. every one be confound and the most part think it bad caunsall to come back from the river of daycao and not to have follow their fortune. go that way that go over land. for by sea it seem impossible to save themselves, unless god will work a miracle for they, for there be neither pilot nor sea-chart. neither do they know where the river enter into the sea, neither have they notice of it, neither have they any thing wherewith to make sail, nor any store of which be a grass whereof they make okam which grow there and that which they find they save to calk the pinnace withal. neither have they any thing to pitch they withal, neither can they m^ke. whereof they make okam, which grow there, and that which they find they save to calk the pinnace withal. neither have they any thing to pitch they withal, neither can they m^ke ship of such substance, but that any storm will put they in great danger, and they fear much. it will fall out with they, as it do with pamphilo naruaez, which be cast away upon that coast. and above all other. it trouble they most that they can find no maiz, for without it they can not be sustain, nor can do any thing that they have need. of all of. they be put to great confusion, their chief remedy be to commit themselves to god and to beseeeh, he that he will direct they. the that they have need of all of they be put to great confusion, their chief remedy be to commit themselves to god and to beseeeh he that he will direct they the way that they may save their life. and it please he of his goodness that the indian of nilco come peaceable and tell they that two day journey from thence, near unto the great river, be two town whereof the christian have no notice, and that the province be call minoya and be a fruitful soil. that whether at this present there be any maiz or no, they know, not because they have war with they, but that they will be very glad, with the favour of the christian, to go and spoil they the governor. maiz or no, they know, not because they have war with they, but that they will be very glad, with the favour of the christian, to go and spoil. they, the governor, send a captain thither with horseman and footman and the indian of nilco with he. he come to minoya, minoya, two great ^ownes, and find two great town seat in a plain and open soil, half a league distant, one in sight of another, and in they he take many indian and find great store of maiz present. he lodge in one of they and send word to the governor what he have find, wherewith they be all exceed glad. they depart from nilco in the begin of december, th^ beginning of december, and all that. and send word to the governor what he have find, wherewith they be all exceed glad. they depart from nilco in the begin of december, th^ beginning of december, and all that way and before from chilano, they endure much trouble, for they pass through many water and many time it rain, with a northern wind, raine wi^h northern wind ^xceeding cold, and be exceed cold so that they be in the open field with water over and underneath they, and when at the end of their day journey they find dry ground to rest upon, they give great thanks to god. with this trouble, almost all the indian that serve they die, and after they be in minoya many christian also die, and the most part be they give great thanks to god with this trouble. almost all the indian that serve they die and after they be in minoya, many christian also die and the most part be sick of great and dangerous disease which have a spice of the lethargy. at this place die andrew de vasconcelos. the death of andrew vasconcelos, and two portugal of eluas, which be very near he, which be brother, and by their surname call sotis, the christian lodge in one of the town which they like best, which be fence about and distant a quarter of a league from the great river. the maiz that be in the other town be bring thither and in all it be esteem to be 6000.. han^gs or bushel and there. of a league from the great river, the maiz that be in the other town be bring thither and in all it be esteem to be 6000. han^gs or bushel, and there be the best timber to make ship that they have see in all the land of florida. wherefore, all of they give god great thanks for so singular a favour and hope that that which they desire will take effect, which be that they may safe be conduct into the land of the christian, chap 36, how there be seven brigandine build and how they depart from minoya assoon. as they come to minoya, the governor command they to gather all the chain together which every one have to lead indian in, and to gather all they depart from minoya assoon. as they come to minoya, the governor command they to gather all the chain together which every one have to lead indian in and to gather all the iron which they have for their provision and all the rest that be in the camp and to set up a forge to make nail, and command they to cut down timber for the brigandine and a portugal of ceuta who have be a prisoner in fez, have learned to see timber with a long see which for such purpose they have carry with. they do teach other which help he to see timber, and a genowis who it please god to preserve, for without he they have never come out of the country. for with. they do teach other which help he to see timber and a genowis who it please god to preserve, for without he they have never come out of the country for there be never another that can make ship, but he, with four or five other, biscaine carpenter which hew his plank, and other timber make the brigandine and two calker, the one of genua, the other of sardinia. do calk they with the tow of a herb like hemp- enequen be a herb like hemp, whereof before i have make mention which there be name enequen- and because there be not enough of it, they caulk they with the flax of the country, flax of the country and with the mantle which they ravel for that. name enequen, and because there be not enough of it, they caulk they with the flax of the country, flax of the country, and with the mantle which they ravel for that purpose. a cooper which they have among they fall sick and be at the point of death and there be none other that have any skill in that trade. it please god to send he his health, and albeit he be very weak and can not labour yet 15.. day before they depart, he make for every brigandine two half hog head, which the mariner call quarteret, because four of they hold a pipe of water. the indian, which dwell two day journey above the river in a province call taguanate, taguanate, two day ^^urney above. mariner call quarteret because four of they hold a pipe of water. the indian, which dwell two day journey above the river in a province call taguanate, taguanate, two day ^^urney above minoya. and likewise those of nilco and guacoya and other their neighbour, see the brigandine in, make think, because thei^ place of refuge be in the water, that they be to go to seek they, and because the governor demand mantle of they as necessary for sail come many time and bring many mantle and great store of fish. and for certain it seem that god be willing to favour they in so great necessity, move the mind of the indian to bring they for, to go to take they they be never able for in. that god be willing to favour they in so great necessity, move the mind of the indian to bring they for, to go to take they they be never able, for in the town where they be assoon, as winter come in, they be so enclose and compass with water that they can go no far by land than a league and a league and a half. and if they will go, father, they can carry no horse, the great use of horse, and without they they be not able to fight with the indian because they be many and so many for so many. on foot they have the advantage of they by water and by land because they be more apt and light and by reason. they be many and so many for so many. on foot. they have the advantage of they by water and by land, because they be more apt and light and by reason of the disposition of the country which be according to their desire for the use of their war. they bring also some cord and those which want for cable be make of the bark of mulberry tree. mulberry tree, they make stirrup of wood and make anchor of their stirrup in the month of march, when it have not rain, a month before the river grow so big that it come to nilco. the mighty increase of t^e (@) for two mon^ths ^pace, to wit, all march an^ ap^^ll which be nine league off and on. river grow so big that it come to nilco, the mighty increase of t^e (@) for two mon^ths ^pace, to wit all march an^ ap^^ll, which be nine league off, and on the other side, the indian say that it reach other nine league into the land. in the town where the christian be, which be somewhat high ground where they can best go, the water reach to the stirrup. they make certain raft of timber and lay many bough upon they, whereon they set their horse, and in the house they do the like, but see that n^thing prevail, they go up to the loft and if they go out of the house, it be in canoe or on horseback, in those place where the ground be. see that n^thing prevail. they go up to the loft and if they go out of the house it be in canoe or on horseback in those place where the ground be high. so they be two month and can do nothing, during which time the river decrease not the indian cease not to come unto the brigantine as they be wont and come in canoe. at that time the governor fear they will set upon he. he command his man to take a indian secret of those that come to the town and to stay he till the rest be go. and they take one. the governor command he to be put to torture to make he confess whether the indian do practice any treason or no. he till the rest be go, and they take one, the governor command he to be put to torture to make he confess whether the indian do practice any treason or no. he confess that the cacique of nilco, the grand conspiracy of the indian against the christian, guachoya and taguanate and other, which in all be about 20.. cacique, with a great number of people, determine to come upon he, and that three day before they will send a great present of fish to colour their great treason and malice, and on the very day they will send some indian before with another present, and these, with those which be our slave, note well, which be of their conspiracy also, shall set the house on fire and they will send some indian before with another present, and these, with those which be our slave, note well which be of their conspiracy also, shall set the house on fire and first of all possess themselves of the lance which stand at the door of the house. and the cacique, with all their man, shall be near the town in ambush in the wood, and when they see the fire kindle, shall come and make a end of the conquest. the governor command the indian to be keep in a chain and the self-same day that he speak of, there come 30. indian with fish. he command their right hand to be cut off. thirty indian of the cacique o guac^^ya have their righ^ hand cut off. that he speak of, there come 30.. indian with fish, he command their right hand to be cut off. thirty indian of the cacique o guac^^ya have their righ^ hand cut off and send they so back to the cacique of guachoya. who man they be, he send he word that he and the rest shall come when they will, for he desire nothing more, and that he shall know that they think not any thing which he know, not before they think of it. hereupon they all be put in a very great fear, and the cacique of nilco and taguanate come to excuse themselves and a few day after come, he of guachoya and a principal indian and his subject say he know by certain information. the cacique of nilco and taguanate come to excuse themselves and a few day after come he of guachoya and a principal indian and his subject say he know by certain information that the cacique of nilco and taguanate be agree to come and make war upon the christian assoon. as the indian come from nilco, the governor examine they and they confess it be true. he deliver they present to the principal man of guachoya which draw they out of the town and kill they. another day come some from taguanate, the right hand and nose of traitor cut off and confess it. likewise, the governor command their right hand and nose to be cut off and send they to the cacique, wherewith they of guachoya remain. nose of traitor cut off and confess it. likewise, the governor command their right hand and nose to be cut off and send they to the cacique, wherewith they of guachoya remain very well content. and they come oftentimes with present of mantle and fish and hog hog in flo^ida which breed in the country, of some swine that be lose by the way the last year. assoon as the water be slake, they persuade the governor to send man to taguanate. they come and bring canoe wherein the footman be convey down the river and a captain with horseman go by land and the indian of guachoya which guide he till they come to taguanate. taguanate take assault the town and take many man and woman and a captain with horseman, go by land and the indian of guachoya which guide he till they come to taguanate. taguanate take, assault the town and take many man and woman and mantle which, with those that they have already be sufficient to supply their want, the brigandine be finish in the month of june. june, the river increase, but once a be wh^n the snow do me^^ in march and april, a ^^^^calous ^^^ent. the indian have tell we that the river increase, but once a year when the snow do melt in the time wherein i mention it have already increase, be now in summer and have not rain a long time. it please, god, that the flood come up to the town to seek the. wherein i mention it, have already increase, be now in summer and have not rain a long time. it please god that the flood come up to the town to seek the brigandine, from whence they carry they by water to the river which, if they have go by land, have be in danger of break and split their keel and to be all undo because that, for want of iron, the spike be short and the plank and timber be very weak. the indian of minoya, during the time that they be there, come to serve they be drive thereunto by necessity, that of the maiz which they have take from they, they will bestow some crumb upon they. and because the country be fertile and the serve. they be drive thereunto by necessity. that of the maiz which they have take from they, they will bestow some crumb upon they and because the country be fertile and the people use to feed of maiz and the christian have get all from they that they have and the people be many, they be not able to sustain themselves. those which come to the town be so weak and feeble that they have no flesh leave on their bone and many come and die near the town for pure hunger and weakness. the governor command upon grievous punishment to give they no maiz. yet when they see that the hog want it not and that they have yield themselves to serve they and consider their misery. command upon grievous punishment to give they no maiz. yet when they see that the hog want it not and that they have yield themselves to serve they and consider their misery and wretchedness, have pity of they, they give they part of the maiz which they have. and when the time of their embarkment come, there be not sufficient to serve their own turn, that which there be, they put into the brigandine and into great canoe, tie two and two together, they ship 22.. of the best horse that be in the camp, the rest they make dry flesh of and dress the hog which they have in like manner. they depart from minoya the second day of julie 1543.. chap 37, as the christian go. rest. they make dry flesh of and dress the hog which they have in like manner. they depart from minoya the second day of julie 1543.. chap 37: as the christian go down the great river on their voyage, the indian of quigalta do set upon they. and what be the success thereof. the day before they depart from minoya, they determine to dismiss all the man and woman of the country which they have detain as slave to serve. they save some hundred, little more or less, which the governor embark and other who it please he to permit. and because there be many man of quality who he can not deny that which he grant to other, he use a policy, say that they may serve. please he to permit, and because there be many man of quality who he can not deny that which he grant to other, he use a policy: say that they may serve they as long as they be in the river, but when they come to the sea they must send they away for want of water because they ha^ but few vessel. he tell his friend in secret that they shall carry they to nueva espanna and all those who he bear no good will unto, which be the great number ignorant of that which be hide from they which afterward time discover, think it inhumanity for so little time of service in reward of the great service that they have, do they to carry they with? be hide from they which afterward time discover think it inhumanity for so little time of service in reward of the great service that they have. do they to carry they with they to leave they slave to other m^n out of their own country, 500 slave (@) t^e country? leave five hundred man and woman, among who be many boy and girl, which speak and understand the spanish tongue. the most of they do nothing but weep which move great compassion. see that all of they with good will will have become christian and be leave in state of perdition. there. go from minoya, 322 spaniard in seven brigandine. they sail down rio grandee from minoya 17. day before they come to the mou^h thereof, well make leave in state of perdition. there go from minoya: 322 spaniard in seven brigandine. they sail down rio grandee from minoya 17.. day before they come to the mou^h thereof, well, make save that the plank be thin because the nail be short and be not pitch, nor have any deck to keep the water from come in. in stead of deck, they lay plank whereon the mariner may run to trim their sail and the people may refresh themselves. above and below, the governor make his captain and give to every one his brigandine and take their oath and their word that they will obey he, until they come to the land of the christian. the governor take one of the brigandine for himself which he best. take their oath and their word that they will obey he until they come to the land of the christian. the governor take one of the brigandine for himself which he best like. the same day that they depart from minoya they pass by guachoya, where the indian tarry for they in canoe, by the river and on the shore they have make a great arbour with bough. they desire he to come on shore, but he excuse himself and so go along the indian in their canoe, accompany he and come where a arm of the river decline on the right hand. they say that the province of quigalta be near unto that place and importune the governor to set upon he and that they will aid. the river decline. on the right hand. they say that the province of quigalta be near unto that place and importune the governor to set upon he and that they will aid he. and because they have say that he dwell three day journey down the river, the governor suppose that they have plot some treason against he and there leave they and go down with the great force of the water, the current be very strong and with the help of oar they go very swift. the first day they land in a wood on the left hand of the river and at night they withdraw themselves to the brigandine. the second day, the next day, they come to a town where they go on shore and the left hand of the river and at night they withdraw themselves to the brigandine. the second day, the next day, they come to a town where they go on shore and the people that be in it- dare not tarry a woman that they take there be examine- say that that town belong to a cacique name, huasene, huasene, subject to quigalta, and that quigalta tarry for they, below in the river, with many man, certain horseman, go thither and find some house wherein be much maiz, immediate more of. they go thither and tarry there one day, in which they do beat out another day and take as much maiz as they need while they be there. many indian come from the nether part of the there one day, in which they do beat out another day and take as much maiz as they need while they be there. many indian come from the nether part of the river and on the other side, right against they, somewhat careless, set themselves in order to fight the governor, send in two canoe, the crossebowman that he have and as many more as can go in they. they run away and see the spaniard can not overtake they. they return back and take courage and come near, make a outcry. they threaten they and assoon as they depart thence. they go after they, some in canoe and some by land along the river and get before come to a town that stand by the river side. assoon as they depart thence. they go after they, some in canoe and some by land along the river and get before come to a town that stand by the river side. they join altogether, make a show that they will tarry there every brigandine, tow a canoe, fasten to their stern for their particular service present there, enter man into every one of they, which make the indian to fly ^^owne, bur^^d and burn the town. the same day they present land in a great field where the indian dare not tarry the three day. the next day there be gather together a hundred canoe, among which be some that carry 60. and 70. man () () and 70. man and the principal man canoe have their. the next day there be gather together a hundred canoe, among which be some that carry 60. and 70. man () () and 70. man and the principal man canoe have their tilt and plume of white and red feather for their ensign and they come within two crossbow shoot of the brigandine and send three indian in a small canoe with a feign message to view the manner of the brigandine and what weapon they have, and come to the side of the governors brigandine. one of the indian enter and say that the cacique of quigalta, his lord, send he his commendation and do let he understand that all that the indian of guachoya have tell he concern himself be false and that they have incense. of quigalta, his lord, send he his commendation and do let he understand that all that the indian of guachoya have tell he concern himself be false and that they have incense he because they be his enemy, that he be his servant and shall find he so the governor. answer he that he believe all that he say be true and will he to tell he that he esteem his friendship very much. with this answer they return to the place where the rest in their canoe be, wait for they and from thence all of they fall down and come near the spaniard, shout aloud and threaten of they. the governor send john de guzman which have be a captain of footman in florida with 15.. of they fall down and come near the spaniard, shout aloud and threaten of they. the governor, send john de guzman, which have be a captain of footman in florida with 15. arm man in canoe, to make they give way assoon. as the indian see they come towards they, they divide themselves into two part and stand still till the spaniard come nigh they. and when they be come near they, they join together on both side. take john de guzman in the midst and they that come first with he and with great fury board they and as their canoe be big and many of they leap into the water to stay they and to lay hold on the canoe of the spaniard and overwhelm they. board they and as their canoe be big and many of they, leap into the water to stay they, and to lay hold on the canoe of the spaniard and overwhelm they so present. they overwhelm they, the christian, fall into the water and, with the weight of their armour, sink down to the bottom and some few that by swim or hold by the canoe can have, save themselves with oar and staff which they have, they strike they on the head and make they sink. when they of the brigandine, see the overthrow though, they go about to succour they. yet through the current of the river they can not go back. four spaniard flee to the brigandine that be near to the canoe and only they go about to succour they yet through the current of the river, they can not go back. four spaniard flee to the brigandine that be near to the canoe and only these escape. of those that come among the indian, they be eleven that die there. eleven spaniard drown the death of john de guzman. among who john de guzman be one and a son of don carlos call john de vargas, the rest also be person of account and man of great courage. those that escape by swim say that they see the indian enter the canoe of john de guzman at the stern of one of their canoe, and whether they carry he away dead or alive, they can not certain tell. chap 38, which. enter the canoe of john de guzman at the stern of one of their canoe and whether they carry he away dead or alive, they can not certain tell chap 38, which declare how they be pursue by the indian. the indian see that they have get the victory, take such courage that they assault they in the brigandine, which they dare not do before they come first to that brigandine wherein calderon go for captain and be in the rearward and at the first volley of arrow they wound 25 man, 25. spaniard wound. there be only four arm man in this brigandine. these do stand at the brigandine side to defend it. those that be unarm see how they hurt. they leave their oar and go. be only four arm man in this brigandine, these do stand at the brigandine side to defend it. those that be unarm, see how they hurt. they leave their oar and go under the deck, whereupon the brigandine begin to cross and to go where the current of the stream carry it. one of the arm man see this: without the commandment of the captain, make a footman to take a oar and stir the brigandine. he stand before he and defend he with his target. the great use o^ large target. the indian come no near than a bowshot from whence they offend and be not offend, receive no hurt. for in every brigandine be but one crossbow and those which we have be very much out. near than a bowshot, from whence they offend and be not offend, receive no hurt. for in every brigandine be but one crossbow and those which we have be very much out of order so that the christian do nothing else but stand for a butt to receive their arrow. have leave this brigandine, they go to another and fight with it half a hour and so from one to another. they fight with they all. the christian have mat to lay under, they which be double and so close and strong that no arrow go through they and assoon as the indian give they leisure, strong mat, a good defence against arrow. they fence the brigandine with they and the indian see that they can not shoot. through they and assoon as the indian give they leisure, strong mat, a good defence against arrow. they fence the brigandine with they and the indian see that they can not shoot level, shoot their arrow at random up into the air, which fall into the brigandine and hurt some of the man and not therewith content. they seek to get to they which be in the canoe with the horse, those of the brigandine environ they to defend they and take they among they. thus see themselves much vex by they and so weary that they can no long endure it, they determine to travel all the night, follow think to get beyond the country of quigalta and that they will leave they. but when they think they can no long endure it. they determine to travel all the night, follow, think to get beyond the country of quigalta and that they will leave they. but when they think least of it, suppose they have now leave they. they hear very near they, so great outcry that they make they deaf. and so they follow, we all that night and the next day till noon, by which time we be come into the country of other, another province who they desire to use. we after the same manner, and so they do. the man of quigalta return home and the other, in fifty canoe, fight with we a whole day and a night and they enter one of the brigandine that come in the rearward. man of quigalta return home and the other in fifty canoe fight with we a whole day and a night. and they enter one of the brigandine that come in the rearward by the canoe which she have at her stern and take away a woman which they find in it and afterward hurt some of the man of the brigandine. those which come with the horse in the canoe be weary with row, night and day linger behind and present the indian come upon they and they of the brigandine tarry for they, the governor, resolve to go on shore and to kill the horse because of the slow way which they make, because of they assoon. as they see a place convenient for it, they go. resolve to go on shore and to kill the horse because of the slow way which they make, because of they assoon. as they see a place convenient for it, they go thither and kill the horse, dry horseflesh for food and bring the flesh of they to dry it aboard. four or five of they remain on shore alive. the indian go unto they after the spaniard be, embark the horse, be not acquaint with they and begin to neigh and run up and down in such sort that the indian, for fear of they, leap into the water and get into their canoe, go after the brigandine, shoot cruel at they. they follow, we that evening and the night follow till the next day at ten. leap into the water and get into their canoe, go after the brigandine, shoot cruel at they. they follow we that evening and the night, follow till the next day at ten of the clock and then return up the river present. from a small town, ^^al town that stand upon the river, come seven canoe and follow we a little way down the river, shoot at we, but see they be so few that they can do we but little harm. they return to their town from thence forward until they come to the sea (@) ^^^led () ^he ri^^h^ch be ^bout 250 league. they have no encounter. they sail down the river seventeen day, which may be two hundred and fifty league journey, little more or. (@) ^^^led () ^he ri^^h^ch be ^bout 250 league. they have no encounter. they sail down the river seventeen day, which may be two hundred and fifty league journey, little more or less, and near unto the sea. the river be divide into two arm, each of they be a league and a half broad- chap 39- how they come unto the sea and what happen unto they in all their voyage. half a league before they come to the sea. they come to anchor to rest themselves thereabouts a day, for they be very weary, with row and out of heart, for by the space of many day they have eat nothing but parch and sodden maiz, which they have by allowance every day, a headpiece full. with row and out of heart, for by the space of many day they have eat nothing but parch and sodden maiz which they have by allowance every day, a headpiece full by strike for every three man. while they ride there at anchor, seven canoe of indian come to set upon those which they bring with they. the governor command arm man to go aboard they and to drive they far off. they come also against they by land, through a thick wood and a moorish ground and have staff with very sharp fork head make of the bone of fish and fight very valiant with we which go out to encounter they and the other that come in canoe with their arrow. stay for they that make of the bone of fish and fight very valiant with we which go out to encounter they and the other that come in canoe with their arrow. stay for they that come against they and at their come both those that be on land and those in the canoe wound some of we. and see we come near they, they turn their back and, like swift horse among footman, get away from we, make some return and reunite themselves together, go not past a bow, shoot off for in, so retire. they shoot without receive any hurt of the christian, for though they have some bow, yet they can not use they and break their arm with row to overtake they and the indian easy in their any hurt of the christian, for though they have some bow yet they can not use they and break their arm with row to overtake. they and the indian, easy in their compass, go with their canoe, stay and wheel about as it have be in a skirmish, perceive that those that come against they can not offend they, and the more they strive to come near they, the more hurt they receive. assoon as they have, drive they far off, they return to the brigandine. they stay two day there and depart from thence unto the place where the arm of the river enter into the sea. they sound in the river, near unto the sea and find 40. fathom water. they stay there and the governor the place where the arm of the river enter into the sea. they sound in the river, near unto the sea, and find 40. fathom water. they stay there and the governor command all and singular person to speak their mind, touch their voyage, whether it be best to cross over to nueva espanna, commit themselves to the high sea, or whether they shall keep along the coast. there be sundry opinion touch this matter, wherein john danusco, which presume much and take much upon, he, in the knowledge of navigation and matter of the sea, although he have but little experience, move the governor with his talk and his opinion, be second by some other, and they affirm that it be much better to pass by the although he have but little experience, move the governor with his talk and his opinion, be second by some other. and they affirm that it be much better to pass by the high sea and cross the gulf, which be three of four, part the lesser travel, because in go along the coast they go a great way about by reason of the compass which the land do make. john danusco say that he have see the seacard and that from the place where they be, the coast run east and west unto rio palmas and from rio palmas to nueva espanna, from north to south and therefore in sail, always in sight of land, will be a great compass about and spend of much time, and that from rio palmas to nueva espanna, from north to south and therefore in sail, always in sight of land, will be a great compass about and spend of much time, and that they will be in great danger to be overtake with winter before they shall get to the land of the christian, and that in 10. or 12. day space have good weather. they may be there in cross over the most part, be against this opinion and say that it be more safe to go along the coast, though they stay the long because their ship be very weak and without deck, so that a very little storm be enough to cast they away and if they shall be hinder with calm or contrary weather through. their ship be very weak and without deck, so that a very little storm be enough to cast they away. and if they shall be hinder with calm or contrary weather through the small store of vessel which they have to carry water in, they shall likewise fall into great danger. and that, although the ship be such as they may venture in, they yet have neither pilot nor seacard to guide themselves, it be no good counsel to cross the gulf. this opinion be confirm by the great part, and they agree to go along the coast. at the time wherein they seek to depart from thence, the cable of the anchor of the governors brigandine break and the anchor remain in the river, and albeit they the coast at the time wherein they seek to depart from thence, the cable of the anchor of the governors brigandine break and the anchor remain in the river and albeit they be near the shore, yet it be so deep that the diverse dive many time can never find it, which cause great sadness in the governor and in all those that go with he in his brigandine. but with a grindstone which they have and certain bridle which remain to some of the gentleman and man of worship which have horse, they make a weight which serve in stead of a anchor. the 18. of july. they land the 30. of may 1539.. chap 7.. they go forth to sea, july 18. 1543.. they go forth. weight which serve in stead of a anchor, the 18. of july. they land the 30. of may 1539.. chap 7.. they go forth to sea, july 18. 1543.. they go forth to sea with fair and prosperous weather for their voyage and see that they be go two or three league from the shore. the captain of the other brigandine overtake they and ask the governor wherefore he do put off from the shore and that if he will leave the coast he shall say so and he shall not do it without the consent of all, and that if he do otherwise they will not follow he, but that every one will do what seem best unto himself. the governor answer that he will do nothing. of all and that if he do otherwise they will not follow he, but that every one will do what seem best unto himself. the governor answer that he will do nothing without their counsel, but that he do bear off from the land to sail, the better and safe, by night, and that the next day, when time serve, he will return to the sight of land again. they sail with a reasonable, good wind that day, and the night follow, and the next day till evening, song, fresh water. almost two day sail in the sea, always in fresh water, whereat they wonder much, for they be very far from land, but the force of the current of the river be so great the coast shallow. the sea, always in fresh water, whereat they wonder much, for they be very far from land, but the force of the current of the river be so great, the coast shallow, and the coast there be so shallow and gentle that the fresh water enter far into the sea that evening. on their right hand they see certain creek, c^rtaine creek, where they rest a ^^ght, where whither they go and rest there that night, where john danusco, with his reason, win they at last, that all consent and agree to commit themselves to the main sea, allege, as he have do before, that it be a great advantage and that their voyage will be much short- they sail two day- and when they will have come main sea, allege, as he have do before, that it be a great advantage and that their voyage will be much short. they sail two day, and when they will have come to sight of land they can not, for the wind blow from the shore on the four day, see their fresh water begin to fail, fear, necessity and danger. they all complain of john danusco and of the governor that follow his counsel, and every one of the captain say that they will no more go from the shore, though the governor go whither he will. it please god that the wind change, though but a little, and at the end of four day, after they have put to sea, be already destitute of water by he. will it please god, that the wind change, though but a little, and at the end of four day after they have put to sea, be already destitute of water. by force of row they get within sight of land and with great trouble recover it in a open road, a open road. that evening the wind come to the south, which on that coast be a cross wind and drive the brigandine against the shore, because it blow very hard and the anchor be so weak that they yield and begin to bend. the governor command all man to leap into the water and go between they and the shore and thrust the brigandine into the sea. assoon as the wave be past, they save, they. governor command all man to leap into the water and go between they and the shore and thrust the brigandine into the sea. assoon as the wave be past. they save they till the wind cease. chap 40, how they lose one another by a storm and afterward come together in a creek in the bay where they ride. after the tempest be past, they go on shore and with mattock which they have they dig certain pit- fresh water be common find- by dig in the sand on the sea side which grow full of fresh water, where they fill all the cask which they have. the next day they depart thence and sail two day and enter into a creek like unto a pool, fence from. fresh water where they fill all the cask which they have. the next day they depart thence and sail two day and enter into a creek like unto a pool fence from the south wind, which then do blow and be against they, and there they stay four day, not be able to get out, and when the sea be calm they row out, they sail that day and towards evening the wind grow so strong that it drive they on the shore and they be sorry that they have put forth from the former harbour. for as soon as night approach, a storm begin to rise in the sea and the wind still wax more and more violent. with a tempest the brigandine lose one another two. for as soon as night approach, a storm begin to rise in the sea and the wind still wax more and more violent. with a tempest, the brigandine lose one another. two of they, which bear more into the sea, enter into a arm of the sea, a arm of the sea which pierce into the land two league beyond the place where the other be. that night, the five which stay behind be always a league and half a league. the one from the other, meet together, without any knowledge the one of the other, in a wild road, a wild road where the wind and the wave drive. they, on shore for their anchor, do straighten and come home and they can not rule their oar. in a wild road. a wild road where the wind and the wave drive, they on shore for their anchor, do straighten and come home and they can not rule their oar. put seven or eight man to every oar which row to seaward and all the rest leap into the water and when the wave be past that drive, the brigandine on shore, they thrust it again into sea with all the diligence and might that they have. other, while another wave be in come with bowl, lave out the water that come in overboard. while they be in this tempest, in great fear of be cast away in that place, from midnight forward they endure a intolerable torment of a infinite swarm of moskitoe which fall. while they be in this tempest in great fear of be cast away. in that place, from midnight forward they endure a intolerable torment of a infinite swarm of moskitoe which fall upon they, a swarm of grievous mos^^o^s which assoon as they have, sting the flesh it so, infect it as though they have be venomous. in the morning the sea be assuage and the wind slake, but not the muskitoe, for the sail, which be white, seem black with they. in the morning. those which row unless other keep they away, be not able to row, have pass the fear and danger of the storm. behold the deformity of their face and the blow which they give themselves to drive they away. one of they laugh. to row, have pass the fear and danger of the storm, behold the deformity of their face and the blow which they give themselves to drive they away. one of they laugh at another. they meet all together in the creek where the two brigandine be which outgo their fellow there be, find a scum, a scum of the sea like (@) call, which they call copee, which the sea cast up and it be like pitch wherewith in some place where pitch be want. they pitch their ship there, they pitch their brigandine. they rest two day and then eftsoon proceed on their voyage. they sail two day more and land in a bay or arm of the sea, another deep ^^y, where they stay two day. two day and then eftsoon proceed on their voyage. they sail two day more and land in a bay or arm of the sea, another deep ^^y, where they stay two day. the same day that they go from thence, six man go up in a canoe towards the head of it and can not see the end of it. they put out from thence with a south wind which be against they, but because it wa^ little and for the great desire they have to shorten their voyage, they put out to sea by force of oar and for all that make very little way with great labour in two day and go under the lee of a small island, a small island into a arm of of oar and for all that, make very little way with great labour in two day and go under the lee of a small island, a small island, into a arm of the sea which compass it about. while they be there, there fall out such weather that they give god many thanks that they have find out such a harbour. there be great store of fish in that place, great store of fish which they take with net, which they have and hook. here a man cast a hook and a line into the sea and tie the end of it to his arm and a fish catch it and draw he into the water unto the neck, and it please god that he remember himself of. and tie the end of it to his arm. and a fish, catch it and draw he into the water unto the neck, and it please god that he remember himself of a knife that he have and cut the line with it. there they abide fourteen day. fourteen day, abide ^n this place and at the end of they, it please god to send they fair weather, for which, with great devotion, they appoint a procession and go in procession along the strand. beseech god to bring they to a land where they may serve he in better sort. chap 41. how they come to the river of panuco in nueva espanna, in all the coast, wheresoever they dig, they find fresh water. there they fill their he in better sort, chap 41, how they come to the river of panuco in nueva espanna, in all the coast, wheresoever they dig, they find fresh water there, they fill their vessel and the procession be end, embark themselves and go always in sight of the shore. they sail six day, six da^es sail. john danusco say that it will do well to bear out to seaward, for he have see the sea-card and remember that from rio palmas forward the coast do run from north to south and thitherto they have run from east to west and in his opinion, by his reckon, rio palmas can not be far off from where they be. that same night they put to sea and in the morning they to west and, in his opinion, by his reckon, rio palmas can not be far off from where they be. that same night they put to sea and in the morning they see palm leave float (@) of () ^aves () and the coast which run north and south. from midday forward they see great mountain which until then they have not see for from this place to puerto santo (@) north () t^e (), where they first land in florida, be a very plain and low country and therefore it can be descry unless a man come very near it. by that which they see, they think that they have overshoot rio de palmas that night, which be 60 league from the river of panuco, which be man come very near it by that which they see, they think that they have overshoot rio de palmas that night, which be 60 league from the river of panuco, which be in nueva espanna. they assemble all together and some say it be not good to sail by night l^st they shall overshoot the river of panuco, and other say it be not well to lose time, while it be favourable and that it can not be so near that they shall pass it that night and they agree to take away half the sail and so sail all night. two of the brigandine which sail that night with all their sail, by break of day have overshoot the river of panuco without see it of the and so sail all night. two of the brigandine which sail that night with all their sail, by break of day have overshoot the river of panuco without see it. of the five that come behind, the first that come unto it be that wherein calderan be captain, a quarter of a league. before they come at it, and before they do see it, they see the water muddy and know it to be fresh water, and come right against the river. they see, where it enter into the sea, that the water break upon a shall, and because there be no man there that know it, they be in doubt whether they shall go in or go along. and they resolve to go in, and before they shall, and because there be no man there that know it, they be in doubt whether they shall go in or go along. and they resolve to go in and before they come unto the current, they go close to the shore and enter into the port and assoon as they be. come in, they see indian man and woman apparel like spaniard. who they ask in what country they be, they answer in spanish that it be the river of panuco. the river of panuco, the town 15. league from the mouth of the river, and that the town of the christian be 15 league up within the land. the joy that all of they receive upon these news can sufficient be express, for it seem unto and that the town of the christian be 15 league up within the land. the joy that all of they receive upon these news can sufficient be express, for it seem unto they that at that instant they be bear again, and many go on shore and kiss the ground and kneel on their knee with lift up their hand and eye to heaven. they all cease not to give god thanks. those which come after assoon, as they see calderan come to a anchor with his brigandine in the river present, go thither and come into the haven, the other two brigandine, which have overshoot the place, put to sea to return back to seek the rest, and can not do it because the wind be contrary. into the haven. the other two brigandine, which have overshoot the place, put to sea to return back to seek the rest and can not do it because the wind be contrary and the sea grow. they be afraid of be cast away and recover the shore. they cast anchor. while they ride there, a storm arise and see that they can not abide there, much less endure at sea. they resolve to run on shore and as the brigandine be but small, so do they draw but little water and where they be, it be a sandy coast, by which occasion the force of their sail drive they on shore without any hurt of they that be in they, as those that be in the port of a sandy coast, by which occasion the force of their sail drive they on shore without any hurt of they that be in. they, as those that be in the port of panuco at this time, be in great joy. so these feel a double grief in their heart, for they know not what be become of their fellow, nor in what country they be, and fear it be a country of indian enemy. they land two league below the port and when they see themselves out of the danger of the sea, every one take of that which he have, as much as he can carry on his back, and they travel up into the country and find indian which tell they where their fellow be and of that which he have, as much as he can carry on his back. and they travel up into the country and find indian which tell they where their fellow be and give they good entertainment, wherewith their sadness be turn into joy and th^y. thank god most humble for their deliverance out of so many danger. chap 42: how they come to panuco and how they be receive of the inhabitant from the time that they put out of rio grande to the sea at their departure from florida until they arrive in the river of panuco, be 52. day. they come into the river of panuco, the 10. of september 1543.. they arrive in the river of panuco, 1543.. septem 10.. they go up the river. of panuco be 52. day. they come into the river of panuco, the 10. of september 1543.. they arrive in the river of panuco, 1543.. septem 10.. they go up the river with their brigandine. they travel four day and because the wind be but little and many time it serve they not, because of the many turn which the river make and the gre^t curr^nt draw they up by tow and that in many place. for this cause they make very little way and with great labour, and see the execution of their desire to be defer, which be to come among christian and to see the celebration of divine service which so long time they have not see. they leave the brigandine with the mariner and be defer, which be to come among christian and to see the celebration of divine service which so long time they have not see. they leave the brigandine with the mariner and go by land to panuco. all of they be apparel in deer skin, tan and die black to wit, coat, hose and shoe. when they come to panuco present, they go to the church to pray and give god thanks that so miraculouse have save they. the townsman which, before be advertise by the indian and know of their arrival, carry some of they to their house and entertain they who they know and have acquaintance of or because they be their countryman. the mayor take the governor home to his house and command all the. to their house and entertain they who they know and have acquaintance of, or because they be their countryman, the mayor take the governor home to his house and command all the rest, assoon as they come to be, lodge 6. and 6. and 10. and 10. according to the ability of every townsman, and all of they be provide for by their host of many hen and bread, of maiz and fruit of the country which be such as be, in the isle of cuba, the description o^ panuco, whereof before i have speak. the town of panuco may contain above 70.. family, the most of their house be of lime and stone and some make of timber, and all of they be thatch it be a town of panuco may contain above 70. family. the most of their house be of lime and stone and some make of timber and all of they be thatch it be a poor country and there be neither gold nor silver in it. the inhabitant live there in great abundance of victual and servant. the rich have not above 500 crown rend a year and that be in cotton clothes, hen and maiz, which the indian, their servant, do give they for tribute. 311. christian arrive at panuco. there arrive there of those that come out of florida, three hundred and eleven christian present. the mayor send one of the townsman in post to advertise the viceroy, don antonio de mendoca, which be resident in mexico, that of of florida, three hundred and eleven christian present. the mayor send one of the townsman in post to advertise the viceroy, don antonio de mendoca, which be resident in mexico, that of the people that go with don ferdinando de soto to discover and conquer florida. three hundred and eleven man be arrive there that see they be employ in his majesty service. he will take some order to provide for they, whereat the viceroy and all the inhabitant of mexico wonder, for they think they be miscarry because they have travel so far within the main land of florida and have no news of they for so long a time. and it seem a wonderful thing unto they how they can save themselves so long among infidel. main land of florida and have no news of they for so long a time, and it seem a wonderful thing unto they how they can save themselves so long among infidel, without any fort wherein they may fortify themselves and without any other succour at all. present the viceroy send a warrant wherein he command that whithersoever they send, they shall give they victual and as many indian for their carriage as they need, and where they will not furnish they, they may take those thing that be necessary perforce without incur any danger of law. this warrant be so ready. obey that, by the way, before they come to the town they come to receive they with hen and victual of the favour which they find. law, this warrant, be so ready, obey that, by the way, before they come to the town they come to receive they with hen and victual of the favour which they find at the hand of the viceroy and of the inhabitant of the city of mexico. from panuco to the great city, temistitan, mexico be 60. league and other 60.. from panuco to the port cruz, where they take ship for spain and those that come from spain do land to go for nueva espanna. these three town stand in a triangle, to wit cruz to the south, panuco to the north and mexico to the west, 60. league. asunder the country be so inhabit with indian that, from town to town, those which be far be. to the south, panuco to the north and mexico to the west, 60. league asunder. the country be so inhabit with indian that from town to town those which be far be but a league and half a league asunder. some of they that come from florida stay a month in panuco to rest themselves, other fifteen day, and every one, as long as he list for there, be none that show a sour countenance to his guest, but rather give they any thing that they have and seem to be grieve when they take their leave, which, be to be believe for the victual which the indian do, pay they for tribute be more than they can spend and in that town be no commerce. and there leave which be to be believe for the victual which the indian do, pay they for tribute be more than they can spend and in that town be no commerce and there dwell but few spaniard there and they be glad of their company. the mayor divide all the emperor clothes which he have, which there they pay, he for his tribute among those that will come to receive they, those which have shirt of mail, lest be glad man, for they have a horse for one shirt of mail. some horse themselves, and such as can not, which be the great part, take their journey on foot in which they be well receive of the indian that be in the town and better serve than they can. can not- which be the great part- take their journey on foot, in which they be well receive of the indian that be in the town and better serve than they can have be in their own house, though they have be well to live for. if they ask one hen of a indian, they bring they four, and if they ask any of the country fruit, though it be a league off, they run present for it. and if any christian find himself evil at ease, this be the manner of china. to carry man in chair. they carry he in a chair from one town to another. in whatsoever town they come the cacique by a indian which carry a rod of justice in his hand. in chair. they carry, he in a chair, from one town to another, in whatsoever town. they come, the cacique, by a indian which carry a rod of justice in his hand, who they call tapile, that be to say a sergeant. command they to provide victual for they and indian to bear burden of such thing as they have and such as be needful to carry they that be sick. the viceroy send a portugal, 20. league from mexico, with great store of sugar, raisin of the sun and conserve and other thing fit for sick folk, for such as have need of they and have, give order to clothe they all at the emperor charge and their approach be know by the citizen of mexico. they. sick folk for such as have need of they and have give order to clothe they all at the emperor charge and their approach be know by the citizen of mexico. they go out of the town to receive they and with great courtesy request they in favour to come to their house. every one carry such as he, meet home with he and clothe they every one the best they can so that he which have the mean apparel- it cost above 30. ducat- as many as be willing to come to the viceroy house he command to be apparel and such as be person of quality, sit at his table and there be a table in his house for as many of the mean sort as he command to be apparel and such as be person of quality, sit at his table and there be a table in his house for as many of the mean sort as will come to it and he be present, inform who every one be to show he the courtesy that he deserve. some of the conqueror do set both gentleman and clown at their own table and many time make the servant sit cheek by cheek by his master and chief, the officer and man of base condition. do so for those which have better education. do inquire who every one be and make difference of person. but all do what they can with a good will and every one tell they who they have in their education, do inquire who every one be and make difference of person, but all do what they can with a good will and every one tell they who they have in their house that they shall not trouble themselves nor think themselves the worse to take that which they give they, for they have be in the like case and have be relieve of other, and that this be the custom of that country. god reward they all and god grant that those which it please he to deliver out of florida and to bring again into christendom may serve he, and unto those that die in that country and unto all that believe in he and confess his holy faith. god, for his mercy sake, grant the into christendom may serve he, and unto those that die in that country and unto all that believe in he and confess his holy faith. god, for his mercy sake, grant the kingdom of heaven, amen. chap 44, which declare some diversity and particularity of the land of florida and the fruit and beast and fowl that be in that country, from the port santo- port santo be in 29. degree on the west side of florida, where they land when they enter into florida- to the province of ocute, which may be 400. league, little more or less, be a very plain country and have many lake and thick wood and in some place they be of wild pinetree and be a weak soil. there be in more or less be a very plain country and have many lake and thick wood and in some place they be of wild pinetree and be a weak soil. there be in it neither mountain nor hill. the country of ocute be more fat and fruitful. it have thin wood and very goodly meadow upon the river from ocute. ocute to may be 130. league, 80. league thereof be desert and have many grove of wild pine tree through the wilderness great river do pass from to xuala. xuala may be 250. league. it be all a hilly country and xuala stand both in plain ground high and have goodly meadow on the river from thence forward to chiaha coca and talise. chiaha coca and talise be plain. a hilly country and xuala stand both in plain ground, high and have goodly meadow on the river. from thence forward to chiaha coca and talise. chiaha coca and talise be plain ground, dry and fat and very plentiful of maiz. from xuala to tascaluca, tascaluca may be 250.. league, from tascaluca to rio grande or the great river may be 300.. league: the country be low and full of lake. from rio grande, rio grande forward, the country be hire and more champion and best people of all the land of florida and along this river from aquixo. aquixo to pacaha and coligoa be 150.. league: the country be plain and the wood thin and in some place champion, very fruitful and pleasant. from coligoa, coligoa to river from aquixo, aquixo to pacaha and coligoa be 150.. league: the country be plain and the wood thin and in some place champion, very fruitful and pleasant. from coligoa, coligoa to be 250.. league of hilly country from a^^^^qu^ to agua^ay may be 230.. league of plain ground: from aguacay to the river of daycao: 120.. league: all hilly country from the port santo unto apalache. they travel from east to w^st (@) 72. and northwest, from to xuala, from south to north, from xuala to coca, from east to west, ^rom, coca to tascaluca and to rio grande, as far as the province of quizquiz and aquixo, from east to west, from aquixo to pacaha to the north, from pacaha to tulla, from east to west. and to rio grande, as far as the province of quizquiz and aquixo, from east to west, from aquixo to pacaha to the north, from pacaha to tulla, from east to west, and from tulla to from north to south, to the province of guachoya and daycao. the bread which they eat in all the land of florida be of maiz, which be like course millet, and this maiz be common in all the island and west indies, from t^e antiles forward. there be also in florida great store of walnut () and plum, mulberry and gr^pes. they sow and gather their maiz every one th^^r s^uerall crop. the fruit be common to all, for they grow abroad in the open field in great abundance without any need. gr^pes they sow and gather their maiz. every one th^^r s^uerall crop. the fruit be common to all, for they grow abroad in the open field in great abundance without any need of plant or dress. wh^re there be mountain (@) there be chestnut. they be somewhat small than the chestnut of spain. from rio grandee westward, the walnut differ from those that grow more eastward () for they be soft and like unto acorn, and those which grow from rio grandee to puerto santo, for the most part be hard ^nd the tree and walnut in show, like those of spain. there be a fruit through all the country which grow on a plant like ligoacan, which the indian do plant (). the fruit be like unto. in show, like those of spain. there be a fruit through all the country which grow on a plant like ligoacan, which the indian do plant (). the fruit be like unto pear rial. it have a very good smell and a excellent taste. there grow another plant in the open field which bear a fruit like unto strawberry- strawberry close to the ground, which have a very good taste. the plum be of two kind (@) of two ^^^ds, red and gray, of the make and bigness of nut and have three or four stone in they. these be better than all the plum of spain and they make far better prune of they in the grape there be only want of dress, for though they be. in they these be better than all the plum of spain and they make far better prune. of they in the grape there be only want of dress, for though they be big, they have a great kernel. all other fruit be very perfect and less hurtful than those of spain. there be in florida many bear and lion, beast, wolf, dear dog, cat, martem and coney. there be many wild hen as big as turkey, fowl, partridge, small like those of africa, crane, duck, pigeon, thrush and sparrow. there be certain black bird big than sparrow and lesser than stare. there be gosse, hawk, falcon, jerfalcon and all fowl of prey that be in spain. the indian be well proportion. those of the plain country be tall. sparrow and lesser than stare there be gosse, hawk, falcon, jerfalcon and all fowl of prey that be in spain. the indian be well proportion. those of the plain country be tall of body and better shape than those of the mountain. those of the inland have great store of maiz and commodity of the country than those that dwell upon the sea coast. the country along the sea coast be barren and poor and the people more warlike. the coast run from puerto santo to apalache, e^st and west, and from apalache to rio palmas from east to west, from r^o palmas unto nueva espanna from north to south. it be a gentle coast but it have many shoal and great shelf of sand. this relation of from east to west, from r^o palmas unto nueva espanna, from north to south. it be a gentle coast but it have many shoal and great shelf of sand. this relation of the discovery of florida be print in the house of andrew de burgos, printer and gentleman of the house of my lord cardinal the infante. it be finish the ten of february in the year one thousand five hundred fifty and seven, in the noble and most loyal city of euora.