to the right, noble and worthy advancer of the standart of christ among the gentile, the adventurer for the plantation of virginia. pray that nation may bless they and be bless by they. right, noble and worthy such as. do praise the worthy, do cloth they with the robe of other that have go before they in virtue of like nature, a thing which i can do of your plantation see. neither testament that i can find do afford we a parallel in man of like quality. that great and golden sentence: the seed of the woman shall gene break the serpent head, the only subject of all age with a part of the wisdom that be fold therein hitherto have beautify the world with admirable and pleasant. woman shall gene break the serpent head, the only subject of all age with a part of the wisdom that be fold therein hitherto have beautify the world with admirable and pleasant variety, more rich and delightful than all the ornament of prince palace or the curtain of solomon. here may we see the flood, the burn of sodom, the drown of pharaoh, the subdue of the canaanite by david and his son, the break of monarchy into chaff, the daniel surprise and conquer of great nation, ephe by fisherman with the sword of the spirit, the stamp of the dragon, the heathen empire into pee^es by constantine, euseb constantini, the desolation and nakedness of antichrist, now ready to be cast into the fire, manifest demonstration of the the stamp of the dragon. the heathen empire into pee^es by constantine, euseb constantini. the desolation and nakedness of antichrist, now ready to be cast into the fire, manifest demonstration of the serpent bruise head. but here be not. all these thing be do in a corner in comparison of that which be in hand and remain to be accomplish at the last judgement. long since the gospel of christ do ride forth, conquer that he may overcome, reve and and now the host that be in heaven do follow he on white horse. now the isai lord have make bare his holy arm in the sight revel of ^ll the gentile and all the end of the earth shall see the salvation of our god. now many. isai, lord have, make bare his holy arm in the sight. revel of ^ll the gentile, and all the end of the earth shall see the salvation of our god. now many mighty king have set their crown upon the head of christ. the valiant soldier say: the shield of the world belong to psalm, god. the true nobility have upon their horse bridle. holiness to the lord. and zach now, the wise and industrious merchant, do hold the riches of the gentile too, base a freight for his ship. he trade isai for his wisdom. that say sure the isle. wait for, i say, the lord and the ship of the ocean most especial, namely to carry the gospel abroad, the people in multitude, like strong thunder. that say: sure the isle wait for, i say, the lord and the ship of the ocean most especial, namely to carry the gospel abroad. the people in multitude, like strong thunder, do say hallelujah. and who be want in this revel bless expedition, sure not any tribe. praise you, the lord, for the people that offer judg, themselves so willing. for who can withdraw himself from concurrence in so good a action especial, when he shall but read or hear that one sentence, which deborah do sing: curse you, meroz, say, the angel of the lord. curse the inhabitant thereof, judg, because they come not forth to help the lord, this land be of old time. offer to our king, our late sovereign elizabeth, who story have lord, curse the inhabitant thereof, judg because they come not forth to help the lord. this land be of old time. offer to our king, our late sovereign elizabeth, who, story, have no peer among prince of her sex, be a pure virgin, find it, set foot in it and call it virginia. our most sacred sovereign in who be the spirit of his great ancestor, constantin t^e, pacifier of the world and planter of the gospel, euseb constantin in place most remote desire to present this land a pure virgin to christ, such as: do manage the expedition. be careful to carry thither no traitor nor papist that depend on the great whore. lord, finish this good work thou have. begin and marry this land a pure. manage the expedition, be careful to carry thither no traitor nor papist that depend on the great whore. lord, finish this good work thou have, begin and marry this land, a pure virgin, to thy kingly son, christ jesus. so shall thy name be magnify and we shall have a virgin or maiden britain, a comfortable addition to our great britain and now right worthy. if any ask a account of my vocation to write and preach thus much, i answer that although i can not satisfy their request, that will have i go. yet i can not omit to show my zeal to the glory of god. if they ask account of my dedication, i answer: your virtue have exact it if any man listen to be. can not omit to show my zeal to the glory of god. if they ask account of my dedication, i answer: your virtue, have exact it if any man listen to be curious or contentious. we have no such custom, nor the church of god. hold on your bless course and you shall receive blessing of christ. bless be the lord god, even the psalm god of israel, which only work great wonder, and have put these bless thought into your christian heart and bless be his glorious name for ever and let all the earth be fill with his glory. amen, amen. four most hearty affect in the cause of virginia: william simondsa, sermon preach at white chapel in the presence of many. the adventurer and planter. be fill with his glory. amen, amen. four most hearty affect in the cause of virginia. william simondsa, sermon preach at white chapel in the presence of many, the adventurer and planter for virginia. genesis, for the lord have say unto abraham: get thou out of thy country and from thy kindred and from thy father, house unto the land that i will show thou, and i will make of thou a great nation and will bless thou and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. i will bless they also that bless thou and curse they that curse thou, and in thou shall all the family of the earth be bless. this book of genesis contain the story of the creation and plantation of thou and curse they that curse thou, and in thou shall all the family of the earth be. bless. this book of genesis contain the story of the creation and plantation of heaven and earth with convenient inhabitant. the heaven have angel, the sky star, the air fowl, the water fish. the earth, furnish with plant and herb and beast, be provide for man a while to inhabit, who, after be to be receive into glory, like unto the angel matth, hereupon the lord, who, by his great decree, set down by his whole trinity, have determine that man shall rule among the creature. do make man, both male and female, after his own image, corinthian that be jesus christ, and give they this blessing. bring forth fruit. determine that man shall rule among the creature. do make man, both male and female, after his own image, corinthian that be jesus christ, and give they this blessing: bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the earth and subdue, gen it, etc. and howsoever. this precept may seem to find interruption by the sin of man that have incur the curse to die the death. yet we see that god gen and isai gen will not for any thing alter his oath and word that be go out of his mouth for unto noah. he revive this precept after the flood. but as all the commandment of god do find rebellion against they, so have this most special, insomuch that the whole earth conspire to make open. revive this precept after the flood. but as all the commandment of god do find rebellion against they, so have this most special. insomuch that the whole earth conspire to make open insurrection against it by build of a city, gen and town, the better to continue together. for the subdue of which rebellion, the lord come down gen and confound their language and scatter they abroad, not only to the overthrow of their ambition who seek a great name, but also to deprive they of his spiritual grace of salvation. one be not able to understand the other, and so of the son of noah be the nation divide after the gen flood among who the bless line of shem be not gen only plentiful, remember, but understand the other. and so of the son of noah be the nation divide after the gen flood among who the bless line of shem be not gen only plentiful, remember but also commend as obedient unto that first and great law of god. for terah, the father of abraham, with his family, be report to be find in a land, not they that they may fill the earth. the reason why terah and his family remove the context be record in these three verse and, in a word, be the call of abraham by the lord to remove. in the story. whereof be these two point: first the, the vocation of abraham in these three verse and then his obedience unto this heavenly call in the four. lord to remove in the story. whereof be these two point: first the, the vocation of abraham, in these three verse, and then his obedience unto this heavenly call, in the four verse. his vocation have first the commandment of the lord and then the reason and argument by which god do induce he thereunto. the commandment be to take a journey in which we must consider the place from whence and whither go out of. he be to go the place from whence be not describe cosmographical but moral, contain three important reason in all good sort to rest he where he be: the first be his country, thy country, which be pleasant and fruitful. the second, his kindred, which be holy and bless the three, his good sort to rest he, where he be. the first be his country, thy country, which be pleasant and fruitful. the second, his kindred, which be holy and bless. the three, his father, house, which be love and rich. hence must he go and leave they all behind if they will not go with he. the place whither he must go be also very general. note out, namely the place which god will show he, a place utter to the place which i shall show thou, unknown unto he, so that from thence he have no argument to quicken he to that voyage, the argument which the lord do use to persuade, argument from promise abraham, to this journey, be all take from the promise of god a. argument to quicken he to that voyage, the argument which the lord do use to persuade, argument from promise abraham to this journey, be all take from the promise of god a strong reason than the very sweetness of paradise can be unto a faithful man. these promise do partly concern abraham himself, partly those among who he shall live. for himself, the lord do promise four thing. first, tha^ whereas himself be childless, he w^uld make a great nation of he, a great nation, a thing which the builder of babel drift but be disappoint of by the judgement. bless thou of god. the second promise be that god will bless he by give he the good thing of this present world and that which be to. of by the judgement. bless thou of god. the second promise: be that god will bless he by give he the good thing of this present world and that which be to come, a thing which the builder of babel lose by transgress. god, commandment of replenish the earth, a great name. the three thing: be that the lord will make he a great name with much honor and good report, which the confound builder of babel seek and miss because of their sin. the four promise: a blessing: be that he shall be a blessing that be such a one as man shall be the better where he come and so think themselves. see that through he, as through a golden pipe, the lord will bestow his that be such a one as man shall be the better where he come and so think themselves. see that through he, as through a golden pipe, the lord will bestow his blessing upon his family and other among who he live. the argument that concern other man be of two sort: the one be their temporal estate, the other their spiritual concern. the temporal estate of those among who he live, god will dispose of as they dispose themselves towards abraham, for the lord will bless they and cause they. bless they that bless thou to prosper, that seek the blessing and prosperity of abraham, and again, if they stand otherwise affect towards abraham, then will the lord also set his face. curse they that curse thou. to prosper, that seek the blessing and prosperity of abraham. and again, if they stand otherwise affect towards abraham, then will the lord also set his face. curse they that curse thou against they, in these word, and i will curse they that curse thou so that nothing they have shall prosper until they be gracious and favourable to abraham. that which concern their spiritual estate be indeed a argument to a faithful man, strong than chain of adamant, namely that by this mean the people all abroad shall receive the grace of salvation. all nation bless the thing he promise be salvation by the gospel. in this word, i will bless the mean be abraham and his seed, jesus christ, in these word, in thou the person. bless the thing he promise be salvation by the gospel. in this word, i will bless the mean be abraham and his seed, jesus christ. in these word, in thou the person to receive benefit by he be infinite, even all the family of noah, by who the nation of all the earth be divide. in these word, and in thou shall all the family of the earth be bless. this be the sense of these three verse, in which be very many excellent thing to be observe, but we will only insist upon those which be proper to our occasion, etc. doctrine: jo abraham, call the lord, call abraham to go into another country. there be no doubt but that there be a double manner of call. be proper to our occasion etc. doctrine: jo: abraham call the lord, call abraham to go into another country. there be no doubt but that there be a double manner of call. the one, ordinary, by some know precept of the word of god. the other, mat number, extraordinary, when, as by dream or by vision, god require any duty to be, do now, if it be demand how abraham be call to go into another country, the answer be both ordinary and extraordinary. it be a know rule of the word of god. conclude and pronounce before the creation and often repeat afterward, that man shall spread abroad etc. and inhabit the earth and fill it. hitherto belong that which god say: let we make man in. pronounce before the creation and often repeat afterward, that man shall spread abroad, etc. and inhabit the earth and fill it. hitherto belong that which god say: let we make man in our image and let they rule over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the gen heaven and over the beast and over all the earth. then must he replenish the earth, else can he not rule over all. to the same effect, be that speak of adam after his fall, that god send he forth of the genes garden of eden to till the earth, so that the fall of adam do not in the least thing cause the lord to alter his first decree. so to noah, after the flood gen. eden to till the earth, so that the fall of adam do not in the least thing cause the lord to alter his first decree. so to noah, after the flood gen bring forth fruit and multiply, grow plentiful in the earth and increase therein and replenish the earth. by all this, it do appear that god do call abraham abroad by a general vocation, but when he be call to a certain place and under certain condition, it be also plain that withal he have a special and extraordinary call, either by dream or by vision or by some such extraordinary mean which, till the canon of the scripture, come full in be to be obey as the write word of god. yet still we must remember: vision, or by some such extraordinary mean which, till the canon of the scripture come full in, be to be obey as the write word of god. yet still we must remember that this special calling be subject to the general law of replenish the earth. for although god call he to one land, yet to uphold the general rule, god often lay a necessity upon he to spread further. for in this chapter, by reason of a famine, he be constrain to sojourn gen, etc. in egypt. god do also tell he before hand that his seed shall be a stranger in a land that be not gen they four hundred year. it be true that the jew do hold themselves so confine to their own land. his seed shall be a stranger in a land that be not gen they four hundred year. it be true that the jew do hold themselves so confine to their own land that they be as loath to forego their inheritance as from the sacrament of their salvation. witness: king, be naboth that answer the king, the lord, keep i from give the inheritance of my father unto thou. and yet, when god will have it, so as when there be famine, elimelech and his family, r^th, go to sojourn among the gentile. in time of war, david take his father and mother and carry sam they to sojourn with the king of moab and act when, as we read, that there be dwell at jerusalem. jew of war, david, take his father and mother and carry sam they to sojourn with the king of moab and act. when, as we read that there be dwell at jerusalem jew of every nation under heaven, it be plain that the jew do spread abroad, not only to sojourn for a time and then to come again, but to act, inhabit and replenish the whole earth. paul be also a jew, bear in cilicia, even in a roman colony. the reason why god will have he to fill, the reason to know god work earth be, because the lord will have his work to be know. now, in diverse country, god have his diverse work of herb and tree and beast and fish and fowl and serpent etc. because the lord will have his work to be know now in diverse country. god have his diverse work of herb and tree and beast and fish and fowl and serpent etc. which, if the people of god come not there, can praise the psalm creator. when david say: all thy work, praise thou, god, and thy saint bless thou. they show the glory of thy kingdom and speak of thy power, the implication be manifest that his saint must be witness of all his work in all climate, for else they can bless he in all his work. another reason: be spread of knowledge that one that have the knowledge of the fear of god shall communicate it to other. hereupon psalm, be it that david do. all his work. another reason be spread of knowledge, that one that have the knowledge of the fear of god shall communicate it to other. hereupon psalm: be it that david do teach we to pray. thus have mercy on we, lord, and bless we and cause thy face to shine among we. selah mark this that he bid we pray. god, be merciful unto we, the mean. how be this that they may know thy way upon earth and thy save health among all nation. whereby he do imply that god have withhold some mercy from we till all nation have the mean of salvation. this be exodus a cause why god send abraham posterity into egypt. that by their mean, pharaoh, who heart be big and from. we till all nation have the mean of salvation. this be exodus, a cause why god send abraham posterity into egypt. that by their mean, pharaoh, who heart be big and will not acknowledge god, may be constrain to fall down and say i have sin against exodus the lord. the cause also of the captivity of the jew in babylon in the secret providence of god. be that the monarch of the world who think, daniel, there be no god, can come near. they in greatness may be as beast before god. acknowledge that it be god that give kingdom to who he will and when the lord have, cause his people to return and to build their city and temple. yet will not god foreslowe. it be god that give kingdom to who he will and when the lord have, cause his people to return and to build their city and temple. yet will not god foreslowe, the enforce of his precept fill the earth, for whereas by reason of his promise he can not send the people abroad till christ come to make his glory know he bring upon they gog and magog with their numbersome ezek army. the reason be that the heathen may know the lord i will be, magnify and sanctify and know in the eye of many nation. then here must we know that what inducement abraham have to go use i out of his country by a general call the same do bind all his son according. many nation. then here must we know that what inducement abraham have to go, use i out of his country by a general call the same do bind all his son according to the faith, to go likewise abroad, when god do not otherwise call they to some special affair, how ever? still they must have a long and a like to spread the gospel abroad. and that this point may be evident, convict unto we, christ, our savior, have, according to his infinite wisdom, revive the old law of fill the earth in a most excellent manner. go teach, say he, all nation and baptize they in the matth name of the father, the son and the holy ghost. give he this commandment to his apostle only. excellent manner. go teach, say he, all nation and baptize they in the matth name of the father, the son and the holy ghost. give he this commandment to his apostle only. have not also the labor of godly preacher, which they have spread over the face of the whole earth, be bestow by the power of this commandment. and though the word as they lie do bind the minister of the word to endeavour the propagation of the gospel with all their power. yet not only they, for we read that poor tentmaker and other have do much good in spread the act gospel according to their vocation. they also satisfy thus much of christ precept. neither can there be any doubt but that the lord that have do much good in spread the act gospel according to their vocation. they also satisfy thus much of christ precept. neither can there be any doubt but that the lord that call abraham into another country do also, by the same holy hand, call you to go and carry the gospel to a nation that never hear of christ. the prophet zachary speak of the day of the gospel. do show that it be a good vocation for man to go abroad when the number of the child of god do exceed his word. be these, thus say the lord of host: my city shall yet be break with plenty. the lord shall yet comfort zion. unto zach who agree, the prophet isatah, the child of isa. these. thus say the lord of host, my city shall yet be break with plenty. the lord shall yet comfort zion. unto zach, who agree, the prophet isatah, the child of isa, thy barrenness, shall say again in thy ear: the place be too straight, for i give i place that i may dwell. wherefore see that, thanks be to god, we be throng with multitude. the lord of host himself have, give we the call of his child to objection not to enter other prince territory. seek for room and place to dwell in. and here may we have proceed to the next point, be it not for one scruple which some that think themselves to be very wise do cast in our way, which be this: here may we have proceed to the next point, be it not for one scruple which some that think themselves to be very wise do cast in our way, which be this: in effect, the country they say be possess by owner that rule and govern it in their own right, then with what conscience and equity can we offer to thrust they, by violence, out of their inheritance? answer conquest lawful. for answer to this objection. first, it be plain that the objecter suppose it not lawful to invade the territory of other prince by force of sword. this proposition, i confess, i never be willing to examine. consider my vocation be private. and if sigismond the emperor say, well, carrion, that he marvel every man avoid. force of sword. this proposition, i confess, i never be willing to examine. consider my vocation be private. and if sigismond the emperor say, well, carrion, that he marvel every man, avoid all labor and difficulty, but only to rule which be the most difficult of all other labor, then to give sentence of that which in rule be the most weighty, namely war, which be do with the great counsel must needs be a labor too heavy for a private man shoulder, and because myself be but weak eye in so great a mystery. come forth, you, great prince and monarch of assyria, persia, media, greece and rome, with your grave counselor and answer for your fact in conquer and subdue nation, for your story that be. forth you, great prince and monarch of assyria, persia, media, greece and rome, with your grave counselor, and answer for your fact in conquer and subdue nation, for your story that be wont to be read with singular admiration of your fortitude, your wisdom, your magnificence and your great justice, be now arraign and must be find guilty that through your side a action of true honor then, ever you attempt, may be wound. your strong title of the sword heretofore magnify by historian, politician and civilians, be to our objecter but a spider web, or the hatch of a cockatrice, his egg but whatsoever the rest can say for their own defence, the lord himself do say thus much for cyrus. thus say: isay the lord unto. the hatch of a cockatrice, his egg, but whatsoever the rest can say for their own defence, the lord himself do say thus much for cyrus. thus say: isay the lord unto cyrus, his anoint, who right hand i have hold to subdue nation. before he, therefore, will i weaken the loin of king and open the door before he, and the gate shall not be shut. i will go before thou and make the crooked straight, i will break the brazen door and burst the iron bar, and i will give thou the treasure of darkness and the thing hide in secret place. that thou may know that i be the lord which call thou by thy name, even the god of israel for jacob, my servant. darkness and the thing hide in secret. place that thou may know that i be the lord which call thou by thy name, even the god of israel, for jacob, my servant sake, and iraell, my elect, i will even call thou by thy name and name, thou though thou have not know. i then, who can blame cyrus and keep himself from blaspheme? the almighty, nay, that which be more to be tremble at. we must also to summon up and call to the bar the most holy, worthy of the scripture, and see if man or god have any thing to be say for they, why they shall not be condemn as injust, cruel and bloody. jacob, thy bless bow and sword, with the fruit whereof man or god have any thing to be say for they, why they shall not be condemn as injust, cruel and bloody. jacob, thy bless bow and sword with the fruit whereof thou blessed thy son joseph, the staff of gene, thy gray head and feeble knee must be break and burn and thou must be condemn for thy unlawful conquest. worthy joshuah and most worthy david, with thy cloud of worthy, who hang up so many shield in the house of god and who sweet sing that god be his fortitude and buckler psalm josh must incur the note of injustice. joshuah, where be thy virtue to set thy foot upon the neck of prince in their own kingdom and call of the mean of the people. must incur the note of injustice. joshuah, where be thy virtue to set thy foot upon the neck of prince in their own kingdom and call of the mean of the people to be thy partner in that indignity? david, how will thou answer for the blood thy sword have shed, which thou be wont to praise? there be none to it. nay, thou, glory of man sam and true type of christ, king solomon, who wisdom be like unto the wisdom of god, teach we to say somewhat in thy defence, for one grain of thy wisdom be of more worth than a talon of their leaden wit. that we be constrain to answer. give a account of his innocence. that say unto thou, gird thou with. thy wisdom be of more worth than a talon of their leaden wit. that we be constrain to answer. give a account of his innocence. that say unto thou: gird thou with thy sword upon thy psalm. thigh thou most mighty. thy right hand shall teach thou terrible thing. the people shall fall under thou. thy father, the son of ishai, make a sinful prayer for thou, as our objecter blaspheme when he say: thou shall so enlarge thy border that thy dominion psalm shall be from sea to sea and from the river to the end of the land. he will have thou too rigid when he say that thy enemy shall lick the dust. sure i be persuade that at the only name of so mighty, end of the land he will have thou too rigid when he say that thy enemy shall lick the dust. sure i be persuade that, at the only name of so mighty monarch and holy conqueror, our objecter, out of their modesty, will, with some distinction, qualify their proposition and say that it be not lawful by force to invade the territory of other prince that be in quiet possession in some sort, and in some case. i know that the devil himself, with all his distinction, that ever he make which be record in scripture or which he leave in hell in his cabinet of abstruse study, lock safe till he find out the jesuit, his trusty secretary, to keep they, i say none of they all. or which he leave in hell in his cabinet of abstruse study lock safe till he find out the jesuit, his trusty secretary, to keep. they- i say none of they all- can arm a subject against his prince without sin, but he that will set open his school in the fantastical shop of his addle imagination, for he will be, hiss out of the university and take upon he to nurture prince as petty tell they that they must not make offensive war if it be to gain the whole world to christ, shall never be bidder of guest to the marriage, matth luke of the king son who be require to compel they to come in. and if i may be so bold, i will fain. be bidder of guest to the marriage, matth luke, of the king son who be require to compel they to come in. and if i may be so bold, i will fain ask one question of these objecter that come drop out of some anabaptist spicery whether, if it be unlawful to conquer the crown, sit well on the head of our most sacred sovereign who day be as the day of heaven lord for. by this objection they show that have they power to untwist that which in so many age have be well spin they will write he crownelesse. as far as he have his title from the conqueror, no wrong to bring in the gospel matth, but god forbid, say the objecter, that we shall. they will write: he crownelesse as far as he have his title from the conqueror. no wrong to bring in the gospel matth. but god forbid, say the objecter, that we shall do any wrong at all. no, not to the devil. the rule of christ be excellent. cast out the beam of thy own eye, so shall thou see clear to cast the mote out of thy brother eye. if you will needs be cast stone, let he begin first, that be without sin. but john to the point. our objecter will not whip a child to teach he learning and virtue for fear of do wrong what wrong. i pray you do the apostle in. go about to alter the law of nation, even against the child to teach he learning and virtue, for fear of do wrong what wrong? i pray you do the apostle in go about to alter the law of nation, even against the express commandment of the prince, and to set up the throne of christ. if your mouth be so foul to charge they with wrong, as the gentile apol do, we have more need to provide you a medicine for a canker mouth and a stink breath then to make you any answer at all. but in enter of other country there must no blood mean to be shed. needs be much lamentable effusion of blood. certain our objecter be hatch of some popish egg and it may be in a jesvit vault where they feed themselves. mean to be shed needs be much lamentable effusion of blood. certain our objecter be hatch of some popish egg, and it may be in a jesvit vault where they feed themselves fat with torment. innocent, why be there no remedy but assoon as we come see-white the way to the church on land, like wolf and lion and tiger, long famish, we must tear in piece, murder and torment the natural inhabitant with cruelty never read nor hear of before. must we needs, burn million of they and cast million into the sea? must we bait they with dog that shall eat up the mother with their child? let such be the practice of the devil of abaddon, the son of perdition of antichrist and his fry. bait they with dog that shall eat up the mother with their child. let such be the practice of the devil of abaddon, the son of perdition, of antichrist and his fry that be of purple rome. as for the professor of the gospel, they know, with gene, only a sojourn ^udg war, only defensive jacob and his posterity to say to pharaoh to sojourn in the land. be we come for thy servant, have no pasture, etc. they can, with samson, live peaceable with the philistine till they be constrain by injustice to stand upon their defence. they can instruct gene, the barbaric prince, as joseph do pharaoh and his senator, and as daniel do nabuchadneze daniel, etc. and if these objecter have any brain in their their defence. they can instruct gene the barbaric prince, as joseph do pharaoh and his senator, and as daniel do nabuchadneze, daniel, etc. and if these objecter have any brain in their head- but those which be sick- they can easy find a difference between a bloody invasion and the plant of a peaceable colony in a waste only the plant of a peaceable colony country where the people do live but like dear in herd- and no, not in this stoop age of the gray head world, full of year and experience, have not as yet attain unto the first modesty that be gene in adam that know he be naked, where they know no god but the devil, nor sacrifice, but to offer their man and yet attain unto the first modesty that be gene in adam, that know he be naked, where they know no god but the devil, nor sacrifice, but to offer their man and child unto moloch. can it be a sin in philip to join himself to a ethiopian chariot act, be only now the ancient plant of colony. so high praise among the roman and all other nation, so vile and odious among we, that what be and have be a virtue in all other must be sin in we. and if our objecter be descend of the noble saxon blood, let he take heed lest while he cast a stone at we he wound his father. that first bring he in his loin from foreign part into. of the noble saxon blood. let he take heed lest while he cast a stone at we he wound his father. that first bring he in his loin from foreign part into this happy isle. but assure myself that these objecter speak, that they think not because they think that they shall not, and if the term of the person be change, will praise other nation for that which they dislike in we. i leave they to tremble before his glorious eye that all thing be naked and bare unto, and myself will pass to enforce the rest of our text upon the conscience of such which i hope to be the son of abraham. according to promise, abraham must get he out from his country, his kindred. the rest of our text upon the conscience of such which i hope to be the son of abraham. according to promise abraham must get he out from his country, his kindred, his country act and his father house his country be. call mesopotamia the sweet and most fruitful soil that be in the world, for it lie between the two great river, euphrates and tigris, which serve not pli^ nat history as other river do in other place, to bring fatness into the country but to sweep away the rankness and foison of the earth, lest, with the lustiness of the ground, the fruit of the earth shall rot or be choke or run up to weed. his kindred be every way of the best and noble. lest, with the lustiness of the ground, the fruit of the earth shall rot or be choke or run up to weed. his kindred be every way of the best and noble, his kindred stock of the son of noah, namely the family of gene shem, of who god say: bless be the god of shem, so bless be his tent, to wit the house and family of his posterity. that as of the most happy thing it be, say god persuade japheth and his posterity, of which we be a part, to dwell in the tent of shem. it seem, then, a matter of as great a peril to leave that kindred as to leave the church, and so salvation itself. so say peter to christ to. tent of shem. it seem, then, a matter of as great a peril to leave that kindred as to leave the church, and so salvation itself. so say peter to christ: to who, john, shall we go? thou have the word of eternal life, his father house. be worthy for he to have his father house continue in, for though some interpreter think that he be command to remove because his father house be idolatrous, it be not so. it be true indeed that they be idolater, because joshua do say to the child of israel: your father dwell, be yond, the flood in old time, terah the father, abraham, josh and the father of nachor, and serve other god. but what of this? sure it be more. your father dwell, be yond the flood in old time, terah the father, abraham, josh and the father of nachor, and serve other god. but what of this? sure it be more through ignorance of the law, then through rebellion and rage. for when, as terah, perceive that god be with his son, he leave all without bid to go with his son and have rather put himself in the tent of his son, then want the blessing of god. hereby it appear that they be a very love people one to the other and soft heart to obey when the lord do command his father. also be very wealthy, have many possession, much cattle, a numbersome and great family of servant, all which be nothing obscure imply. heart to obey when the lord do command his father. also be very wealthy, have many possession, much cattle, a numbersome and great family of servant, all which be nothing obscure, imply in that which be speak of abraham, abraham be very rich in cattle, in silver and gene, gene in gold, and that when abraham hear that his brother be, take he arm of they that be bear and bring up in his house three hundred and eighteen. for it be not likely but that this wealth and multitude come to he from his father. yet all these must he forsake and get he from they, unless they will follow he and his fortune, as they say, which they may if they will, otherwise if none will. yet all these must he forsake and get he from they, unless they will follow he and his fortune, as they say, which they may if they will, otherwise if none will go with he, but that he must be alone. yet must he still follow the commandment of his god that say: get thou out from among they. the reason be give by christ, that also call reason. the commandment be of price and must be obey matth, son from their father, owner from their house and land, brother from their brother, father from their child and husband from their wife, as he say, he that love father or mother more than i be not worthy of i. the commandment of god be the kingdom of heaven. child and husband from their wife. as he say, he that love father or mother more than i be not worthy of i. the commandment of god, be the kingdom of heaven. it be a treasure hide in the field, a matth psalm, pearl of great price which if he have the heart of a man that find he will s^ll, a^l that he have and buy it here. than we see that where god give a use, go when god call due vocation to spread abroad and inhabit the earth. neither the love of the country, be it never so fruitful, the love of kindred, be they never so noble and holy. the love of a man, father, house, be the family never so kind, so rich. country, be it never so fruitful. the love of kindred, be they never so noble and holy. the love of a man, father, house, be the family never so kind, so rich, so numbersome. no, nor the largeness of possession ought to be any impediment to keep we from obedience. indeed, it be true that if any thing can afford a man a sufficient excuse to defer obedience unto god, commandment of this kind it may be easy find in one of these branch. but what christ say to his follower be to be repeat here. christ say to one: follow i luke, and the same say, lord, suffer i first to go and bury my father, but christ endure no delay, for he present, subjoin a second. christ say to one: follow i luke. and the same say, lord, suffer, i first to go and bury my father, but christ endure no delay for he present subjoin. a second commandment: go thou and preach the kingdom of god. then another say: i will follow thou, lord, but let i first go and bid they farewell, which be at my house. and jesus say: no man that put his hand to the plough and look back, be apt to the kingdom of god. then the commandment of god must needs be obey whosoever else be neglect. i be not ignorant that many be not willing to reason of not go answer england, not like mesopotamia. go abroad and spread the gospel in this most honorable and be neglect. i be not ignorant that many be not willing to reason of not go. answer england, not like mesopotamia, go abroad and spread the gospel in this most honorable and christian voyage of the plantation of virginia. their reason be diverse according to their wit. one say england be a sweet country. true indeed, and the god of glory be bless that, whereas the country be as wild a forest but nothing so fruitful as virginia and the people in their nakedness do, arm themselves in a coat, armour of woad, fetch com c^soris, their curet and polderns from a painter shop by the civil care of conqueror and planter. it be be now become a very paradise in comparison of kindred, not like abraham that. their curet and polderns from a painter shop by the civil care of conqueror and planter. it be be now become a very paradise in comparison of kindred. not like abraham that it be, but how sweet soever it be, i be sure it can compare with me^^potamia, where abraham dwell but say another: my kinidred will not be. forsake kindred what kindred. sure thy kindred be hardly so honorable and bless as the kindred of abraham be and for any thing that i can see. since atheist and papist have get out of their serpent hole and converse with man, they have sow such cockle among our wheat that in many place a man be in no such peril to be cheat and cozen, if not murder. hole and converse with man. they have sow such cockle among our wheat that in many place a man be in no such peril to be cheat and cozen, if not murder and poison, as among his own kindred that be affect that way. some few, and those very few, be not willing to leave their father house where any thing may be hope for after the death of their parent. but for the most part the world perceive that, except it be to join in a deadly feud or some piece of excellent villainy. the english proverb be true: the far from kin, the near to friend. but look serious into the land and see whether there be not just cause, if not a necessity, to seek. english proverb be true: the far from kin, the near to friend. but look serious into the land and see whether there be not just cause, if not a necessity, to seek abroad, the people cause to seek abroad. bless be god. do swarm in the land as young be in a hive in june, insomuch that there be very hardly room for one man to live by another. the mighty like old, strong be, thrust the weak as young out of their hive. lord of manor, convert township in which be a hundred or two hundred communicant to a shepherd and his dog, the true labor husbandman that sustain the prince by the plough who be wont to feed many poor, to set many people on work. hundred communicant to a shepherd and his dog, the true labor husbandman. that sustain the prince by the plough. who be wont to feed many poor, to set many people on work and pay twice as much subsidy and fifteen to the king for his proportion of earth as his landlord do for ten time as much. that be wont to furnish the church with saint, the muster, with able person to fight for their sovereign. be now in many place, turn labourer and can hardly escape the statute of rogue and vagrant. the gentleman have get most of the tillage in his hand. he have rot sheep to sell at michaelmas his summer feed ox at easter ask no better price for hay than his beast to. get most of the tillage in his hand. he have rot sheep to sell at michaelmas his summer feed. ox at easter ask no better price for hay than his beast to keep that till spring. that they get at grass by these mean he can keep his corn till the people starve. always provide that the poor husbandman which be leave and the clothier must buy their seed and wool at such a rate that shall wear they out in a very few year. and be it not that the honest and christian merchant do often help, who put all his estate upon the providence of god, which they call venture to bring corn into the land for which he have many a bitter curse of the often help, who put all his estate upon the providence of god, which they call venture to bring corn into the land for which he have many a bitter curse. of the curse cornmonger, we shall find a extreme famine. in the midst of our great plenty, the rich shopkeeper have the good, honest, poor labourer at such advantage that he can grind his facewhen he please the poor mettle man, work his bone out and swell himself in the fire. yet for all his labor have charge of wife and child. he can hardly keep himself from the alm box always provide that his master to who he work will give never a penny towards his live. but they can tell of their own knowledge that if himself from the alm box, always provide that his master, to who he work, will give never a penny towards his live. but they can tell of their own knowledge that if the poor man be a good husband he may live well, for he receive much money in the year at their hand, very near four penny for every six penny worth of work. the thoughtful poor woman that have her small child stand at her knee and hang on her breast. she work with her needle and labor with her finger. her candle go not out by night. she be often delude the bitterness of her life with sweet song that she sing to a heavy heart. sometime she sing- have mercy on i lord. sometime not out by night. she be often delude the bitterness of her life with sweet song that she sing to a heavy heart. sometime she sing: have mercy on i, lord. sometime help lord, for good and godly man do perish and decay. sometime judge and revenge my cause, lord, and many such like which. when a man of understanding do hear, he do with pity praise god that have give such mean to mock hunger with and to give patience. i warrant you her song. want no passion. she never say, lord, but a salt tear drop from her sorrowful head, a deep sigh breathe as a furnace from her ache heart that weep with the head for company with tear of sweet blood and when all tear drop from her sorrowful head, a deep sigh breathe as a furnace from her ache heart that weep with the head for company with tear of sweet blood, and when all the week be end she can hardly earn salt for her water gruel to feed on. upon the sunday, many such sweet be in england, which i know not how better to interpret then to say: the strong old be, do beat out the young to swarm and hive themselves elsewhere. take the opportunity, good, honest labourer, which indeed bring all the honey to the hive. god may so bless you that the proverb may be true of you that a may swarm be worth a king ransom. the place whither abraham must go be to the hive. god may so bless you that the proverb may be true of you that a may swarm be worth a king ransom. the place whither abraham must go be to the land iijo, which the lord will set himsee a commandment fit for god to persuade by no argument. take from the sweetness and fruitfulness of the place. thus, do the apostle to the hebrew render this place by faith, abraham, when he be call, obey god, heb to go into a place which afterward he shall receive for inheritance. and he go out not know whither he go. the like commandment do the lord give to the child of israel when they come out of egypt, for they must not choose their own way, but not know whither he go. the like commandment do the lord give to the child of israel when they come out of egypt, for they must not choose their own way but follow the cloudy pillar that lead they. for at the commandment of the lord they pitch and at the numb commandment of the lord they journey. keep the watch of the lord. at the commandment of the lord they journey, sometime where the water be bitter, sometime where there be no water, sometime where the place be full of fiery serpent. yet can they not be their own chooser, but must follow where the lord go before for rom, god, in his way, can endure no counsellor. he will be the shepherd, we the sheep of. not be their own chooser but must follow where the lord go before. for rom, god, in his way, can endure no counsellor. he will be the shepherd, we the sheep of his pasture reason, content to be god creature, he will be the potter. we must content ourselves with the condition of the potter vessel wherefore we be bind. if god command to follow he though, blindfold again the lord. do not tell he whither he shall go to keep he in suspense. that the obedience of faith may the more effectual appear. for if the lord have entice he by argument, take from the opportunity and sweetness of the place, how shall it be know whether he go by the power of the promise of god? the lord have, entice he by argument, take from the opportunity and sweetness of the place. how shall it be know whether he go by the power of the promise of god or by some carnal inducement? we know the devil say to god of job, do job. fear god, for nought haste job thou, not make a hedge about he and about his house. and we also know what christ say to they that follow job he, you seek i, not because you see the miracle that be for any respect they have to his godhead, but because you eat of the loaf and be fill, from which imputation the lord will free his servant abraham, who he purpose to make the father of the faithful and godhead, but because you eat of the loaf and be fill, from which imputation the lord will free his servant abraham, who he purpose to make the father of the faithful and give he for a example to all posterity. so deal the lord in the wilderness with the child of israel. he let they see no possibility to live in the world, but sustain they by extraordinary miracle, give they manna and qua^les that they may follow the step of their father, abraham, and know that man live, not by deut bread only, but by every word that proceed out of the mouth of god. do man live then? here we see where use god. do command he be to be obey, without ask of any question. every word that proceed out of the mouth of god do man live? then here we see where use god. do command he be to be obey, without ask of any question. abraham must go to a land he know not whither, because god will have it. so he must not say a lion may be in the prou street, lest he find a serpent bite he at home as he lean on the wall. how much more, when the land be discover to be as much better than the place in which we live as the land of canaan be better than the roar wilderness, ought we to be willing to go whither god call the child of numb israel. have word by their spy the land. the land of canaan be better than the roar wilderness. ought we to be willing to go whither? god call the child of numb israel? have word by their spy. the land which we walk through to search it be a very good land. if the lord love we, he will bring we to this land and give it we, which be a land that flow with milk and ^oni^. thence they bring a bunch of grape and load numb deut two man as they carry it on a bar upon their shoulder. sure, if such motive as these can not make they ready to run to the place, it appear that they have neither the fear of god- that will not be persuade by he, nor the motive, as these can not make they ready to run to the place. it appear that they have neither the fear of god that will not be persuade by he, nor the wit of reasonable man that will not respect their own benefit. what shall we say then to our people which have in they so little edge to follow their own thrift? the land, by the constant report of all that have see it be a good land, with the fruitfulness whereof and pleasure of the climate, the plenty of fish and fowl, england, our mistress, can compare- no, not when she be in her great pride, it be say- of the land of canaan that isaac sow in that land and gene find in the same. mistress can compare- no, not when she be in her great pride, it be say- of the land of canaan that isaac sow in that land and gene find in the same year a hundred fold by estimation. and the text add: and so the lord bless he. but here be great matter than so, for if i count aright, this land give five hundred fold at one harvest for the ear of wheat which i have see be ten in square and fifty long, and yet they say that common this return be little better than the three part every stalk bear ordinary, three such ear of wheat. as for the opportunity of the place, i leave it to the grave politician. and for the commodity, let than the three part every stalk bear ordinary three such ear of wheat. as for the opportunity of the place, i leave it to the grave politician. and for the commodity, let the industrious merchant speak. but for food and raiment, here be enough to be have for the labor of master, and subdue the soil, the child of israel that be in the wilderness ready to perish if god withdraw his miraculous hand. like a stiffnecked people as they be refuse to go, fall into a mutiny and make a commotion upon the news that the land have fence, city and number wall town exceed great. and because there be the son of anak, mighty ^^nts that be arm in brass and their spear like a weaver. the land have fence city and number wall town exceed great. and because there be the son of anak, mighty ^^nts that be arm in brass and their spear like a weaver cloth beam. for they forget the god that bring they out of egypt and that make the rage wave of the sea to stand in heap and take the office of strong wall that they may easy march through upon dry land. they forget that god be the creator of the mountain, whereof one of the least be strong than all, the son of anak. they forget that god put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross. but we shall be worse than mad to be discourage by any such imagination of this place. anak. they forget that god put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross. but we shall be worse than mad to be discourage by any such imagination. of this place, there be but poor arbour for castle base and homely shed for walled town. a mat be their strong portcullis, a naked breast their target of best proof. a arrow of reed on which be no iron, their most fearful weapon of offence. here be no fear of nine hundred iron charet their god be the enemy judg ^et of mankind that seek who he may devour. a murder from the beginning. that labor o^n the destruction of those that serve he most devout. here that scripture have a full accomplishment. in that day shall the he may devour a murder from the beginning. that labor o^n the destruction of those that serve he most devout here that scripture, have a full accomplishment. in that day shall the lord defend the inhabitant of jerusalem, and he that be feeble among they shall be be david that slay his ten thousand and the house of david as god, as the angel of the lord, before they that destroy the most puissant army of the assyrian that come against jerusalem. wherefore, ^^ay see, we be content when the king do press we out to war to go. we know not whither nor under who and can propose no thing unto we but to fight with a mighty enemy. let we be cheerful to go to the. war to go. we know not whither nor under who and can propose no thing unto we but to fight with a mighty enemy. let we be cheerful to go to the place that god will show we to possess, in peace and plenty, a land more like the garden of eden which the lord plant than any part else of all the earth. the lord do promise to enrich he with many iiijo deut blessing if he be obedient to his call. a example of that sweet sanction of the law when the lord do allure man to keep it by the abundance of his blessing. in this place, the lord do promise unto abraham four most excellent mercy of all man of understanding most earnest desire. allure man to keep it by the abundance of his blessing. in this place, the lord do promise unto abraham four most excellent mercy of all man of understanding most earnest desire. the first thing he promise unto he be that the a great nation. lord will make he a great nation, a thing which in the begin of the plantation of the world by all man, be principal desire with the great long. out of this desire arise the take of many mal wife, whereas god do make but one. hence also rise a reproach unto the barren, though the lord have shut up the womb. this appear by leah who say: when she bear a son. now, therefore, my go ^^m husband will ^ove i and unto the barren, though the lord have shut up the womb. this appear by leah who say: when she bear a son, now, therefore, my go ^^m husband will ^ove i, and again now will my husband keep i company because i have bear he three son. it appear also by the story of hannah, of who, it be say, her adversary vex, she sore, which be her husband, other wife for she upbraid she, because the lord have make her barren. it appear also that even to the time of the gospel, it be a reproach to a woman if she be barren, as elizabeth say, when she conceive with child. thus, have the luke lord deal with i in the day when he look on i. reproach to a woman if she be barren, as elizabeth say, when she conceive with child. thus, have the luke lord deal with i in the day when he look on i to take from i my rebuke among man. yes, it be in those day a speech curse: be the barren that bear not and the breast that give not, suck no marvel. then, if it be a argument very powerful to persuade abraham to go under this condition, especial when abraham be full of year, elder gene than his father be when he beget he and also gene his wife be well, strike in year in so much that it cease to be with she after the manner of woman and to let it appear that. he and also gene his wife be well, strike in year in so much that it cease to be with she after the manner of woman, and to let it appear that he be exceed affect, with a desire to multiply and increase. when god come to he and comfort he thus: fear gene, not abraham. i be thy buckler and thy exceed great reward. he make this answer to god: what will thou give i? for? the text do say he be exceed rich. see, i go childless, as if he have. say that he prefer the blessing of multiplication before all the world beside. now, here do god promise he upon his obedience, not only to give go he a child, or that he shall beget. prefer the blessing of multiplication before all the world beside. now, here do god, promise he upon his obedience, not only to give go he a child, or that he shall beget twelve prince, as it be say of ishmael, but he will make he a great nation, a nation that not man, but god call great, that be exceed great, for imprint of which go gene ^^ heb ^^ promise in the heart of abraham. he call he to see the innumerable star of the sky, the infinite sand by the sea and the mote of the dust of the earth, which he will make fit comparison to express the greatness of this nation. then see answer to the objection of be extinguish whatsoever be promise to. of the dust of the earth, which he will make fit comparison to express the greatness of this nation. then see: answer to the objection of be extinguish whatsoever. be promise to abraham, be also promise to all that be of his faith and obedience. here be a answer to such as object. they be loath to go from home because they know not what shall become of they, for if they once get into a other country they think there be a end of they and all they. this the lord answer: not so, but obey the commandment and god will open the barren womb and make she to dwell with a family psalm and to be a joyful mother of child. praise the lord jacob thus: obey the commandment and god will open the barren womb and make she to dwell with a family psalm and to be a joyful mother of child. praise the lord jacob, thus, praise god with my s^affe, come i over, go this jordan. and now have i get two band, the second thing which the lord do promise. god will bless he unto abraham. be that he will bless he. he, i say, and the nation that shall come of he. what be mean by this blessing? the patriarch isake, do in part, make plain, when he dispose of this blessing to jacob, which his father abraham, have of god and leave to he his word. be these, god, give thou of the dew of heaven, gene and he dispose of this blessing to jacob, which his father, abraham, have of god and leave to he his word. be these: god, give thou of the dew of heaven, gene and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of wheat and wine. let people be thy servant and nation bow unto thou. be thou lord over thy brother and let thy mother child honor thou. in sum, he bless he with plenty and authority. howbeit these thing be but a part of the blessing. the remainder of this blessing, which indeed be most excellent, contain the substance whereof those temporal blessing be but the type and shadow, and as it be the sacrament. when moses do say my doctrine, deut shall drop as the rain and my the substance whereof those temporal blessing be but the type and shadow, and as it be the sacrament. when moses do say my doctrine, deut shall drop as the rain and my speech shall still as the dew, as the shower upon the herb and as the great rain upon the grass, it be plain that the dew be but the type of the word of god and his gracious spirit that do accompany it, as all the promise which be deliver in a temporal phrase have a spiritual sense, to which purpose be that in the epistle to the hebrew, by faith, abraham abode in the heb land of promise as in a strange country for he look for a city, have a foundation, who builder and the epistle to the hebrew. by faith, abraham abode in the heb land of promise as in a strange country for he look for a city. have a foundation. who builder and maker, be god that be a heavenly one. in this blessing, then, be there all good thing. have the promise of tim, the life present and of that which be to come. for this be the profit be get by godliness. so when the child of israel, exodus, come out of egypt, they come forth rich with silver and gold and with great substance, as the gene lord have show unto abraham before. but that be deut, not all, for the lord. send his angel to accompany they, raise they up, prophet of their brother erect. as the gene lord have show unto abraham before. but that be deut, not all, for the lord. send his angel to accompany they. raise they up, prophet of their brother, erect number corinthian. answer to the objection of lose the blessing of god. his tabernacle among they, yes, say saint paul. they drink of the spiritual rock that follow they, and the rock be christ. and here be a answer to a second obiecton of such as will not go abroad for fear of lose the blessing of god. diverse be the difficulty into which a man be cast when he live among barbaric people. sure he can have the blessing of god that be mingle among the heathen. he must lose the preach of the word. a man be cast when he live among barbaric people, sure he can have the blessing of god that be mingle among the heathen, he must lose the preach of the word of god and the purity of the sacrament. thus be he undo in body and soul. to this the lord reply that to he that do willfull with the breach of god commandment, run into tentation. the lord do bring upon he the curse that david forewarn his son of. if thou chronicle forsake he, he will cast thou off for ever. but if a man leave his country at god commandment, the blessing of the lord shall ever wait upon he to feed his body and sanctify his soul. the truth be that none do. a man leave his country at god commandment, the blessing of the lord shall ever wait upon he to feed his body and sanctify his soul. the truth be that none do so shine in piety as those that fear god and be out of their country. we never read of such a blessing of man with constancy and deliverance in their own country as we find of some abroad. where do sidrach, misach and abednago stand, daniel, for their faith and be deliver out of the fiery oven into which they be cast because they will not offend god? but among the babylonians where daniel? do daniel show his constancy in prayer and find deliverance from the lion den? but among the gentile, stand fast, then in. will not offend god, but among the babylonians, where daniel do daniel show his constancy in prayer and find deliverance from the lion den, but among the gentile, stand fast then in the faith and you shall see the blessing of god redouble upon you. more be in a strange country than you be able to discern at home. the three blessing upon abraham: be that god a great name, will make he a great name. this be a blessing of that kind as man be exceed ambitious of no marvel when god and man do commend it unto the world as a thing of price. a good name. ecclesiastes prou, say solomon, be better th^n a costly ointment and be to b^e choose above great riches hereupon. commend it unto the world as a thing of price, a good name. ecclesiastes prou, say solomon, be better th^n a costly ointment, and be to b^e choose above great riches. hereupon the scripture have record good man, and the epistle to the hebrew give the reason of it, which it render heb chronicle. thus all these, through faith, obtain a good report. so be david register for a worthy, and so be all his worthy record by the holy ghost to stir up other age to imitate their virtue, that they may inherit their praise for praise for virtue. be a bless thing which christ himself delight in: his fame be spread abroad, throughout all the land, and of the fame of the apostle and such as. for praise, for virtue be a bless thing which christ himself delight in. his fame be spread abroad, throughout all the land, and of the fame of the apostle and such as preach psalm rom, the word of god david say, which also paul do cite and thus render to their praise: their sound go out through all the earth and their word into the end of the world. this swift fly and loud sound fame do the lord promise shall be spread abroad of abraham if he will obey god and forsake his country, a thing which prove true for all. the rest of the scripture to the end of the bible have this only subject, namely the praise of abraham. it be certain that a godly thing which prove true for all the rest of the scripture, to the end of the bible, have this only subject, namely the praise of abraham. it be certain that a godly man have never that great name, at home as abroad. christ say true in the particular of a prophet, which be also true of every virtuous man. a prophet be not without honor, save in matth, his own country and in his own house. and so here be answer to the objection of loss of memory, a answer to a three objection which some do make. what shall a man do abroad? a man will willing keep the poor reputation and respect he have. if i go out of my country i shall be but swallow. do make. what shall a man do abroad? a man will willing keep the poor reputation and respect he have. if i go out of my country, i shall be but swallow up among stranger. my memory will be soon rot, abroad though i live, then, if i be long, lay in my grave at home. the lord answer this objection thus: fear not, abraham, i will be thy exceed great reward. i will, by thou, do so great thing in a strange place that thy name shall be remember as my name, which i will put upon thou sure. it be very true that many a man, while he stay at home, live in obscurity as in the dark night, though his virtue and worth deserve better. put upon thou. sure it be very true that many a man, while he stay at home, live in obscurity as in the dark night. though his virtue and worth deserve better respect for at home, what can be a man regard where there be million of his rank, though not better, deserve yet better favour. get abroad, where virtue be scant, and there, by the advance of thy wisdom and virtue, thou shall be more eminent and famous in a year. then at home half of thy rank shall be all their day. hide virtue, be neglect, but abroad it be magnify. at home, be thou a right, good man. thou can not be see, for thou be either overtop or so many way equal that thou be neglect, but abroad it be magnify. at home, be thou a right, good man. thou can not be see, for thou be either overtop or so many way equal that thou be like gold in solomon time. which king be esteem no better than stone, or like cedar, that be, but like wild fig tree. thy way, then, to make the world ring of thy virtue, to thy praise among the good and to the terror of those that be evil, be to go abroad. when god call thou the four, blessing, be that he shall be a blessing. this speech have relation to the esteem that other, a blessing man, give, for so do we often read the phrase in the scripture where it ever do. shall be a blessing. this speech have relation to the esteem that other, a blessing man, give for. so do we often read the phrase in the scripture where it ever do import so good a reputation among other that they hold themselves bless for his company. in that sense, the prophet isaiah use the word in this sentence in isai: that day shall israel be a three with egypt and ashur, even a blessing in the mid of the land, and the prophet zachary. thus it shall come to pass that as you be a curse among the heathen house of judah and zach house of israel, so will i deliver you and you shall be a blessing. but the speech have more in it then. so curse among the heathen house of judah and zach house of israel. so will i deliver you and you shall be a blessing. but the speech have more in it then, so namely that whereas the time of ignorance god regard not, but that he bestow those blessing upon, act, the barbaric people, by the hand of that general providence whereby he make his sun to shine, matth on the evil and the good and send rain on the just and unjust. now the lord shall bestow all his blessing upon the land through abraham, as if the olive tree of god grace do drop through he, as through a golden pipe upon they. a great blessing to abraham zach, who herein shall be a type of christ. if the olive tree of god grace do drop through he as through a golden pipe upon they. a great blessing to abraham zach, who herein shall be a type of christ, for as of his fullness all receive, so of abraham the nation shall receive grace for grace. and so here be a answer, answer of be abhor to a four objection of they that say: what shall a man do out of his country? he shall be but a hiss and a gaze stock and a curse to those among who he be a stranger beside. if he will have any good, he must seek for pearl in a dunghill. he must lick his honey off from the thorn and work his butter out of the. stranger beside, if he will have any good, he must seek for pearl in a dunghill, he must lick his honey off from the thorn and work his butter out of the fire. unto this objection the lord answer: abraham, fear not, for none of these thing shall befall, for, on the contrary, i will incline the heart of thy stranger so to respect thou, that they shall hold thou to be the only blessing that ever come among they, because thou shall, very sensible, bring many blessing unto they. when isaac, the son of abraham, come to abimelech, though gene the philistine envy he for his wealth. yet abimelech, the king, come to he with his friend and captain of his army and say: we have certain. come to abimelech, though gene the philistine envy he for his wealth. yet abimelech the king come to he with his friend and captain of his army and say: we have certain see that the lord be with thou. and we think, let there now be a oath between we and let we make a covenant with thou. thou now, the bless of the lord, do this. pharaoh, gene and king of egypt say to his servant of joseph: can we find such a man as this in who be the spirit of god? he say also to joseph: thou shall be over my house and at thy word shall all my people be arm. thus abraham be know to be a blessing. now, what the lord promise. also to joseph: thou shall be over my house, and at thy word shall all my people be arm. thus abraham be know to be a blessing. now, what the lord promise to abraham be also promise to all those ^om that be of the same faith and obedience with he, then this blessing of be a blessing belong unthose which, at god commandment, do get they out of their country. when a man of worth be among many man of like worth, he be account, rather a curse, then a blessing. such be the corruption of flesh and blood, infect with envy and with pride. if any good come to any land by reason of any good man, yet be there such wrestle for the garland that of flesh and blood infect with envy and with pride. if any good come to any land by reason of any good man, yet be there such wrestle for the garland that he that have the most friend will set the better leg before, and not only get the thanks that be due to another, but also, as jacob get the start of esau in virtue, so will esau trip up the heel of jacob by his power, if god, keep he not. nay, esau must be acknowledge to have a angel face for wink at his brother that wind himself out of his company as clean as he can. but when a man come abroad where the word of god and his fear be precious than every, his brother that wind himself out of his company as clean as he can. but when a man come abroad, where the word of god and his fear be precious than every virtue of worth, shall have this respond of the idiot and barbaric out of question corinthian. god be in these man. then can there no blessing fall extraordinary, but all man know for who sake it be, namely for such as god have. make a blessing out of these argument, by which god entice, use i abraham to go out of his country, such as go to a christian plantation. may gather many bless lesson. marry not with infidel. god will make he a great nation. then must abraham posterity keep they to themselves. they may as go to a christian plantation may gather many. bless lesson. marry not with infidel. god will make he a great nation. then must abraham posterity keep they to themselves. they may not marry, nor give in marriage to the heathen. that be uncircumcised. and this be so plain that out of this foundation arise the law of marriage a-among themselves. the break of this rule may break the neck of all good success of this voyage, whereas by keep the fear of god, the planter, in short time, by the blessing of god, may grow into a nation formidable to all the enemy of christ and be the praise of that part of the world for so strong a hand to be. join with the people here. into a nation formidable to all the enemy of christ, and be the praise of that part of the world for so strong a hand to be. join with the people here that fear god. another thing also be to be mark out of this: a great nation, god blessing place. mamelie that to grow into a great nation, be a very great blessing of god. then be they but atheist that hold a great family of child to be a heavy and sore charge and they blaspheme. they know not what that wish god have their child for. they can spare they well enough, but especial the son of perdition, that body of popery be by this text, make abominable that once. write to the lord of their child, for they can spare they well enough. but especial the son of perdition, that body of popery be by this text, make abominable that once write to the lord of the counsel of this land that popery will much profit the land, because by the single life of priest and nun and monk and friar the commonwealth shall not be so. charge with multitude of child, they fit. say not charge, but they say not that less child shall be get, for when as one fishpond, a thousand par vrsperg year ago, can afford more than six thousand infant head, so long before the abstruse study come from hell into the hand of jesuite, what shall we think of these latter day, but to rake no. more than six thousand infant head so long before the abstruse study come from hell into the hand of jesuite. what shall we think of these latter day? but to rake no further into that stink kennel, i must tell they to their tooth that when they say the kingdom be better for the smallness of the number of the subject or be not the better for be a great nation, that they do like their father. the devil give god the lie, whereas god do promise to bless he in his journey, as he do indeed give he the gift. bless his journey of a prophet to teach, of a priest to pray, of a king to rule, of plenty in his temporal estate and joy in. indeed give he the gift, bless his journey, of a prophet to teach, of a priest to pray, of a king to rule of plenty in his temporal estate and joy in see christ the savior of his soul. here. may john, such as transplant at god commandment, be assure of that. promse of god. i will not leave thou nor forsake thou. but as god say to joshuah, as i be with moses, so will i be with thou. so god say to iosh they, as i be with abraham, so will i be with you. i will bless you, to wit, with the blessing of this life and of the kingdom of heaven. but further, if you will have abraham blessing, you must do your diligence. you, i will bless you to wit with the blessing of this life and of the kingdom of heaven. but further, if you will have abraham blessing, you must do your diligence to walk in those way by which the lord do give his blessing. you must not, with idleness, enforce god to work miracle of mercy on the willfull sinful. you must be diligent to hear the word of god, reverend in, believe and receive of it, fruitful in the christian practice of it. that the blessing of god may come upon you. god can raise child unto abraham of matth the very stone and cast you away if you cast he off. in that the lord do promise abraham to make he a great name know. raise child unto abraham of matth the very stone and cast you away. if you cast he off, in that the lord do promise abraham to make he a great name. know that it be a bless thing to a good name. be well. speak of this will god bring upon the obedient. but if you disobey, you will but make the ear of they to tingle. that hear of you and as we be in continual expectation of some honorable effect, if you continue in the faith, so will you bring a confusion upon yourselves and a shame upon your nation if you stick not fast to god and his bless commandment. and last, whereas god do promise that abraham shall be a blessing, you must know. and a shame upon your nation if you stick not fast to god and his bless commandment. and last, whereas god do promise that abraham shall be a blessing, you must know it. your duty, ephe, to walk wise towards those that be without redeem the time, because the day be evil, the day be evil indeed in that continent. then how tender ought your care to be to gain the reputation of a blessing among this people. let they see that he that come before be but satan, who they themselves do serve, that have transform himself into a angel of light, and that they be satan, minister, that transform themselves into the apostle of christ. but walk, you honest, as in the day rom atth, let transform himself into a angel of light and that they be satan, minister, that transform themselves into the apostle of christ. but walk you honest as in the day rom atth. let your light so shine before man that they may see your good work and glorify you, father, which be in heaven. while we have time, let five do good to all man, yet give gal ^phe no place to the devil. so the blessing of god shall be upon we and we shall be a blessing wheresoever we go, and still remember that as the devil child will needs be a curse, so the son of abraham will always labor to be a sweet blessing where ever they come. and these be the argument that concern. the devil child will needs be a curse. so the son of abraham will always labor to be a sweet blessing where ever they come. and these be the argument that concern abraham and his people. we must now proceed also to speak of such argument that concern other. the lord do deal wonderful with he in respect vo of other. when he be depart from his own country, for first the lord will bless they that bless he to bless in this place. be by word and deed to seek the prosperity of any the lord than do promise to make all his blessing go before they that do in any manner make their blessing go before his servant to this purpose. be it which the prophet lord than do promise to make all his blessing go before they that do in any manner make their blessing go before his servant. to this purpose, be it which the prophet david have pray for the peace of ^sal, jerusalem. let they prosper. that love, thou, and that of christ. he that receive a prophet in the name of ^att a prophet, shall receive a prophet reward, and he that receive a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive the reward of a righteous man. and whosoever shall give to one of these little one to drink a cup of cold water, only in the name of a disciple, very i say unto you, he shall not lose his reward upon this blessing. of these little one to drink a cup of cold water. only in the name of a disciple, very, i say unto you, he shall not lose his reward upon this blessing of god. be it that david say to his son solomon: show kindness unto the son of barzillai, the king gileadite, for so they come to i when i flee from absolom, thy brother. and as the lord do bless they that love his child with his blessing of this life, so do he bless they at last with the kingdom of heaven. for thus do our savior christ give his sentence: come you bless of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom, prepare for you from the begin, matth of the world, for i. thus do our savior christ give his sentence: come you bless of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom, prepare for you from the begin, matth of the world, for i be a hunger, and you give i meat etc. which afterward he do thus explain very, i say unto you, in as much as you have, do it to one of the least of these, my brother, you have, do it to i. but here we must understand that when he say i will bless they, that bless thou, the word thou do not signify personal abraham, but abraham and all his posterity, which be in his loin and be to be that great nation that the lord promise to make of he and this the signify personal abraham, but abraham and all his posterity, which be in his loin and be to be that great nation that the lord promise to make of he and this, the fox balam, know very number well. when speak of jacob and the habitation of israel, he cite this text: bless, be he that bless gen^ ^^ and thou laban be bless for jacobs sake and the keeper of the prison with his whole charge. be bless because of joseph the midwife, that do spare exodus the child of the israclite and do not kill they, according to the commandment of pharaoh the king. be also bless, which the scripture do thus record: god, therefore, prosper the widow and again, and because the widow, fear god. therefore, they, according to the commandment of pharaoh, the king, be also bless, which the scripture do thus record. god therefore, prosper the widow. and again, and because the widow fear god, therefore he make they house rahab also that harbour and hide the lord spy. find the blessing that joshuah o^ and ^at save she and her father household and all that she have. and she dwell in israel, as it seem, marry to salmon, and so also from she come christ. to curse in this place do signify all kind of affliction deut as appear by the law of god, and so the meaning be that the lord will spend all his plague upon such as. do bring any affliction upon abraham. yes, the lord will revenge. by the law of god, and so the meaning be that the lord will spend all his plague upon such as do bring any affliction upon abraham. yes, the lord will revenge. they in his wrath, so say the lord, jesus christ, he that shall mat offend one of these little one that believe in i. it be better for he that a millstone be hang about his neck and that he be drown in the depth of the sea. let pharaoh tell how well he speed, for take abraham wife into his house. the text say: the lord plague pharaoh with great plague because of sarai, abraham, gen, gen, ge exodus, etc. wife. let abimelech tell how much better he fare for the like prank but s^dom. say, the lord plague pharaoh with great plague because of sarai abraham gen. gen ge exodus, etc. wife, let abimelech tell how much better he fare for the like prank. but s^dom will never be. forget that will abuse stranger and egypt be. hang up a table in all man eye to let they see that the lord have innumerable fearful plague to spend upon they that will deal crafty and cruel with his people and not suffer they to serve the lord. the reason hereof be that god to reason, communion with god gen he that receive his covenant do bind himself to be his god and the god of his seed. and thus the prophet zachary bring forth god, express his meaning to be that there. that receive his covenant do bind himself to be his god and the god of his seed. and thus the prophet zachary bring forth god, express his meaning to be that there be so strict a union between god and his people that what be do to his servant he take as do to himself his word. be these: he that touch you, touch the apple zach of my eye to this purpose, be that of our savior christ. he that receive you, receive i, and he that matth receive i receive. he that send i. and again, he that despise you, despise i. and he that despise luke i despise he that send i. and now see the respect of blessing or curse which fall upon abraham. and again, he that despise you despise i. and he that despise luke, i despise he that send i. and now see the respect of blessing or curse which fall upon abraham and his posterity do fall upon god. then consider what god say for himself. they that honor sam, i i will honor, and they that despise, i shall be despise, and this do, david, acknowledge in god. with the godly, thou will show thyself godly. with the psalm: upright, thou will show thyself upright. with the pure, thou will show thyself pure. and with the froward, thou will show thyself froward. it be then to be observe that godly man that use, i fear god where ever they go by god vocation, godly man find friend. the froward thou will show thyself. froward it be then to be. observe that godly man that use, i fear god. where ever they go by god vocation. godly man, find friend, they shall find friend, and such as shall bless they. he make those that lead they away captain to pity they. joseph and daniel, find more honor abroad than their prince have at home. ester and mordecai find more favour at shusan than many of their better find at jerusalem. he that raise up those godly man, friend abroad, will also provide for you abroad if you continue his faithful servant, as abraham do. and further here we see that such as love god, people shall prosper though they be, but heathen, the friend of godly. abroad if you continue his faithful servant, as abraham do, and further, here we see that such as love god, people shall prosper though they be, but heathen, the friend of godly man, prosper. this may give warranty unto our conscience to accept of favour and blessing even of the gentile, and also to hold a league and concurrence even with the well affect heathen, that god have stir up to be the mean of his blessing unto we. so be it. say to abraham, when he have occasion to rescue his brother lot from chedor-laome^ gen, then come one that escape and tell abraham, the hebrew which dwell in the plain of mamre, the amorite, brother to eshcol and brother to aner, which be confederate with abraham. gen. then come one that escape and tell abraham, the hebrew which dwell in the plain of mamre, the amorite, brother to eshcol and brother to aner, which be confederate with abraham, and also we may secure ourselves in the association of such that god will not kill we for their sake, but on the contrary, god will bless they for our sake. again, this text do teach we thus much that in a strange country we must look for enemy, th^y ^^st. look for enemy, even curse enemy, under who tongue be the poison of asp and who right hand be a right hand of iniquity. balaam that have a witch tongue, iosh number in his head, be send for to curse israel by balak that know. asp and who right hand be a right hand of iniquity, balaam, that have a witch tongue, iosh number in his head, be send for to curse israel by balak that know he have a pestilent tongue. the seed of the devil gen will be spit and bite do what a man can this, our savior foretell to his holy apostle john, in the world, you shall have trouble, a thing which if the child of israel have know as they ought, they will never have. refuse to enter the land which god command they to possess, because there be curse and kill enemy, no better than cannibal be. not then discourage though you light on enemy, for that do god foretell unto abraham that he and his possess because there be curse and kill enemy. no better than cannibal. be not then discourage though you light on enemy. for that do god foretell unto abraham that he and his seed must find, rather be strong and of good courage, because the lord be with you and with they, but a arm of flesh last, our text do tell we that he will curse they that curse abraham. this the witch balaam know their enemy shall be. curse that if any will open his mouth to curse the people of god, he shall be curse himself, for the curse shall return unto he as water into his psalm bowel and oil into his bone and general. they shall come unto shame and confusion as many as curse himself, for the curse shall return unto he as water into his psalm bowel and oil into his bone and general. they shall come unto shame and confusion as many as have evil. will at ziion here then be a warrant that where godly man be constrain to encounter with curser, such as be the priest of the gentile, it be god ordinance to bring a curse upon they and to kill they, as the child of israel do, balam josh. here be also a promise that if we keep ourselves to abraham faith and obedience, god will bring a curse upon all our enemy. the prophet zachary have many excellent speech to express this by. the lord say he will make jerusalem a cup of poison. obedience, god will bring a curse upon all our enemy. the prophet zachary have many excellent speech to express this by the lord say he will make jerusalem a cup of poison, zach, etc. unto all the people in the siege of jerusalem. jerusalem shall be a heavy stone for all people. all that lift at it shall be tear, though all the earth be gather together against it. again, the prince of judah shall be as coal of fire among wood and like the firebrand in the sheaf, and they shall devour all people round about on the right hand and on the left. these thing speak the prophet of these victorious day of the gospel. i hope out of these word, thus general, deliver every true. about on the right hand and on the left. these thing speak the prophet of these victorious day of the gospel. i hope out of these word, thus general, deliver, every true heart protestant can frame out a answer unto the objection that be think much to impeach this plantation in virginia, the peril say. the objecter be great by the papist that shall come on the back of we. what papist do you fear? the prince, sure, such as be in alliance with our nation, will think other thought and take better advice. but as for the popish church, a unruly beast exempt from all good government, civil and divine, only adore he that have exalt himself above all that be call god or that be worship. for the popish church, a unruly beast, exempt from all good government, civil and divine. only adore he that have exalt himself above all. that be call god or that be worship. it may be they, like the daughter of solomon horseleech, will cry: give, give more blood and yet more bloo^ from. and yet a man will think they be glut before this time of day, for in she may be find the blood ^eve of the prophet and of the saint and of all that be slay upon the earth. but you will say, now they be so well flesh they will have more blood. to this first our text answer in general: never fear they. they come to curse with bell, book and candle and now they be so well flesh they will have more blood. to this first our text answer in general: never fear they. they come to curse with bell, book and candle and the devil and all. but remember this: god will cu^se they that curse abraham. but say you, they be such terrible beast as that the professor of the gospel must needs be afraid of they. indeed, their peril be great, while their enchantment be in reve force. jannes and jambre withstand moses till the exodus plague of the scab fall upon they, and then they be able to stand before moses no long. so they reve, juggle and do many strange trick and much mischief, till the plague of the scab light upon they at naples. they be able to stand before moses no long. so they reve, juggle and do many strange trick and much mischief, till the plague of the scab light upon they at naples, more than a hundred year ago. but since, though, their industry have be nothing inferior to the devil that come from compass of the earth, job to and fro. yet they may cast a woeful account, for they find in the total, how many kingdom they have lose and do daily lose, how many battle they have, fight in all, which, to the protestant, as the canaanite will prove, to the israelite in calebs numb judgement. so have they be even bread, for we ask what be become of those imperial army that go into boeme. as the canaanite will prove to the israelite in calebs numb judgement. so have they be even bread for we ask what be become of those imperial army that go into boeme against the hussite in the time of sigismond the emperor and know what be become of their armour, whether it arm not the hussite that want. ask what be become of the many ship that come into the narrow sea in the year. i be sure much of their ordinance furnish the netherlander will. they come to you, sure god that make israel rich of the spoil of egypt can by his providence make they furnish you with ship, with munition, with victual, with money. let this be your hope, but fear not their fear, babylon. of the spoil of egypt can, by his providence, make they furnish you with ship, with munition, with victual, with money. let this be your hope, but fear not their fear. babylon say the angel be fall, reve and never to rise again. sing hallelujah and you shall see her smoke ascend for evermore. no, no, they reve shall prevail. no more for their madness be make evident. tim, they have another char to do. i hope will make they scratch where it itch. not think you that it be possible for prince who treasure be exhaust and honor impeach by their inchaunment, not to require satisfaction for these wrong and to that purpose, pull all their mammon from under their altar? i be persuade the armour they exhaust and honor, impeach by their inchaunment not to require satisfaction for these wrong and to that purpose pull all their mammon from under their altar. i be persuade the armour they have in the roufe of their church will one day help to arm a company of good fellow that will come to church. it may be under pretence of hear a mass but will depart with good luggage of silver and gold and pearl and such like that. be there ready, gather to their hand. wherefore fear god and of all other there lie the least fear to be. look for from they the only peril. be in, offend god and take of papist in to your company if, once they come, creep into your house. the least fear to be. look for from they the only peril be in. offend god and take of papist in to your company. if, once they come, creep into your house, then look for mischief if treason or poison be of any force. know they all to be very assasine of all man to be abhor. but hope in god that he that have send you abroad will also send you such governor as will cast out the leaven out of your house, to who i need say little, because i know they need not be nurture by i. in abraham shall all the family of the earth be bless vj^. by abraham be mean as before, abraham as in his loin. be many nation for that. be nurture by i. in abraham shall all the family of the earth be bless. vj^ by abraham be mean as before abraham as in his loin. be many nation for that which be here, speak of abraham be also speak of jacob in this manner: in thou and in thy seed shall all the family of the earth be bless. it be true that in abraham and his gen child, be many man bless, as appear in the scripture, where they have draw many stranger to serve god, howbeit the principal blessing be ascribe to christ who by excellency be call thy seed, as paul do. very notable observe when he say he say not, and to thy seed, as speak gal of many but and to christ who by excellency be, call thy seed, as paul do very notable observe when he say: he say not and to thy seed as speak gal of many, but and to thy seed as of one which be christ by the family of the earth be understand all those nation which arise from the family of the son of noah. after their generation, among their gen ^^ people for out of these be the nation divide in the earth after the flood, and that which be here render family afterward be call nation in the speech of the lord of abraham. all the nation of the earth shall be bless in he. paul, render it thus in thou shall gen and all the gentile be bless by speech of the lord of abraham. all the nation of the earth shall be bless in he. paul, render it thus in: thou shall gen and all the gentile be bless by blessing in this place. see gal, the seed, be christ and the word thou do so far, point out abraham as it have relation to christ in his loin of force. it must signify that blessedness which christ do bring unto man, which the angel and a multitude of heavenly soldier do comprehend in their sweet song of praise god. when they say: glory be to god on high and peace on earth, luke and towards man good will, then the speech all put together be this: that abr^ham must get he out of his country. be to god on high and peace on earth luke and towards man. good will, then. the speech all put together be this: that abr^ham must get he out of his country that he may begin that which god, by he and his seed, will accomplish in due time, namely that all nation may embrace the gospel of christ unto their salvation. a excellent argument and of singular force to persuade not only abraham but all his child, according to the faith, to fly, if it be possible, over the mountain about so great a errand. with what comfort may a man come before the lord with this account of his talon. behold, i be here, and the child which god have give i, it will never grieve. with what comfort may a man come before the lord with this account of his talon. behold, i be here and the child which god have give i. it will never grieve paul to go from cilicia to present a church at corinthian, a pure virgin to christ. two objection: the last judgement at hand. but stay, say one. you run too fast, without good ground. you seem to incline to the millenary or such as: look for the gospel to be spread over all the world. you must know that be do many a fair year ago, that we need not look for a new revolution, of that it be safe to tremble at the last judgement. who trumpet be ever sound in our ear, arise from. year ago that we need not look for a new revolution. of that it be safe to tremble at the last judgement who trumpet be ever sound in our ear, arise from the dead and come to judgement. to this i answer that no prejudicate opinion be a just answer, condemnation to the truth. nor any doctrine out of book that be apocrypha can make a wise man depart from a doctrine of the canonical scripture. it be true that gregory credit be wont to be great ^r^g lib dialo in the time that man know no better who confident, affirm the judgement to be at hand. but beside the confutation of a thousand year which have be since he so affirm, the pregnant and clear scripture confound. no better, who confident affirm the judgement to be at hand. but beside the confutation of a thousand year which have be since he so affirm, the pregnant and clear scripture confound the proud conjecture of he and his follower. and this do also appear by the apostasy of some papist that in their book, late print at rome, have depart from the sentence of so great a pope and grave doctor of the church, tell we plain that the gospel must be preach universal through the world before the last judgement. but neither by their authority nor argument, but by the force of such text as can be delude do i affirm that all the nation of the world shall be bless in christ. they that mince. authority nor argument, but by the force of such text as can be delude do i affirm that all the nation of the world shall be. bless in christ. they that mince and pare this text, that they make it as sore as the shechamit gene, psalm rom, be with their circumcision. say that take away the overlash hyperbole and their sound be go out into all the world, will serve the turn, a simple blessing, god know, and little differ from the savour of death. unto death, if they receive you, not corinthian say: christ, shake off the dust of your foot. true, i say unto yond, it shall be easy for the land of sodom and gomorrah in the day of judgement, then for that city. shake off the dust of your foot. true, i say unto yond, it shall be easy for the land of sodom and gomorrah in the day of judgement. then for that city, att^, howsoever they hear the sound of the word of god, this stumble block. few wise man will say. be this blessedness. promise to abraham the jew. hunt counter as fast on the other side. for when, as in the second psalm, they read of their messtas that he shall have the heathen for his inheritance and the utter most part of the earth for his possession, psalm that he shall crush they with a sceptre of iron and break they in piece like a potter vessel, they affirm that all the world must be subdue. for his possession, psalm, that he shall crush they with a sceptre of iron and break they in piece like a potter vessel. they affirm that all the world must be subdue by force and violence unto messiah, a opinion that prevail much in the time of christ, as appear not only by diverse other but also by the apostle who encounter our savior christ. thus, before his ascension, lord, will thou at this time restore the kingdom act to israel. but they also make but a uncomfortable blessing of this blessedness of abraham. the phrase be plain- that in abraham all the family of the earth shall be bless a blessedness. than must the gentile trust to receive from abraham particu these thing be deliver in the. be plain that in abraham all the family of the earth shall be bless, a blessedness than must the gentile trust to receive from abraham. particu these thing be deliver in the scripture, which i think no distinction of hyperbole, nor spiritual, nor at the last judgement can delude, which be the ordinary refuge of they that, out of prejudice will fain put by the truth, daniel. have it thus a stone be cut without hand, daniel, and smite the image upon the foot and break they in piece, then be the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver and gold break together and become like chaff of the summer flower and the wind carry they away that no place be find for they and the stone that. brass, the silver and gold break together and become like chaff of the summer flower, and the wind carry they away that no place be find for they and the stone that smite the image become a great mountain and fill the whole earth. here first we plain see that christ must destroy the monarch that they be not find. and so much of this speech do paul interpret, thus plain that christ shall put down all rule and all authority, g^r and power, for he must reign till he ha^h put all his enemy under his foot. the last enemy that shall be destroy be death. the other part of daniel speech, david do thus express in the psalm: thou lord, psalm shall inherit all nation, and his foot. the last enemy that shall be destroy be death. the other part of daniel speech, david do thus express in the psalm: thou lord, psalm, shall inherit all nation, and this point the prophet zachary do render thus: the lord sh^ll be king over all the earth. in that day there shall be one lord and his name shall be one, so that no other god shall be zach name in all the world. but lest any shall understand this point of the last judgement and so place earth in heaven, daniel, show how the lord shall be king. his word be these. the kingdom and dominion and greatness of his kingdom. under the whole daniel, heaven shall be give to the holy people of the. the lord shall be king. his word be these. the kingdom and dominion and greatness of his kingdom, under the whole daniel, heaven shall be give to the holy people of the most high, who kingdom be, a everlasting kingdom and alpower shall serve and obey he. but what shall he abolish, king, and bring all to a popularity? no such matter. god be the author of order and not of confusion. the corinthian ^euel kingdom of this world shall be our lord and his christ, and he shall reign for evermore by king. convert to the gospel for godly king, do si^ chr^ psalm and: and on the throne of the lord, and by they the lord reign. the beginning of this alteration. isaiah express thus: king. the gospel for godly king do si^, chr^, psalm and: and on the throne of the lord, and by they the lord reign. the beginning of this alteration, isaiah express thus: king shall be thy nurse, father and queen shall be thy nurse. they shall worship thou with their face, isa^, towards the earth and lick up the dust of thy foot. but least any man shall say. it may be some, but what be that? to the rest, david answer thus: the king of tarshish and of the isle shall bring present the psalm, king of sheba and seba shall bring gift. yes, all psalm king shall worship he, all nation shall serve he. and again the lord be high and terrible, a great king over all. of sheba and seba shall bring gift. yes, all psalm king shall worship he, all nation shall serve he. and again, the lord be high and terrible, a great king over all the earth. and again, in the same psalm: god be king over all the earth. sing praise^ whosoever have understanding, god reign over the heathen, etc. if any do yet think that they shall serve he as the king do, joshua when he set his foot on their neck, josh, the bless scripture say no for the psalm. have it thus: all king of the earth shall praise thou lord for psalm. they have hear the word of thy mouth, a thing which they will not do at the resurrection. when go to hell, thy shall the earth shall praise thou, lord, for psalm. they have hear the word of thy mouth, a thing which they will not do at the resurrection. when go to hell, thy shall say: when see we thou a hunger or a mat, thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison? and and as the scripture be very particular in set down the state of the king, how they shall stand, affect to the gospel, so do it of the people first, psalm david say: all the people shall see thy glory, but that be not sufficient, wherefore john in the revelation, go far. thus all nation shall come and worship revel isai before thou, lord, isaiah, have it thus. i have swear by myself and be not sufficient, wherefore john in the revelation go far. thus, all nation shall come and worship revel isai before thou, lord isaiah, have it thus i have swear by myself, and the word be go out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not return. that every knee shall bow unto i and every tongue shall swear by i, philipp, which saint paul express thus: god have exalt christ, jesus, and give he a name above all, name that at the name of jesus shall every knee bow and that every tongue shall confess that jesus be the lord unto the glory of god, the father malachi. yet go further. thus, from the rise of the sun to the go down of the same, my name be. jesus be the lord unto the glory of god, the father malachi, yet go further. thus, from the rise of the sun to the go down of the same, my name be great among the gentile, and in every place incense shall be offer unto thy name and psalm a pure offer. the psalm say also: the prince of the people, be gather unto the people of the god of abraham. to conclude this point, the prophet isaiah say: from month to month and from sabbath to sabbath, isai, shall all flesh come to worship. i say the lord, the sum be what blessing any nation have by christ must be. communicate to all nation the office of his prophecy, to teach the ignorant the office of his. say the lord, the sum be what blessing any nation have by christ must be communicate to all nation the office of his prophecy to teach the ignorant. the office of his priesthood to give remission of sin to the sinful. the office of his kingdom, by word and sacrament and spirit to rule the inordinate that such as be dead in trespass may be make to sit together ephe, etc. in heavenly place. for there be no difference between the jew and the greek. for he that be lord over rom all be rich unto all that call upon he for it well beseem the glory of god to triumph over his reason. from god attribute enemy and the wisdom of god after the world have have. all that call upon he for it well beseem the glory of god to triumph over his reason. from god attribute enemy and the wisdom of god, after the world have have plentiful experience of the craft of the devil and wicked man of all sort, to exalt the gospel, the wisdom of god, as also his power to be declare when all his enemy have show their force and his mercy to his saint, after so great exercise of patience and his justice, to show his judgement in condemn those that have speak proud word and do wicked deed to his servant, but especial to his glory. in exalt his son and crown he with glory and worship that we may see that which yet we see. and do wicked deed to his servant, but especial to his glory, in exalt his son and crown he with glory and worship that we may see that which yet we see, not all things be put in subjection unto he. it be true that many h^b objection be make against this doctrine out of such place as this: when the son of man come, luke, shall he find faith on the earth? and of antichrist, who thes the lord shall abolish by the brightness of his come? but partly for want of grammar- learning to know the meaning of the word come- and partly for want of logic to lay out those place to their due time, those scripture and many more be rack by such man. know the meaning of the word come and partly for want of logic to lay out those place to their due time, those scripture and many more be rack by such man out of their joint which right understand. have a clean other sense then, that for which they be allege, which neither this time nor place will give. i leave to dispute. wherefore stand to our own first ground. learn first to be spare in use, abridge the glory of god which make the world be spare in shorten the glory of god that his son may rule over all, for howsoever, for some good cause, god will not make himself glorious at the first, but will seem to hide the glory of god in the passion. son may rule over all for howsoever, for some good cause, god will not make himself glorious at the first, but will seem to hide the glory of god in the passion of his son and affliction of his saint and permit antichrist to climb to his height. that those that be perfect may be know. yet questionless christ must sit at the psalm corinthian right hand of his father till all his enemy be make his footstool, and then shall come from thence to judge the quick and the dead again. if it be god purpose that the gospel shall be preach through the world for a witness, than aught, minister, to be careful and willing to spread it abroad in such good service as this that purpose that the gospel shall be preach through the world for a witness than aught minister to be careful and willing to spread it abroad in such good service as this that be intend. sure it be great shame unto we of the ministry that can be better content to sit and rest. we here idle then undergo so good a work. our pretence of zeal, be clear, discover to be but hypocrisy when we rather choose to mind unprofitable question at home, then gain soul abroad. it be a singular sin for man to be overcome with evil. it be a shame that the jesuite and friar that accompany every ship shall be so diligent to destroy soul and we not seek the tender lamb nor bind. overcome with evil. it be a shame that the jesuite and friar that accompany every ship shall be so diligent to destroy soul. and we not seek the tender lamb nor bind up that which be break, but go on courageous and notwithstanding the snort idleness of the ministry, suspect not the king. blessing of god. a captive girl, bring naman to the prophet. a captive woman be the mean of convert iberia now call georgia eedesius and ruffinus. eccle history, lib. cap. corinthian frumentius. two captive youth be the mean of bring the gospel into india. god, make the weak thing of the world, confound the mighty and get himself praise by the mouth of babe and suckling. be cheerful, then, and the lord of all glory. india. god, make the weak thing of the world, confound the mighty and get himself. praise by the mouth of babe and suckling. be cheerful, then, and the lord of all glory, glorify his name by your happy spread of the gospel to your commendation. and his glory that be lord of all thing to who be power and dominion for ever. hallelujah.