a song of degree, a psalm of david psalm verse: if the lord have not be on our side, may israel now say: if the lord have not be on our side, when man rise up against we, they have then swallow we up quick. when their wrath be kindle against we, then the water have drown we and the stream have go over our soul. then have the swell water go over our soul. praise be the lord which have not give we as a pray unto their tooth. our soul be escape, even as a bird, out of the snare of the fowler. the snare be break and we be deliver our help be in the name of the lord which have make heaven and earth. a bird out of the snare of the fowler. the snare be break and we be deliver our help. be in the name of the lord which have make heaven and earth to enter into a discourse. concern the title of this psalm, a song of degree common to the four psalm immediate go before this and to the ten ensue after. be, as i suppose, more easy to observe the variety of opinion, old and new, then to come to a knowledge of the truth. therein, the jewish rabbin, a a caluin and jacob valent, who manner be when matter be obscure, like painter and poet to come and feign any thing, observe that there be fifteen step or degree in a part of the temple appoint. who manner be when matter be obscure, like painter and poet to come and feign any thing. observe that there be fifteen step or degree in a part of the temple, appoint for man when woman have their place, below to which fifteen step? these fifteen psalm of degree have a reference, luther other think they be so call because they be wont to be sing by the priest and levite upon certain step and degree in the temple, as on a high place that they may be, the better hear by the people of such step and degree there be mention make, in the like case, nehem verse, basil beza. some expound they historical, by way of ascension as the word signify, namely of the child of. step and degree there be, mention make in the like case, nehem verse, basil beza, some expound. they historical, by way of ascension, as the word signify, namely of the child of israel, ascend up to jerusalem in return from their captivity, to the memory of which benefit they be principal, consecrate. basil, arnobius, hierome, augustine, cassiodorus, some mystical of god child, profit in this world of their peregrination, rise from sin to grace and ascend by degree, from virtue to virtue, until they appear before god in the heavenly jerusalem in which current the ancient father run for the most part caluin, some of a high tune or note whereunto they rise in, lift up their voice when they sing. they and junius, last of all, some father run for the most part caluin, some of a high tune or note whereunto they rise in, lift up their voice when they sing, they and junius, last of all, some, in regard of the excellency of that ditty, expound the word of excellency. a song of excellency, that be a excellent song, like that song of song, that excellent song of solomon. howsoever i take it the matter be not great nor worthy any curious inquiry after the name, so long as we agree in the substance and matter of the psalm, that it be indeed a excellent psalm. describe in lively colour the state of god church upon the earth. so expose to enemy as that, sometime, like a general deluge, they be ready to. be indeed a excellent psalm. describe in lively colour the state of god church upon the earth. so expose to enemy as that, sometime, like a general deluge, they be ready to drown it. verse sometime like savage beast to tear it in piece. verse, yes, not make any bone of it to devour and swallow it up quick at once. verse sometime like crafty fowler with begin and snare to entrap it. verse so malicious be they bend, so furious be they incense against it. verse but that god who by his power make heaven and earth and by the same his power rule it still as best, please he verse be evermore at hand, thereby uphold it and at one side thereof, and then no matter. and earth and by the same, his power, rule it still as best. please he verse be evermore at hand, thereby uphold it and at one side thereof, and then, no matter who be against it. verse maugre their wrath and malice. they can not prevail, for they lose their prey. verse the godly escape as a bird out of the snare and be deliver verse. what remain then, but that the lord be praise for this, their deliverance verse, for he be their only help. then, and in his holy name they will set up their rest. verse i have after my country manner, brief, analyze and paraphrastical. in few word, deliver you the sense and meaning of the prophet in this psalm which, howsoever it spread. their rest verse i have, after my country manner, brief, analyze and paraphrastical, in few word, deliver you the sense and meaning of the prophet in this psalm which, howsoever it spread itself like a most fruitful tree into many branch. my purpose be omit other to make choice of these point to insist upon the subtlety of the adversary of the church in lay snare to entrap it as fowler do to catch bird out of the verse, their cruelty in seek to tear it in piece, yes, to swallow it up quick, as some cruel beast do their prey, or as mighty inundation overflow whatsoever come in their way out of the and verse the cause. produce these effect of subtlety and cruelty in these adversary. cruel beast do their prey or as mighty inundation overflow whatsoever come in their way. out of the and verse, the cause. produce these effect of subtlety and cruelty in these adversary, namely their wrath. out of the verse, the deliverance of the church from her enemy, notwithstanding their craft and cruelty, by the omnipotent power of almighty god. out of the and verse, last of all, the duty. perform for this deliverance, praise and thanksgiving to the lord verse. first, therefore, of the subtlety of the enemy of the church, wherein the holy prophet, liken they to fowler, lay their snare so covert shadow over with entice bait that they draw and allure the silly bird, the church, until she be bring within compass of the net. they to fowler, lay their snare so covert shadow over with entice bait that they draw and allure the silly bird, the church, until she be bring within compass of the net and so become the fowler prey, a wile as ancient as the world be old, and plot by the father of wile, the devil, against the church when she be in her infancy, in adam and eve, our first parent in paradise, who happiness in that state of innocence and felicity in a garden of all delightful pleasure, the enemy of mankind subvert by a trap of more. surpass happiness in show. deliver to the woman the forbid fruit gen, so candy with the entice. hope of you shall be as god that she forget lord. a trap of more. surpass happiness in show. deliver to the woman the forbid fruit gen, so candy with the entice: hope of you shall be as god, that she forget lord and loare god and his commandment. take and eat it and give it to her husband. wrap he in the same snare with herself, whereby both of they, with all their succeed, posterity be. make their enemy pray. while they will be as god, they cease to be as man. compare now to the beast that perish. psalm: not continue in honor wherein they be create, but enthrall to death by transgress the commandment. such now be the end of one and all of we, the nimrods and fowler of the world, to make good the. be create but enthrall to death by transgress the commandment. such now be the end of one and all of we, the nimrods and fowler of the world, to make good the old proverb, isaiah ezek. like master, like servant, and as the mother be, so be the daughter, do herein resemble the nature of their father, the devil transform themselves into all shape and lay their begin to catch the simple and innocent witness, joab, who take abner aside under pretence to speak with he peaceable, smite he under the five rib that he die sam, and encourage himself in this mischief not long after he greet amasa with the like salutation: inquire after his welfare, be thou in health, my brother, and take he by the. sam and encourage himself in this mischief. not long after he greet amasa with the like salutation, inquire after his welfare- be thou in health, my brother. and take he by the beard with his right hand to kiss he, but with the other sheathe, his sword, in his bowel. sam verse, judas, his rabbi, god, save thou, master, be much like this treachery and his kiss whereby he betray his lord into the hand of they that seek his blood. luke, so cunning and as common be the sugar name of friend and brother, lord and master make snare for mischief. lib ca. whilst the poison, say isidore, lie hide. spread over with the honey of sweet word, the impostor make a show of virtue and honesty. and master make snare for mischief, lib ca. whilst the poison say isidore, lie, hide, spread over with the honey of sweet word, the impostor make a show of virtue and honesty until he get within a man and fetch he over. for this they learn by experience, as chrysostom observe in a treatise against the gentile, that he which will deceive must set a good face upon it and make the matter seem at least wise, probable, else be they not their craftsmaster. for as the comical poet say, plautus guile be no guile. if deceit cloak they not, chrys, gentle, and no great mischief, then if they be see, for thereby the prey be lose, and they go home emptie-handed, as fowler do when the bird. deceit, cloak they not chrys, gentle, and no great mischief then if they be see, for thereby the prey be lose and they go home emptie-handed, as fowler do when the bird espy the net. but there lie the skill to spread the net that it appear, not that the bait hide the hook, wherein how well the adversary of our church have profit. let the jesuite of our time testify for all the rest, who very name serve for nothing else, as by their practice be evident. but as hierom write in the like case rusticum to circumvent, we so far, be they from that doove-like simplicity to which the lord jesus, and from who they will derive their name, exhort his disciple: math verse there be. rusticum to circumvent we. so far be they from that doove-like simplicity to which the lord jesus, and from who they will derive their name, exhort his disciple: math verse. there be that have. brand they with this mark: jesuit catac li fol. there be not in the world any beast more subtle than be the jesuite, not the fox which chrysostom in his sermon describe. thus, change the name and you may render it thus: the jesuite be a beast powerful in craft, a inventor of guile, the artizen of deceit, master of fawn, devoid of simplicity and full of wily subtlety. for whereunto tend it that one jesuite must be call by so many name? proceedin against he late traitor as garnet, that most treacherous provincial. of simplicity and full of wily subtlety. for whereunto tend it that one jesuite must be call by so many name, proceedin against he late traitor as garnet, that most treacherous provincial wallye alias darcie, alias roberts, alias farmer, alias philip? be it not that go mask under so may name, as under so many vizard he may, the more secure, lay his snare to entrap we. what be their drift in transform themselves into as many shape as they meet with object: now a courtier than a citizen, here a country gentleman there a country swain, sometime a servingman, a swaggerer pot-companion, another while a priest. in a word, every man for every body, a for a, a polipus for all order and degree, be it not. swain, sometime a servingman, a swaggerer, pot-companion, another, while a priest. in a word, every man for every body, a for a, a polipus for all order and degree. be it not that by this mean they may come within man of all sort, insinuate themselves into their company, creep into their bosom, pray into their heart that so they may more easy beguile. they unaware. but of all their wiles, i commend unto you the equivocate shibboleth judg the very forge of lie and deceit which bewray they by their speech to be no other than false feign ephraemites. by this they affirm and deny, swear and forswear, and all with a breath. they be priest, and they be no priest, that be to tell you they. than false feign ephraemites. by this they affirm and deny, swear and forswear, and all with a breath: they be priest and they be no priest. that be to tell you, they say mass and they say not mass, that be in paul quire or in westminster quire. when they talk with our magistrate, they speak as to the wall for man, with they be no man, and all by virtue of this mix proposition, their gorgon head, a point in logic which aristotle never teach and the ancient school know it not, whereby they go beyond the course of nature, make thing mere contradictory to subsist. let i trouble your patience with one instance which shall be worthy your observation: when a recusant shall swear, for example. beyond the course of nature, make thing mere contradictory to subsist. let i trouble your patience with one instance which shall be worthy your observation. when a recusant shall swear, for example, in take the oath of allegiance, according to the express word of the oath and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same word, without any equivocation or mental evasion or secret reservation whatsoever, can it be imagine that any shift or cavil wit shall be able to find a start hole in the same to wind himself out of it. yet behold a english catholic, as he name himself, but indeed the very fiery match of this state and kingdom, in a letter write to a friend of he, have as it. yet behold, a english catholic, as he name himself, but indeed the very fiery match of this state and kingdom, in a letter write to a friend of he have, as he will bear other in hand- find a mean to avoid the force of this oath by equivocate, as namely, where it be say that the pope have no authority to depose our king pet, nor to dispose of his kingdom, and so forward. what concern the pope? true, say he, without just cause, or direct he can, or in some such like sense, when, as the deponent swear, direct against all and every such mental evasion and secret reservation whatsoever. and that hearty and witting and true. or else let he refuse the oath and when, as the deponent swear, direct against all and every such mental evasion and secret reservation whatsoever. and that hearty and witting and true. or else let he refuse the oath and not swear at all. here be the very quintessence of this, cog artt: he recusant take the oath according to the express word. not so say our english catholic, but he must equivocate. the recusant follow the plain and ordinary sense and meaning of the word. our english catholic teach he to keep somewhat in his mind by secret reservation. the recusant abjure and swear against all mental evasion. our english catholic instruct he to make escape by his mix proposition, express a part of his mind by word of mouth and reserve a other part. swear against all mental evasion. our english catholic instruct he to make escape by his mix proposition, express a part of his mind by word of mouth and reserve a other part in his heart, whether this be to make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience malicious and of set purpose by open and manifest perjury. let any man judge which do not willfull, shut his eye against the noone-light and be past feeling. be by god, justice give over to a reprobate sense. you see the fowler of our time, their net, their sleight, their wile, wherein they go beyond the fox in subtlety, in hunt after their prey. what remain but that we humble desire, our vigilant magistrate. to who the charge of the lord? their wile, wherein they go beyond the fox in subtlety, in hunt after their prey. what remain, but that we humble desire, our vigilant magistrate, to who the charge of the lord vineyard be, commit, to take these fox, both great and small, for what do they else but spoil and destroy our vine, which god have place among we in this fruitful soil, and that we ourselves set their snare before our eye, careful shun and avoid they, which else will bring we to perdition both of body and soul, and this of the subtlety of the adversary of our church. the second circumstance and property whereby the prophet describe they be their cruelty in rent and tear christ his flock and swallow they up quick as of the adversary of our church. the second circumstance and property whereby the prophet describe they be their cruelty in rent and tear christ his flock and swallow they up quick as cruel beast do their prey. it be not a new face of the church or proper to those day and season only which our savior set forth to our view. stel in luke mat. behold, i send you as sheep in the midst of wolf, for in that our savior speak in a time neither past nor yet future to come, but in the present i send you. he thereby give we to understand that the danger which be imminent to his sheep, converse among wolf, be always present with they. there be no season wherein. present i send you. he thereby give we to understand that the danger which be imminent to his sheep converse among wolf, be always present with they. there be no season wherein they be free from their rage and cruelty, whether we call to mind the time past or consider what now be or hereafter shall ensue in in his. in this world of wickedness, say the godly father saint augustine. in these evil day, civit li cap, wherein sin have get the upper hand, the church, as a stranger and pilgrim, hold on her course. sustain by god, holy spirit, not only ever since christ and his apostle converse here upon the earth, but even from the time of abel the righteous, who blood his cruel brother. sustain by god, holy spirit, not only ever since christ and his apostle converse here upon the earth, but even from the time of abel the righteous, who blood his cruel brother cain, spill upon the earth. so ancient be the cruelty of these wolf, and ravenous beast prey upon christ, his flock, and so continue from time to time, as their rage and ravenous appetite have edge they forward. by the fury of these wolf, the holy prophet be consume from abel unto zacharias, matth, yes, our savior himself, be make a prey unto they who example serve to instruct his flock in all age what they be to expect and trust unto. for the disciple be not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. who, example, serve to instruct his flock in all age what they be to expect and trust unto. for the disciple be not above his master, nor the servant above his lord matth verse. and if they have, do these thing to the greenetree, what shall be do unto the dry luke verse. the apostle of our savior, the ram and bell-wether of the flock have all, in a manner, verify the word of their master. and what the condition of the saint be in the primitive church. the author to the hebrew report unto we, some be rack, some try with mock, bond, scourge, etc. imprisonment, some stone, some hew asunder, some slay with the sword with which exquisite torment, and many more of like sort. the some be rack, some try with mock, bond, scourge, etc. imprisonment, some stone, some hew asunder, some slay with the sword, with which exquisite torment, and many more of like sort. the cruelty of these wolf can not be satisfy, but as tacitus in his annal record li the saint of god, suffer martyrdom after this cruel manner be further make laugh stock to the world in be clad with skin of wild beast and so expose to the tear and rent asunder by dog, and this not in some few, to the terror of the rest, but, as the same author add, when the day be not long enough to make they away in, they serve for man to see by, in the night, by the flame. rest, but, as the same author add, when the day be not long enough to make they away in, they serve for man to see by in the night, by the flame wherein their body be consume. eusebius, go yet further: that the number, in some place, grow to be so great that the executioner faint with weariness in their make, havoc though one succeed after another, and that the edge of their sword and axe be dull and make blunt with the multitude of the slay body of the saint which he take not up by way of credit upon other man, report himself, be a eye witness of it in thebais of egypt. ecclesiastes history lib ca, so cruel be the rage of these ravenous beast. by way of credit upon other man, report himself, be a eye witness of it in thebais of egypt. ecclesiastes history lib ca. so cruel be the rage of these ravenous beast in these ten persecution under the roman emperor, from which, if we suppose that the age follow, be free, job we err and be great deceive, say gregory. enlarge his tail. wherein lie his strength? more wicked now in the end of the world moral, the devil. wrath wax great in these wolf, his instrument, by how much short he know his time be to wreak his malice upon the saint, so that, as berna^d distinguish sermon, there be peace and there be no peace, a etc. the church be in peace and rest from pagan. to wreak his malice upon the saint so that, as berna^d distinguish sermon, there be peace and there be no peace a, etc. the church be in peace and rest from pagan and micah, but in sooth, not secure of her own child, nor of they of her own house. yes, most infest by they, for who be they that for these many year have make havoc and spoil of the church? but such as will be term gal, i say not only pillar, as be james and cephas and john, but the very head of the church, christ, his vicar upon earth, as they style themselves, the pope of rome, that very antichrist and scarlet colour whore drunke with the blood of saint and with the blood. the church, christ, his vicar upon earth, as they style themselves, the pope of rome, that very antichrist and scarlet colour whore drunke with the blood of saint and with the blood of the martyr of jesus, as the spirit testify in the revelation. witness, among many other: the albigense against who innocent the three? so proceed by his censure that in one town of they thousand of they, be put to the sword without any respect, have of age, sex or degree, and in another town, one hundred and fourscore consume together in one fire because they will not abjure the faith of christ. history part tit and li pa, as antoninus report. witness: the protestant in germany against who paul the three excite charles the emperor. because they will not abjure the faith of christ. history, part tit and li pa. as antoninus report, witness: the protestant in germany against who paul the three excite charles the emperor? paulo, say genebrard, their chronologer, who, for the better manage of that war, assist the emperor with a army out of italy of ten thousand foot and five hundred horse, under the conduct of his nephew octavius farnesius, who be so confident in his force that depart out of italy. he boast before hand that he will make such a slaughter in germany that his horse shall swim in the blood of the lutheran, as john sleidan be author. last of all, commentar li pa not to stand upon example which in this kind be infinite. his horse shall swim in the blood of the lutheran, as john sleidan be author. last of all, commentar li pa, not to stand upon example which in this kind be infinite, witness the slaughter and butchery of the hugonite in france, history li as natalis, wrong term they of who, to the number of sixty thousand, perish at paris and in other city of france. what time the admiral be murder and in the civil war, not so few as twelve hundred thousand, natural french be number to have be slay, in which combustion the pope of rome be the very alastores and apollyons the firebrand of these mischief. with who flame if this, our native country, have not in like manner burn within these late year? pope of rome, be the very alastores and apollyons the firebrand of these mischief with who flame if this, our native country, have not in like manner burn within these late year. it be god watchful eye over our prince and we which extinguish the spark, while they be enkindle and not want of malicious cruelty in they who be always ready press to minister fuel to these flame. the bull of pius, gregory the sixtus, the testify as much, breathe out fire and sword against our late sovereign, who memory shall be bless in all posterity, and by their loud low call in foreign power against our land and excite disloyal subject, as be tichborne, parry, squier, walpoole and such like, to treacherous conspiracy at home. some posterity and by their loud low call in foreign power against our land and excite disloyal subject, as be tichborne, parry, squier, walpoole and such like, to treacherous conspiracy at home, some of which conspiracy howsoever. our english catholic have make his forehead as the adamant in his letter before mention pa and term ridiculous, false device and monstrous fiction make against some priest to make their whole company and cause odious. yet our tribunal and bench of justice and judgement have convince, evident this shameless untruth and the secular priest have likewise publish as much import, sid and concern these treachery to all man view, so that now it necessary ensue from the confession of our adversary that the company of these jesuite and their whole cause import, sid and concern these treachery to all man view, so that now it necessary ensue from the confession of our adversary that the company of these jesuite and their whole cause be just odious both to god and man for their treacherous and bloody designment, from which aspersion in like manner the two breve of clement. the will not be purge, although this impostor wash they with, to use the word of the prophet, and take much soap to he jeremiah, for most evident it be that catesby, that arch-traitor, lay upon they the foundation of the powder-treason in his conference with garnet proceed, argue from their authority, right and strong, that if it be lawful not to receive his majesty, that now be or to repel. of the powder-treason in his conference with garnet, proceed, argue from their authority, right and strong, that if it be lawful not to receive his majesty, that now be or to repel he, as the say breve do import, than it be also lawful to expel or cast he out, which be endeavour, with no less labor than it be apprehend by hope to be effect by powder from the vault by which most barbaric stratagem, like ravenous beast they will have, swallow we up quick and overwhelm we with a flood, but not of water. thunderclap of powder and stream of fire shall have be the swell water which shall have go over our soul. caligula, that monster of mankind, for his cruelty more than savage be. thunderclap of powder and stream of fire shall have be the swell water which shall have go over our soul. caligula, that monster of mankind, for his cruelty, more than savage, be famous for a wish that in his bloodthirstiness he conceive against his subject, the people of rome, which, be that they all have but one head, that so, at one blow he may chop it off, but in this powder-treason, consider cruelty more brutish than be ever, that of caligula. for here, not the prince, with who under god be store up all power of life and death, be plot against the subject, but the subject against the prince, and that not in heart only wish, but by their practice labor, yes, in a manner effect. of life and death be plot against the subject, but the subject against the prince. and that not in heart only wish, but by their practice labor, yes, in a manner effect, not the ruin of a famous city, but of a flourish kingdom, and not of the kingdom, the commonwealth alone, but of the church also. in both church and commonwealth, aim not at the member without the head, but joint at both together, member and head. also, not with the stroke of a sword direct by man, hand in who still reside mercy, but by the merciless element of fire, and that not ordinary consume by degree, but the extraordinary invention of the devil, minister, that kind of fuel to man rage which swallow up at by the merciless element of fire and that not ordinary consume by degree, but the extraordinary invention of the devil minister, that kind of fuel to man rage which swallow up at one breath and as it be at one mouthful whatsoever, stand in the way. the holy oil wherewith his sacred majesty be enthronize into this royal kingdom shall have be no protection to defend he from the rage of this fire, though the prophet in god person have before express charge: touch not my anoint. the law provide, psalm deut that man shall not take the dam with the young. do god take care of bird corinthian as the apostle reason in the like argument, or be it write for our sake. and yet in this, take the dam with the young. do god take care of bird corinthian as the apostle reason in the like argument, or be it write for our sake. and yet in this share, the mother must have perish with the son. root and branch together have be consume in this combustion. god justice will have spare sodom. have there be find in it but ten righteous gen, but ravenous fury. have so possess these beast that who themselves deem just must have perish with the rest. the height of majesty, adorn with so many peerless virtue of learning, wisdom, godliness, temperance, justice, clemency. the matchless vine with her tender plant, the future hope of our succeed age. the noble peer, the most reverend bishop, the wise counsellor, the. of learning, wisdom, godliness, temperance, justice, clemency. the matchless vine with her tender plant, the future hope of our succeed age. the noble peer, the most reverend bishop, the wise counsellor, the grave sage of the land, the knight and burgise and officer of all sort, all together at one instant. lutheranum ^t. jesaita, hoffaeus, hassemmil history, jesuitic, ca, pa, etc. pa and must have mount up into this fiery chariot as hoffaeus, that bloody jesuite, be wont to say that. so their soul may have be harrow into hell if these gunpowder-powder-inginer have be their judge in this cruel and barbaric as impudence itself will be ashamed. i say not to excuse, but once to extenuate the heinousness of the attempt. see how our english catholic play. judge in this cruel and barbaric as impudence itself will be ashamed. i say not to excuse, but once to extenuate the heinousness of the attempt. see how our english catholic play the part of a diligent advocate, allege the tribulation of catholic in our state and government mere for conscience and religion, of which he grievous complain in sundry part of his letter. for the cause of this woeful attempt, to use his own word, in these unfortunate gentleman wherein to pass over the ingratitude of this unworthy person towards his gracious majesty, of who clemency not only the recusant in general but many of the popish priest have be and still be partaker in great measure, i say only this, and that in a word, and clemency. not only the recusant in general, but many of the popish priest have be and still be partaker in great measure. i say only this and that in a word, and i speak it in the sight and hear of almighty god, that if to be a rebel and a traitor be all one with a catholic, and if due execution of justice be pressure and tribulation, then i willing acknowledge that some catholic in england have perish under this pressure and tribulation. as for other, which suffer pecuniary mulct in good or bodily restraint or loss of country by banishment, let he be please to call to mind the fire and gibbet in queen mary day by which more innocent perish in some one or two. or loss of country by banishment. let he be please to call to mind the fire and gibbet in queen mary day, by which more innocent perish in some one or two year, only for profession of the gospel, without the least imputation of treason. then popish, traitor of all sort, suffer in year of our late sovereign and in the six ensue of his majesty. that now be when, as our holy martyr will have, reckon it for great favour to have go away with life and limb, whatsoever become of their good and native country. away then, even for shame, with these foul blot and stain of cruelty and persecution, the mild and gentle aspect of our merciful king, admit they not. neither be they find. country away then, even for shame, with these foul blot and stain of cruelty and persecution, the mild and gentle aspect of our merciful king, admit they not, neither be they find in our state they be the unseparable mark and badge of the roman synagogue, as you have hear, and of these holy father who rather succeed romulus in murder and slaughter- the say of pope adrian, illine catalogue tomorrow- than peter in feed christ his flock. and this be speak of the cruelty of the adversary of the church. i come now in the three place to discuss the cause which produce these effect of subtlety and cruelty in the adversary of the church, whereby they seek and endeavour the subversion and ruin thereof. the prophet. three place to discuss the cause which produce these effect of subtlety and cruelty in the adversary of the church, whereby they seek and endeavour the subversion and ruin thereof. the prophet lay it down in the three verse: they have swallow we up quick. when their wrath be kindle against we wrath, than be it that quicken the wit and sharpen the raven appetite of these enemy, make they so wily in theirsnare, so powerful in their force, and all to the perdition of the silly and weak lamb of christ, his flock. a affection by nature, incident in a man, but as bernard well note, sermon upon the psalm: man abuse nature, good, it become a miserable ruin and heavy perdition, not to man only, but by nature incident in a man. but as bernard well note, sermon upon the psalm: man abuse nature, good it become a miserable ruin and heavy perdition, not to man only, but to thing also, without reason, yes, without sense too. lib cap behold say seneca, the foundation of most noble city, hardly to be discern, such be their desolation. it be wrath that cast they down and make they level with the ground. consider country and region, make desolate place for many mile together. it be wrath that, in this manner, draw they dry and make they void without a inhabitant. it be wrath that put the instrument of cruelty into the hand of simeon and levi, those brother in evil gen whereby they put hamar and make. they void without a inhabitant. it be wrath that put the instrument of cruelty into the hand of simeon and levi, those brother in evil gen, whereby they put hamar and shechem, with their people, to the sword and sack their city after they have receive circumcision, break thereby the bond of promise and the very seal of their faith. and therefore, most true be that verdict which the wise king have give of this unbridled affection proverb: anger be cruel and wrath be rage. and saint chrysostom, in his homily to the people of antioch, as if he have foresee the powder-treason: anger be like a mighty fire consume all thing. and saint augustine, ser wrath say he be a most cruel beast, rent and tear. antioch, as if he have foresee the powder-treason: anger be like a mighty fire, consume all thing. and saint augustine, ser wrath, say he be a most cruel beast, rent and tear with her tooth. consonant with our prophet in this place, with who accord saint basil in a sermon of this argument. compare it to the swell water of which our psalmist speak. the violent force of man enrage with fury. carry, say he, all thing before they like flood and inundation. such a fire, such a beast, such a swell water. be wrath in a man, possess therewith it, consume it, devour it over-whelmeth all thing. and therefore no marvel when the fountain be so bitter, if the stream issue from thence be so unpleasant as a man possess therewith it consume it, devour it over-whelmeth all thing, and therefore no marvel when the fountain be so bitter, if the stream issue from thence be so unpleasant, as have be declare. yet because, as saint ambrose observe upon the four to the anger be a natural motion or commotion, rather conceive upon some cause, let we consider the cause that exasperate the adversary of the people of israel in such sort as the prophet in this psalm complain a learned modern expositor, wolf muscul, render this reason of it that israel have obtain a king of the lord that go in and out before they. they will no long put their neck and shoulder under the yoke of their enemy who before that time? obtain a king of the lord that go in and out before they. they will no long put their neck and shoulder under the yoke of their enemy who, before that time, have dominion over they. upon this defection they make out after they, with their force, pursue they in hostile manner to reduce they to their wont servitude, as pharaoh have deal with they in former time. a lively type of the adversary of god church in all age, wherein we may plain see what have cause they from time to time to pursue christ, his member, with such deadly wrath and hatred. it be because, upon the admonition of the angel revel corinthian, they be go out of babylon, or to speak with the apostle, because, his member with such deadly wrath and hatred. it be because, upon the admonition of the angel revel corinthian, they be go out of babylon or to speak with the apostle, because they will not be yoke with infidel and heretic in their error and superstition, have obtain a david, a king of god, his son christ, that holy one, the lord anoint. for if there be any thing in the world that do provoke a man and kindle his affection, it be religion, which make he not only defend, to the uttermost of his power and with his best endeavour, what he conceive to be pure, but also to prosecute with all might and fury the contrary sect to the utter extinguish and root up of it. and with his best endeavour what he conceive to be pure, but also to prosecute with all might and fury the contrary sect to the utter extinguish and root up of it. suppose that in so do they fight god. battle, hence proceed that deadly feud between the hebrew and the egyptian gen. they may not eat together, for that be a abomination unto they. between the jew and the samaritan john, they meddle not one with the other. the poet observe as much among the gentile, immortal and inuenal, satyr, hatred without end and a breach which never can be cure, because every nation believe those only to be god who they worship. and julian note it among the christian, as amnianus marcellinus report who find he breach which never can be cure, because every nation believe those only to be god who they worship, and julian note it- among the christian, as amnianus marcellinus report, who find he say no beast so deadly one to another as christian, be to christian which be speak by so great a enemy as be that apostate will carry little credit with it. be it not that the history of the church record as much of the novatians, the arrian, the donatist and such like, heretic against the catholic who impatience, as cyprian note, provoke and force to furious outrage and deadly hatred. here be that sword of which our savior forewarn mat: think not that i come to send peace into the earth. i come not to. force to furious outrage and deadly hatred. here be that sword of which our savior forewarn mat: think not that i come to send peace into the earth. i come not to send peace, but the sword who part christ his vicar. think he play not well if he be not ever now, and then send abroad his sword into protestant kingdom because both prince and people be in his censure. no better then forlorn heretic past, all hope of recovery and amendment to which grievous imputation, we answer with saint paul that, after this way, which his holiness be please to call heresy, we so worship the god of our father, believe all thing which be write in the law and the prophet act, yes, moreover, in which his holiness be please to call heresy. we so worship the god of our father, believe all thing which be write in the law and the prophet, act, yes, moreover, in the evangelist and apostle, to who judgement? if he will stand, we will easy lay this crime upon himself, in depart from the truth of that gospel which not only moses and the prophet but our savior and his apostle preach. i will not now anatomize and rip up the whole body of popish superstition wherein nature be oppose to grace, saint merit to christ, his blood, their mediation to his intercession, unwritten vanity to the write, truth work to faith, with many such like will-worship which be after the doctrine of man, let the trial. christ, his blood, their mediation to his intercession. unwritten vanity to the write, truth, work to faith. with many such like will-worship, which be after the doctrine of man, let the trial be make in one point, the misunderstanding whereof so much trouble the christian world. i mean the natural and civil obedience of dutiful subject towards their lawful prince, a duty enjoin by our savior mat. give unto caesar the thing that be caesar and second, by that, choose vessel the apostle of the gentle rom. give to all man their duty. tribute to who you owe tribute, custom to who custom fear to who fear. honor to who you owe honor, whence be those grave and religious exhortation of the holy apostle saint peter: submit yourselves. you owe tribute. custom to who, custom fear to who fear. honor to who you owe honor. whence be those grave and religious exhortation of the holy apostle saint peter: submit yourselves to all manner ordinance of man, for the lord sake, whether it be to the king as unto the superior, etc. and of paul, let every soul be subject unto the high power, rom. the reason of both be worthy to be engrave in the heart of the subject with the point of a diamond. for the lord sake, say saint peter, for there be no power. but of god, say saint paul, with who concur the law and the prophet, the ancient father of the church, both in their writing and in their meeting in. be no power, but of god, say saint paul, with who concur the law and the prophet, the ancient father of the church, both in their writing and in their meeting in general counsel which may as easy be allege if need require, but our adversary acknowledge as much as he do we, to wit in his letter, namely pa, that subject be bind to obey their temporal prince in all thing lawful, and those not only good prince but have also, and that not only of fear and flattery but of conscience, as the apostle teach. for conscience sake, why then join we not as in tongue, so in hand and heart also, and admit the trial of our obedience by the touchstone of true fidelity in teach for conscience sake. why then join we not, as in tongue, so in hand and heart also, and admit the trial of our obedience by the touchstone of true fidelity in? take the oath of allegiance, pa and because, say our english catholic, beside the exaction of natural obedience, which be lawful, the oath contain diverse other point also concern matter of catholic religion, which be unlawful. for whereas the oath be divide into several part of, they at the least, as he avouch, touch the pope supremacy one way or other, as where it be say in the oath that the pope have no authority to depose our king, to dispose of his kingdom, to authorize any foreign prince to invade or annoy he or his. be say in the oath that the pope have no authority to depose our king, to dispose of his kingdom, to authorize any foreign prince to invade or annoy he or his country, or to discharge his subject of their allegiance, to give licence to any of they to bear arm against he or to offer violence to his person or government or subject. the assertion of all which point and other such like specify in the oath be say: he matter of catholic religion. but who see, not who eye god have open to behold the light of his gospel, that this religion- false term, catholic utter- pervert, the lawful subjection of people to their sovereign, and that hell be not more opposite to heaven than the. the light of his gospel, that this religion, false term, catholic utter, pervert the lawful subjection of people to their sovereign, and that hell be not more opposite to heaven than the bear of arm by the subject against his prince, raise tumult in his dominion, offer violence to his person, state or government be contrary to his allegiance and fidelity. christ say, chrysostom in his commentary upon the to the roman make nor law to overthrow the state of commonwealth, but that he may the better order and establish they, but to depose king, to dispose of their dominion, to take the crown from one and give it to another, as man toss a tennis ball in the court, from henry to rodulph and so along to. dispose of their dominion to take the crown from one and give it to another, as man toss a tennis ball in the court from henry to rodulph, and so along to assoil subject of their fidelity. these and such like, which be after the decree of latter pope, overthrow the very foundation of kingdom and commonwealth, which transcendent authority while they assume unto themselves by virtue of the church censure, they go far beyond the bound and limit of their commission. for excommunication be a punishment, mere spiritual. deprive a man only of such spiritual comfort as otherwise he shall receive at the hand of the church, but no way impeach his estate in his good and possession. li conclus as their own soto teach and much. comfort as otherwise he shall receive at the hand of the church, but no way impeach his estate in his good and possession. li conclus, as their own soto teach, and much less have it any force to depose prince from their throne, to absolve subject from their obedience, to warrant they to rebel, to say violent-hand upon their sovereign, or any way to conspire or work their death. wherefore let this be the obedience of such popish recusant as refuse to profess their fidelity by take the oath bulla and outward to make a show of it, to keep themselves from trouble and mulct. yet with these circumstance, the state stand so firm as god. have the glory and praise for it- it do such a union. of it to keep themselves from trouble and mulct. yet with these circumstance, the state stand so firm as god. have the glory and praise for it. it do such a union and consent in prince peer and all good subject as need not dread the face of all their enemy, and that be until they have get strength enough to make head against their sovereign and then down with he, by open hostility or secret conspiracy, it make no matter which. so they have their watchword from rome by the pope: excommunication and depose of he. but for we beloved, which have otherwise learned christ, let these seed of disloyalty and treason be far from our heart. let we give to our caesar his fear, his honor. he, but for we beloved, which have otherwise learned christ, let these seed of disloyalty and treason be far from our heart. let we give to our caesar his fear, his honor, his service, his protection by our body. good and life which be his. be he as wicked as be ever. nero. how much more be so good and gracious, so zealous of god honor and of his subject good. this subjection, say chrysostom, subvert not piety. nay, it confirm it more. neither be this spiritual but civil obedience due to the prince, ordain by god, not depend upon the pope who exalt his own self. be he place in his due rank, say chrysostom. be he a apostle that be as good as peter himself. or god not depend upon the pope who exalt his own self, be he place in his due rank. say chrysostom, be he a apostle that be as good as peter himself, or be he a evangelist, or be he a prophet, he be but a subject. or if all this serve not the next word, immediate ensue, will order he, or be he what he will be or may be. say chrysostom, if he consist of a soul and body, rom, he must be subject to the high poxer, that be to the king or to the emperor. god vive image upon earth and acknowledge they for his lord epistle as pope. gregory the great, do mauritius the emperor, or if these be matter which concern religion and the emperor, god vive, image upon earth and acknowledge they for his lord epistle as pope gregory the great do mauritius the emperor, or if these be matter which concern religion and such as touch the pope supremacy spiritual, why do not our english catholic bring forth his proof especial have, make promise so to do in the forefront of his pamphlet? but open it and peruse it from the first page to the last. you shall find nothing therein but his own assertion, the pope supposition or, at the most pa, his determination, the authority of cardinal bellarmine and the chief learned man of their church, as he term they that be herod and pilate, the high priest and elder, the scribe and phariseis with the nation. of cardinal bellarmine and the chief learned man of their church, as he term. they that be herod and pilate, the high priest and elder, the scribe and phariseis, with the nation of the jew, conspire against our savior and seek false witness against he, but find none for no better. with we be the credit of the pope and his consistory, his college of cardinal and the whole swarm of his priest and friar in matter concern their own authority, contrary to the express word of holy scripture. yes, pa. but if the pope have not this authority to proceed against prince by dethrone and depose of they for their restraint and amendment, god providence shall be defectuous, say our english catholic, for the preservation of his. not this authority to proceed against prince by dethrone and depose of they for their restraint and amendment. god providence shall be defectuous, say our english catholic, for the preservation of his church. i answer nothing less. for if peter and his successor be able to govern the church in the midst of all the storm of persecution under the pagan emperor who labor by all cruel mean to root out the very name of christianity, without the use of any such authority, how much more easy must it be for they who claim succession from peter to govern the ship of the church when, by the commandment of our savior, the wind be cease and the storm be lay, unless we shall say that the church have peter to govern the ship of the church when, by the commandment of our savior, the wind be cease and the storm be lay, unless we shall say that the church have not her due government but be toss up and down with every wave and puff of wind for the space of year and upward after christ, until such time as hildebrand surname gregory the seven, lift up his priestly lance, as they say, against caesar sword and usurp the authority of decrow prince, which be absurd once to enter into any man conceit of common sense or learning. yet more than this, our english catholic say not but perchance matthew tort, cardinal bellarmine, chaplain, prove the point more substantial. true, if the wrest of a place common sense or learning yet more than this. our english catholic say not. but perchance matthew tort. cardinal bellarmine, chaplain, prove the point more substantial. true, if the wrest of a place or two in holy scripture make any thing to the purpose he allege. out of john our savior, his charge to peter- feed my lamb, feed my sheep. and out of matthew the like. say to peter: i will give unto thou the key of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be bind in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall lose upon earth shall be loose in heaven. from whence, say he? all catholic do gather that it appertain to the authority of the high bishop. he mean the pope of. shall lose upon earth shall be loose in heaven. from whence, say he? all catholic do gather that it appertain to the authority of the high bishop. he mean the pope of rome- not only to have power to lose from sin, but from punishment, censure, law, vow and oath when it shall make for god glory and the salvation of soul. but when may this? when ever be that god shall be glorify by overthrow all law, both divine and human, or be any thing more impossible than that? truth shall receive honor from lie and perjury. be not this to make a lie for god, which holy job so much detest. or, in the best sense, to do evil. that good may come thereby. which whosoever. and perjury. be not this to make a lie for god, which holy job so much detest, or, in the best sense, to do evil. that good may come thereby, which whosoever shall attempt the apostle pronounce of they. that their damnation be just. ro again, where the chaplain avouch his exposition of lose to be mean not only of remission of sin, which we willing acknowledge with his lord and master, the cardinal, but also of relaxation from law. rom pontifi, lib vow and oath from the authority of all catholic, either the ancient father of the church, a, a in mathae, origin in psalm ambrose, hierome in i^ha tract and agon ca angustine, trinit hilary and chrysost sacerdot lib theophilact in mat cap cyprian ansel in. of the church. a. a in mathae, origin in psalm ambrose, hierome in i^ha tract and agon ca, angustine, trinit, hilary and chrysost sacerdot, lib. theophilact in mat cap, cyprian ansel in mat ver, beda, ibid, etc. such like be no catholic, or else he father that upon they which never come within compass of their thought, who, moreover, joint teach and profess that the authority of bind and lose and feed christ, his sheep, be by our savior. give as well to the rest of the disciple as unto peter that they all receive the key as well as peter. what be say to peter? be say to all: the promise to peter. be common to all. they be the express word of these father, so that key as well as peter. what be say to peter. be say to all. the promise to peter. be common to all. they be the express word of these father. so that as yet neither our english catholic nor the cardinal chaplain have say any thing to prove that the authority of bind and lose and feed christ his sheep belong more to saint peter and his successor then to the other apostle and their successor, or that the depose of prince be a point of doctrine belong to the pope supremacy more than to the supremacy of other patriarch, and much less that it be a matter of catholic, that be apostolic or christian religion for subject, in any case at his command to bear arm against. supremacy of other patriarch, and much less that it be a matter of catholic, that be apostolic or christian religion for subject, in any case at his command, to bear arm against their sovereign or to attempt any thing against his state and person. by this, which have be deliver, i hope it be manifest not only how repugnant the voice of that antichrist of rome be to the voice of christ and his apostle in the dutiful obedience of subject towards their sovereign, but also how pernicious popish doctrine be to state and kingdom depose prince from their throne and arm their subject against they. and therefore howsoever the english catholic in his letter aver psalm, that liberty of conscience he mean in popish religion ought to. prince from their throne and arm their subject against they and therefore howsoever. the english catholic in his letter aver psalm. that liberty of conscience he mean in popish religion ought to be as free in this kingdom as breathe and the use of the air be common to all. yet the wisdom of our solomon do see that as one temple can not contain god, ark and dagon, sam corinthian as light have no communion with darkness, christ no concord with belial, so neither can the purity of the gospel have any agreement with popish superstition. our savior himself have deliver his judgement in this case, mat. every kingdom divide against itself shall be bring to nought, and every city or house divide against itself shall not. superstition, our savior himself have deliver his judgement in this case mat. every kingdom divide against itself shall be bring to nought, and every city or house divide against itself shall not stand. and what great division than this can be. think in a state and kingdom, then, where potentate be oppose to potentate, the pope against the king, subject against subject, servant against servant. both walk diverse way after diverse master. such division of heart and affection can but prove deadly in the end, to the body wherein they shall be find, be it civil or ecclesiastical, church or commonwealth. from hence proceed wrath, envy, sedition, contention, dion cass, murder, as maecenas long since tell augustus the emperor. you may take it from a latter writer who: or ecclesiastical church or commonwealth. from hence proceed: wrath, envy, sedition, contention, dion cass, murder, as maecenas long since tell augustus the emperor, you may take it from a latter writer who testimony be beyond all exception, as be a enemy and therefore likely to advise we no more for our good than what the force of truth wrest from he. it be weston, the divinity professor in the english college at dowaie, lib ca. if, say he, the people conceive a opinion of their king to be a enemy to their religion or to contemn it, what be there that they will not attempt against his life to the effusion of his blood and religion. command they and the god who they worship, force they thereunto as. it. what be there that they will not attempt, against his life, to the effusion of his blood and religion. command they and the god who they worship. force they thereunto as they be persuade in their conscience. can he more lively have describe our jesuited romanist who religion be rebellion and murder of prince especial, when their lord god, the pope, glos in cap extravag joan, you know who say it be shall encourage and exhort they thereunto, and again in the conclusion of the chapter, whosoever say he shall consider the infinite hatred which from time to time have pass between heretic and catholic, shall easy perceive that it can stand with civil policy that sectary of such contrary opinion in religion shall be fit conjoin. from time to time have pass between heretic and catholic, shall easy perceive that it can stand with civil policy, that sectary of such contrary opinion in religion shall be fit conjoin in the same civil society and that the safety of the prince can suffer such promiscuous, conventicle and confuse manner of worship in religion. our english catholic acknowledge as much in his letter. add further that beside internal danger, pag, which say he be ever consequent upon such inward division of religion, if foreign occasion shall be offer we again, as in former time they have be, by foreign war. we shall not know how to trust the one the other. here be plain deal. indeed. you hear he now speak plain. lay aside his usual they have be by foreign war. we shall not know how to trust the one the other here. be plain, deal indeed. you hear he now speak plain. lay aside his usual manner of cog and equivocate, and be there not judge you great cause that liberty of their conscience and religion, which threaten such danger both to prince and country, shall be as common among we in this kingdom as the use of the air and breathe be common to all. or rather, be there not great need that the statute concern obstinate recusant be put more due in execution and not lie sheathe so much as they do in the scabbard, and that all loyal subject be seal like the servant of god in their forehead. put more due in execution and not lie sheathe so much as they do in the scabbard, and that all loyal subject be seal like the servant of god in their forehead, make open profession by their oath of their dutiful allegiance towards their sovereign revel which, in a cause so conformable to god will and command, so behooufull to church and commonwealth, so near touch god. glory, the peace, safety and honor both of prince and people, whosoever shall refuse. i wish his leg so fetter, though not with give of iron, and his arm so weaken, though not by draw one drop of blood, that these serpent may not be able to sting when they most desire, nor these wolf to prey upon we when they so weaken, though not by draw one drop of blood, that these serpent may not be able to sting when they most desire, nor these wolf to prey upon we when they most long. thus you have the root from whence spring these bitter fruit of subtlety and cruelty in the adversary of the church. their wrath kindle not upon a light and frivolous occasion, but burn with the zeal of religion, though a zeal not according to knowledge and religion, without due fear of god and reverence of man. there remain yet two point unhandled: the one of the deliverance of the church from her enemy, the other of the duty of praise and thanksgiving to be perform for this deliverance, which the time be so ready. the one of the deliverance of the church from her enemy, the other of the duty of praise and thanksgiving to be perform. for this deliverance, which the time be so ready to prevent, i and my voice fail, i will fold up in a word by way of application to ourselves who, as god have, make example of his mighty power. no nation under heaven more in deliver we out of the hand of all our enemy, both from the snare of secret treachery and from the open violence of their intend cruelty. so there be no people in the world more oblige to the duty of praise and thanksgiving to the lord. i will not now stand to repeat unto you our former deliverance that the be no people in the world more oblige to the duty of praise and thanksgiving to the lord. i will not now stand to repeat unto you our former deliverance that the year so long before speak of, for the wondrous effect which it be expect it shall produce. it suffice that it be wonderful to we when, stand as it be still, we see the salvation of the lord, fight his and our battle against these, his and our enemy, and chase they until he have make almost a final end of they who the pope have bless with the name of invincible. neither will i call to your mind the manifold danger and treachery so oft plot against our late, gracious sovereign and in her life. pope have bless with the name of invincible. neither will i call to your mind the manifold danger and treachery so oft plot against our late gracious sovereign and, in her life, against we, with which our most noble king that now reign have be as fresh assault sithence his entrance into his throne and kingdom of all which we may say with the bless apostle from they all. the lord have deliver we tim consider. but this day, the birthday, as i may term it, of our country, in which both prince and people come as it be anew into the world, deliver from the dreadful powder-vault, the very belly of hell and confusion, as jonah sometime do from the belly of the whale, how desperate and as it be anew into the world. deliver from the dreadful powder-vault the very belly of hell and confusion, as jonah sometime do from the belly of the whale. how desperate and bloody be the attempt, how secret be the snare lay to entrap we, unaware, when every man sing to his neighbour, nothing but peace, peace. how near be we bring to the pit brink, i say not, as jonah do, yet day, but yet not so much as one day, and we shall have be destroy when be ready to sink. god stretch forth his hand unto we, as sometime he do, to peter and take we as a brand out of the fire. matth zechar, sure here be neither want of malice, will or subtlety. his hand unto we, as sometime he do to peter, and take we as a brand out of the fire. matth zechar, sure here be neither want of malice, will or subtlety in the adversary in spread the net that it prevail not, nor force of wisdom or deep insight in any that prevent it. the heart of our most wise and prudent king, how large soever it be, as the water which cover the sea, yet be it at this time extraordinary, inspire from above when, out of a cloud of dark speech by the finger of god, he note and point at the treachery, and therefore more proper, may we take up this. say then, ever do israel, tremel and jun who speak it, but in finger of god he note and point at the treachery, and therefore more proper. may we take up this. say then, ever do israel, tremel and jun, who speak it, but in a trope and figure: if the lord have not be on our side, may we of england say: if the lord have not be on our side, when man rise up against we, they have then swallow we up quick when their wrath be kindle against we. but praise be the lord who give we not over for a prey unto their tooth. our soul be escape as a bird out of the snare of the fowler when our enemy fall into the pit of destruction which they have dig for we. wherefore let the praise soul be escape as a bird out of the snare of the fowler when our enemy fall into the pit of destruction which they have dig for we. wherefore, let the praise of god be always sound in our mouth, both of prince and people, old and young, man and maiden, woman and child. let we all, in our place and calling age and sex, praise the name of the lord, which be only to be exalt, not wisdom, strength or worthiness in ourselves, and let other put their trust in horse and chariot, in the multitude of their host, in the strength of their ship, in the pope curse and blessing. but let we always think and say with our prophet, in the conclusion of this psalm: multitude of their host in the strength of their ship, in the pope curse and blessing. but let we always think and say with our prophet in the conclusion of this psalm: our help be in the name of the lord to which most glorious name be. render all praise, honor and glory, might and majesty this day and for ever. amen. a sermon preach at the spital matth, beware of false prophet which come to you in sheep clothing but inward they be raven wolf. you shall know they by their fruit, etc. among the manifold danger amid which the ark of god church be toss up and down by the sly imposture of her enemy, as by so many storm and surge, the peril by false. manifold danger amid which the ark of god church be toss up and down by the sly imposture of her enemy. as by so many storm and surge, the peril by false prophet and seduce teacher be such as if, with diligent heed and attention, they be not avoid as the syrtes and rock of the sea. we be in danger every hour to make shipwreck before we can so much as see the haven wherein our soul long so earnest to be at rest. the great be the vigilancy of god, watchful eye over his silly flock, never slumber nor sleep, psalm. but as a careful father, warn we before hand of they beware of false prophet. and as a painful master, diligent, instruct we how we. silly flock, never slumber nor sleep, psalm. but as a careful father, warn we before hand of they. beware of false prophet. and as a painful master, diligent, instruct we how we may know and avoid they. you shall know they by their fruit, say our savior mask otherwise. so, with sheepes-cloathing as that, by their outward show and habit, they be able to deceive, if it be possible, the very elect, for this sheepes-cloathing, be that external habit which natural and proper belong to the sheep, make we take they to be so which come so clad unto we it be, say a, a prescript, heretic, caluin, jansen, tertullian, superficies, the superficial outside of a christian that be holiness but feign piety and religion but in show. so clad, unto we it be say a, a prescript, heretic, caluin, jansen, tertullian, superficies, the superficial outside of a christian, that be holiness but feign piety and religion, but in show it be. author in matthew, homily, lucas, burgensis, etc. the sheep skin, indeed, his wool, his fleece, his outward appearance and resemblance, but it be not opus. the true sheep deed, his natural work. the religion be not pure, the holiness not sincere and upright, which yet, notwithstanding, dazzle our eye and pervert our judgement if we be not very wary and circumspect. therefore, our savior, will we not to stand at gaze and to look upon they, but say he heed, they mark, they eye they well, which be as john expound his master meaning. our savior, will we not to stand at gaze and to look upon they, but say he heed they, mark, they, eye they well, which be, as john expound his master, meaning: believe not every spirit but try the spirit, whether they be of god, a point of skill beyond the reach of babe, who be inexpert in the word, use milk such as they be, who the author to the hebrew therefore reprove for it, and as the lay people be in the roman church, who faith lie, fold up in the faith of the church, without any further search and inquiry. it be the part of strong man, yet not of the pastor and doctor alone, as promptuar, cathol, dominic, post, pentecost, stapleton will have it. church without any further search and inquiry. it be the part of strong man, yet not of the pastor and doctor alone, as promptuar cathol, dominic, post, pentecost stapleton will have it, but of the flock too, which, through long custom, have their wit exercise to discern both good and evil. heb author in mat homily: here be a special virtue and property, peculiar to goodness itself, to discern that which be evil, and a sure defence, preservative of our welfare, to know he who thou must eschew and avoid, which that we may be able to perform our savior, add lucas burgen maldonat. symbolum, a badge or cognizance, though not a priore for god. only be act, the searcher of the heart and reins. yet a a. to perform our savior, add lucas burgen, maldonat symbolum, a badge or cognizance, though not a priore for god. only be act, the searcher of the heart and reins. yet a a sign better suit with our understanding from the effect. by their fruit you shall know they, that which lie hide within the heart be make manifest, say m^ral gregory, by that which a man do without, as in the water. a face answer to the face, say solomon prouerb verse. and what be these fruit? the homily, author of the imperfect work upon saint matthew, his gospel, resolve the doubt. very fit in two word, say he. and the fruit whereby a man be know the true prophet, be discern from the false, the sheep from, matthew, his gospel, resolve the doubt very fit in two word, say he. and the fruit whereby a man be know, the true prophet be discern from the false, the sheep from the wolf be the confession of his faith and his life and conversation. for if a man hide the wolf under the sheepes-cloathing, how can thou know? he say the same author, john, but by his voice or by his deed scripture. if his confession be consonant with the scripture, if his life answerable to his profession, this man indeed be a israelite in who be no guile. if otherwise it be the wolf under the sheepes-cloathing. shun he and beware of he. so then you have in the word^ read unto you first a caveat. who be no guile, if otherwise it be the wolf under the sheepes-cloathing: shun he and beware of he. so then you have in the word^ read unto you: first, a caveat, like a pharos, set at the entry of my text division, to give light unto we beware. second, the rock and syrtes which we be to shun, false prophet. three, a reason of the danger: their disguise mask of themselves because they come to you in sheepes-cloathing but inward be raven wolf. last, the mark and token whereby you may descry and discern they. you shall know they by their fruit, which be the very foundation of all the rest. my labor and time shall be spend by god gracious assistance and your wont patience in. you shall know they by their fruit, which be the very foundation of all the rest. my labor and time shall be spend by god gracious assistance and your wont patience in lay open of they which be disclose, the rest of itself will fall to the ground. it be a easy matter to beware of the wolf when he be strip of his sheepes-cloathing. yet the case so stand, as homil tomorrow, chrysostom do true, report it that there be many sheepskin and as many wolf that lie hide under they, and that many false prophet, under colour of the true have in all age creep into christ his flock. we must herein also use a moderation and out of many sort, make choice of some by prophet under colour of the true, have in all age creep into christ, his flock. we must herein also use a moderation and out of many sort, make choice of some by which you may judge of the rest, and because every one, as he, be jealous of his reputatition, labor to remove this imputation from himself. the i papist false charge we with it, and we lay it, as the truth be and where it be to be find upon they. we will herein follow the advice of in mark, verse one of their friar. lay aside our own asseveration. we will name a arbitrator between we to decide this controversy. let the scripture say he who the scripture shall say to be the false prophet. let lay aside our own asseveration, we will name a arbitrator between we to decide this controversy. let the scripture say he who the scripture shall say to be the false prophet, let he be so. repute and account. now the instance to make trial by. to limit myself within some bound, i will put infoure point. the first concern tradition. the second in worship of image, the three in miracle, all matter of doctrine, as you know, and controvert between we and our adversary, the papist, and belong to the voice of the prophet, the first principal fruit by which he be know. the four and last concern manner and life, which be his deed and action, the other principal fruit of which our savior have pronounce by. principal fruit by which he be know. the four and last concern manner and life, which be his deed and action. the other principal fruit of which our savior have pronounce: by their fruit you shall know they. by these you may make a estimate of the rest and according judge of the true and false prophet. first then, to begin with that which be the foundation of many other, our savior say: call they false prophet, mat which transgress the commandment of god by their tradition, lib in mat for these mat cap. he call for the same cause, blind guide, which be all one with false prophet, and denounce a against they. woe be unto you blind guide. now this be a essential property of the for the same cause. blind guide, which be all one with false prophet and denounce a against they. woe be unto you, blind guide. now this be a essential property of the guide and doctor of the roman synagogue who, not content themselves with the fountain of live water, the holy scripture and word of god, as not contain all thing sufficient for manner in this life and salvation in that which be to come dig to themselves pit, even break pit, of diverse and sundry tradition which in truth can hold no water. for thus, bellarmine, they teach and profess that beside the write word of god, there be a other part thereof. not write, their meaning be in the scripture and by the first author thereof. bellarmine, they teach and profess that beside the write word of god there be a other part thereof not write, their meaning be in the scripture, and by the first author thereof, the apostle of our savior, though otherwise it be extant almost in the ancient father bellarmine, as they say, which they term and call tradition, of which they make many sort. agree in this that they concern both faith and manner. what reckon and account they make of these tradition shall come from their own mouth, for otherwise it will seem, i suppose, incredible what they ascribe unto they, the decret council of trent decree that they be to be receive with the like affection of godliness and reverence whereby we admit and reverence the book. what they ascribe unto they the decret council of trent, decree that they be to be, receive with the like affection of godliness and reverence whereby we admit and reverence the book of the old and new testament. eanden li cardinal bellarmine, say that they have all one force and strength, cathol li cap sec, gregory of valencia. the authority of each be alike, infallible and can deceive. cardinal hossius, not content with this parity, add further that far the great part of the gospel come to we by tradition, when but very little thereof be commit to writing and annal ann number. cardinal baronius, as if this be not enough, avouch that all the book of the new testament receive their authority from tradition in regard whereof? commit to writing and annal ann number cardinal baronius, as if this be not enough, avouch that all the book of the new testament receive their authority from tradition in regard whereof he prefer they before the scripture. because scripture, say he, unless they be establish by tradition, have no be when, as tradition without the scripture be firm and stable in themselves. so likewise, petrus a soto before he defence cathol confess, call they the foundation and exposition of the scripture, and lydius panopl li cap lindane the touchstone of true and false doctrine. final, say that many point and head of faith will reel and totter, be they not support by the assistance and authority of tradition. yes, not only reel and totter, but a great. say that many point and head of faith will reel and totter, be they not support by the assistance and authority of tradition. yes, not only reel and totter, but a great part of religion will also perish, say cathol cap soto, be it not for those part of doctrine which be maintain by tradition and the gospel will come to a vain name without substance, which i easy grant and acknowledge in their popish faith and religion, which can no more stand without tradition than a huge build without a foundation for it. be the confession, proceed from their own mouth, that the primacy of the pope and sea-apostolike be from tradition, their five sacrament of confirmation, order and matrimony, penance, extreme unction with their element word. confession proceed from their own mouth, that the primacy of the pope and sea-apostolike be from tradition, their five sacrament of confirmation, order and matrimony, penance, extreme unction with their element, word, fruit and effect, the consecration of water and oil in the sacrament of baptism, the doctrine of transubstantiation, and receive, in one kind of auricular confession, satisfaction, choice of meat, fast, purgatory, monastic profession, single life, prayer for the dead, petrus a soto, peresius, lindanus, panop li canus, theologic li ca, with the rest, invocation and worship of saint, worship their relic and image, in a word scant, any matter in controversy between we, which they acknowledge not to be ground on tradition howsoever. with conscience more than sear in their dispute, they allege scripture for: in a word, scant any matter in controversy between we, which they acknowledge not to be ground on tradition howsoever. with conscience more than sear in their dispute, they allege scripture for proof of they and a? a in his rock sanders proclaim that they have most plain scripture in all point for the catholic faith, false, so call, and none at all against the same. the case then stand thus with the popish religion. it be no marvel if so high they extol their tradition and on the other side, think and speak so base of the holy scripture term, they tilmannus h^shusius, sexcent tit sac, a nose of wax, ready to receive any impression. expound it how a man listen, a leaden rule, flexible and easy. of the holy scripture term they: tilmannus h^shusius, sexcent tit sac, a nose of wax, ready to receive any impression. expound it how a man listen. a leaden rule, flexible and easy to be. wrest whither a man will a dumb teacher which can neither answer nor express his own meaning. a dead scripture, the matter and subject of strife and contention which, without the church authority, be of no more credit than aesop. his fable, yes, a very babble, as dr fulcke his confutation of saunders treatise of the worship of image. pag. doctor cole the papist be visitor in cambridge when a bible be bring unto, he to be deface, call it bible babble. these blasphemy against god, sacred word which rom, corinthian, paul call the. the papist be visitor in cambridge when a bible be bring unto he to be deface, call it bible babble. these blasphemy against god, sacred word, which rom corinthian paul call the wisdom of god and the power of god unto salvation to every one that believe, demonstrate these- popish doctor, if i shall add nothing more, to be those false prophet of which our savior here speak for right. so do their forefather, the ancient heretic, vilify the holy scripture and magnify their tradition, as lib cap irenaeus, a mostancient father, testify, say he man argue against they and they be reprove out of the scripture. they turn themselves to accuse the scripture as if they be not right nor have authority in they and and because argue against they and they be reprove out of the scripture. they turn themselves to accuse the scripture as if they be not right, nor have authority in they and and because they be diverse, speak and have diverse sense, and and because the truth can be find, nor gather out of they by such as know not the tradition for say they, the truth be not deliver by writing in the holy scripture, but by word of mouth from man to man. never. cicer acaden quae be one egg so like another, as these old heretic and our popish doctor soto lindane and such like of the popish crew, so likewise be many of their reason and argument, the dull and blunt weapon of the old heretic. heretic, and our popish doctor soto, lindane and such like of the popish crew. so likewise be many of their reason and argument, the dull and blunt weapon of the old heretic return upon they, so often by the ancient father bellarmine, allege for proof of his tradition, that of our savior john. i have yet many thing to say unto you, but you can bear. they now, with which say of christ, all heretic, even the most absurd and foolish, which, notwithstanding, will be call christian, do endeavour to colour, say augustine, the audacious fiction of their idle brain which the sense of man do most of all fear and abhor. but as that godly father answer, so say i, if our savior conceal those thing who of their idle brain, which the sense of man do most of all fear and abhor. but as that godly father answer, so say i. if our savior conceal those thing who be he among we, that may say they be this or they be that, yet i, jansenius, one of their own, well observe that these many thing be not diverse and contrary to those which our savior teach his disciple while he be present among they, but only a more full and clear explication of they. so loc theol canus allege that of the apostle we speak, wisdom among they that be perfect corinthian, whereby he will prove that certain holy mystery be communicate by the apostle, apart from the ignorant to the perfect, even as apostle, we speak wisdom among they that be perfect corinthian, whereby he will prove that certain holy mystery be communicate by the apostle, apart from the ignorant to the perfect, even, as the old heretic say: irenaeus, by occasion of these word of paul, do every one of they call the fiction of their own blain this self same wisdom of which the apostle speak. but jansenius right note, as do tertullian before he, that the apostle do not signify by those word that he teach the perfect one thing, the unperfect and ignorant another thing, when as he preach the same faith to they both, but that his preach be not all, after one manner, which he apply to his hearer, to some more perfect and profound. when, as he preach, the same faith to they both, but that his preach be not all after one manner which he apply to his hearer, to some, more perfect and profound to other, after a plain fashion, according to the capacity of each of they. again, what the apostle write to timothy, timotheus: keep that which be commit unto thou be canus, bellarmine, etc. general allege of they for proof of their tradition. and so be it by the old heretic as praescripion, hae^eticor, tertullian witness, who from thence teach that the apostle deliver not all thing to all sort of man, but commit some thing open and to all man, other matter secret and to few, but or the thing commit, signify the whole charge which all thing to all sort of man, but commit. some thing open and to all man, other matter secret and to few. but or the thing commit. signify the whole charge which the apostle commit to timothy and particular, the true form of sound doctrine. deliver unto he in that epistle by paul, and not hide elsewhere or far fetch, as tertullian expound the apostle, but of all authority of scripture, allege by our adversary that which paul write to the thessalonian. be in show most clear, for they stand fast and keep the tradition which you have be. teach either by word or by our epistle, in which word the apostle make mention of doctrine. not only write, but also teach by express word of mouth, which you have be teach either by word or by our epistle, in which word the apostle make mention of doctrine. not only write, but also teach by express word of mouth which, as we ingenuous, acknowledge it be a truth. so we say, withal that it make nothing for our adversary. for although at that time, when the apostle write those epistle to the thessalonian annal tomorrow, an number which be more ancient than diverse of the writing of the evangelist and the epistle of the apostle, some, yes, many point of doctrine be deliver in the church by word of mouth, yet this be not against we which have those writing of the evangelist and the apostle which the thessalonian have not, then in all which now, the church by word of mouth. yet this be not against we which have those writing of the evangelist and the apostle which the thessalonian have not. then, in all which now write, we affirm to be comprehend all thing which concern faith and good manner and whatsoever be needful to be believe, so as that it be either express, write or by necessary consequence, may sound, be deduce and conclude out of the scripture for concern the old law. moses, give this charge in the person of god. you shall put nothing thereto, neither take aught therefrom. deut and of the gospel paul say that though himself or a angel from heaven preach otherwise, then that which he have, preach to the galatian. let he be accurse. aught therefrom deut and of the gospel paul say that though himself or a angel from heaven preach otherwise, then that which he have preach to the galatian, let he be accurse. the like be john, testimony of the thing record in his gospel. these thing be write: that you may believe that jesus be the christ, the son of god, and that in believe you may have life through his name, upon which word hugo the cardinal have this remarkable note. by these word, the scope of this gospel in special be show, but in a generality the end of the whole scripture be declare according, herein, with paul tim, the whole scripture be give by inspiration of god and be profitable to teach, to improve, to. a generality. the end of the whole scripture be declare according herein, with paul tim, the whole scripture be give by inspiration of god and be profitable to teach, to improve, to correct and to instruct in righteousness. that the man of god may be absolute, be make perfect unto all good work. so the prophet david, witness of the testimony of the lord, that it give wisdom to the simple psalm, even that wisdom which be able to make we wise unto salvation through the faith which be in christ, jesus tim. therefore, when one demand of our savior what he may do to inherit eternal life, he refer he to the scripture for his direction: luke as abraham, send the rich glutton brother to school to. demand of our savior what he may do to inherit eternal life. he refer, he, to the scripture. for his direction: luke, as abraham, send the rich glutton brother to school, to mos^s and the prophet, that he may avoid the torment of hell, fire, luke. if, then, the scripture be so perfect that we must add nothing to they, nor take aught from they, if no other gospel must be. preach under pain of god. curse if, by the writing of the prophet, the evangelist and apostle, we believe that jesus be the christ, the son of god, and by faith in his name obtain eternal life, if they make the man of god absolute and give wisdom to the simple, that wisdom which make wise unto. son of god and, by faith in his name, obtain eternal life. if they make the man of god absolute and give wisdom to the simple, that wisdom which make wise unto salvation, if they direct we to eternal life and keep we from the torment of hell fire it be as clear as the sunne-light at noon day that they contain all thing necessary for salvation. and therefore the papist, not content themselves with their sufficiency, do the very same for which our savior rebuke the scribe and phariseis. mat transgress the commandment of god by their tradition. now, if beside the voice of god speak in his holy word, any here present require further the witness of man and desire to know the mind and opinion. by their tradition. now, if beside the voice of god speak in his holy word, any here present require further the witness of man and desire to know the mind and opinion of the ancient father, although where god speak, it may well become man to be silent. yet that it may appear that we teach the same doctrine with the old greek and latin church, it shall not be amiss the rather for the stop of the mouth of our adversary, who be always brag of the father of who they be the degenerate child, to observe their judgement in this point. first, therefore, in scripture and columnan lib cap irenaeus say that the gospel which the apostle and evangelist deliver in the scripture be the foundation. to observe their judgement in this point. first, therefore, in scripture and columnan lib cap irenaeus, say that the gospel which the apostle and evangelist deliver in the scripture be the foundation and pillar of our faith, etc. homily in genes origin, instruct we to have daily recourse to the well of the holy scripture, the water of god, holy spirit, and to draw from thence and to carry home our vessel full, like holy rebecca. theodoret li history ecclesiastes ca. constantine the great, in his speech to the bishop: assemble in the council of nice, have this worthy say: the book of the evangelist and apostle, together with the oracle of the old prophet, do plain. teach we the thing which we be to know. concern god. have this worthy say. the book of the evangelist and apostle, together with the oracle of the old prophet, do plain, teach we the thing which we be to know. concern god athanasius in his oration against idol, the very first word thereof. the reason and knowledge of godly religion and truth do demonstrate itself more clear than the sun by the doctrine of christ and immediate after a, the holy and inspire scripture from above, suffice by themselves for the find out of the truth. pag basil say that it be a manifest fall from the faith and crime of arrogancy either to reject any thing which be write or to add any thing which be not write. homil in thessaly, chrysostom, yet more direct to the, the faith and crime of arrogancy, either to reject any thing which be write or to add any thing which be not write. homil in thessaly, chrysostom. yet more direct to the point: all thing be clear and plain out of the holy scripture. whatsoever thing be necessary be manifest. so likewise cyril, all thing be not write which our lord do, but tho^e thing which the evangelist, the writer, do think to suffice, both for manner of life and precept of faith that shine. with a right faith and good work and virtue, we may come to the kingdom of heaven. li ca confess that he receive and acknowledge and reverence all thing which be deliver in the law and the prophet, the apostle and the evangelist. come to the kingdom of heaven. li ca confess that he receive and acknowledge and reverence all thing which be deliver in the law, and the prophet, the apostle and the evangelist seek after nothing beyond these. you have hear by these what the opinion be of the greek father concern the sufficiency of the scripture without the supply of tradition. with who, in like sort, concur the father of the latin church i adore, say tertullian, the fullness of the scripture and immediate after, let hermogines his shop teach that it be write or let he fear that woe appoint for they which add or detract any thing from the scripture. cyprian, distinguish of tradition, make this demand, whence be it, say he, do it descend from. he fear that woe appoint for they which add or detract any thing from the scripture. cyprian, distinguish of tradition, make this demand whence be it say he do it descend from the authority of our lord or his evangelist, or come it from the commandment of the apostle and their epistle. for god witness that those thing be to be do which be write, and immediate after he infer this conclusion i. if therefore it be command in the gospel or comprehend in the epistle or act of the apostle, etc. let this holy tradition be keep and observe also. but on the other side it have no ground in the word of god. then mark what hierome say. other thing which heretic do find of their be, keep and observe also, but on the other side it have no ground in the word of god. then mark what hierome say. other thing which heretic do find of their own accord, without the authority and witness of the scripture, as though they be deliver by apostolic tradition: the sword of god which be his holy word, ephesian cut off, but of all the ancient father, the judgement of saint augustine. be worthy your observation as be most sound and direct to the purpose. who write against petilian the donatist denounce this sentence as it be. with the spirit of the apostle, whether of christ or of his church or of any other thing which appertain to faith and to our life and conversation, i say: it be with the spirit of the apostle, whether of christ or of his church or of any other thing which appertain to faith and to our life and conversation. i say not we, who be by no mean to be compare with he who say: but though that we, etc. gal, but that which the apostle add: if a angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, beside that which you have receive in the scripture, of the law and the gospel, let he be accurse. and in his book christiana li in those thing which be set down plain in the scripture, all those thing be to be find which concern faith and the manner of a man, life, namely hope and charity, these testimony of the be set down plain in the scripture, all those thing be to be find which concern faith and the manner of a man, life, namely hope and charity. these testimony of the ancient father be plain and evident and take out of such their writing as be on all part, confess to be their own and not counterfeit such as our adversary usual press we with in their daily dispute, and they be so forcible even with they that with agrippa they become almost christian and subscribe to as much, in effect, as we teach of the sufficiency of the holy scripture. gregory of valencia, a jesuite of great note among they, acknowledge that what verity of faith be absolute and simple, necessary to be know and believe. the sufficiency of the holy scripture. gregory of valencia, a jesuite of great note among they, acknowledge that what verity of faith be absolute and simple, necessary to be know and believe of all man, that they may be able to come to everlasting bliss by faith, hope and charity, those say he we deny not to be, teach in the scripture themselves, almost and in a manner plain, as saint augustine have also note. but this fere almost which the jesuite insert be like to that wicked gloss which corrupt augustine. his text of the two cardinal bellarmine, deal more ingenuous, acknowledge that all those thing, without any fere almost be write of the apostle which be necessary and needful for all man, knowledge and coster the two cardinal bellarmine, deal more ingenuous, acknowledge that all those thing, without any fere almost, be write of the apostle which be necessary and needful for all man knowledge, and coster the jesuite in his enchiridion. we deny not, say he, that those chief head of faith, which be needful to be know of all christian for their salvation, be contain plain enough in the writing of the apostle, to who i may add a cloud of witness of their own writer, both modern and more ancient, justify against themselves what we teach of the sufficiency of the holy scripture, but i must omit they for brevity sake. what then mean those reproachful speech of the papist concern the insufficiency, obscurity, uncertainty and invalidity of the scripture as of the holy scripture, but i must omit they for brevity sake. what then mean those reproachful speech of the papist concern? the insufficiency, obscurity, uncertainty and invalidity of the scripture, as i have observe. wherefore, be it that they seal they up in a unknown tongue that the unlearned may not understand. they regul why navarre rid number? prohibit they the common people from read. they, why be it account a mortal sin among they for a lay person to dispute of matter of faith? why do hossius avouch that it be fit for woman to meddle with their distaff, then with god word? why do bellarmine so grievous complain that the translate bible be in the hand of all artificer, not only man but woman? but to meddle with their distaff, then with god word? why do bellarmine so grievous complain that the translate bible be in the hand of all artificer, not only man but woman, but that by these wolvish voice of they you shall know they to be the generation of those false prophet and ancient heretic who, tertullian for contempt and shun of the scripture, call such as fly the clear light of the holy scripture and the wicked brood of ciril jul julian, that who object this as a crime and imputation to the christian because they keep not man from read of the scripture as the papist at their pleasure. now adays term we chamber in his epistle to the reader scripturist and a a in his epistle. keep not man from read of the scripture, as the papist, at their pleasure, now adays term we chamber in his epistle to the reader scripturist, and a a in his epistle to the king. worthy scripturian, the voice of the shepherd and bishop of our soul be after another note, will we to search the scripture, pet john and so say the prophet esay to the law and to the testimony, and peter commend such as, take heed to the word of the prophet as unto a light that shine in a dark place by which the noble jew of berea make trial of paul doctrine, search the scripture daily, whether those thing be so act, and in theodoret time he flourish about the year genebrard it. which the noble jew of berea make trial of paul, doctrine, search the scripture daily. whether those thing be so act, and in theodoret time he flourish about the year genebrard. it be so. far from be a sin or reproach to be conversant and skillful in the scripture, or that any be forbid the read of they, that contrariwise, lanifice, etc. artificer and those of the mean sort as smith, weaver, deechers, herdsman, cobbler with woman of all sort, mistress and maidservant, do know and understand they and dispute of high point and mystery of their salvation. and therefore to conclude this point with homily, in collossen, chrysostom, his exhortation, etc. hear, i beg you, you of the laity of all sort, comparate etc. if as yet their salvation and therefore, to conclude this point with homily in collossen, chrysostom, his exhortation, etc. hear i beg you, you of the laity of all sort, comparate, etc. if as yet you have not, then get you the bible, which be the very physic of your soul, in which you may find a cure for every disease. as you be christ, his sheep, so hear you the voice of christ speak unto you in the holy scripture. therefore, august, christiana, li, etc. translate into diverse tongue and language that they may be read and make know to man for their salvation. suffer not yourselves to be rob of these water of comfort. neither dig unto yourselves the break pit of unwritten verity which can hold no water. know to man for their salvation. suffer not yourselves to be rob of these water of comfort. neither dig unto yourselves the break pit of unwritten verity which can hold no water, and take this of homily in column chrysostom as a most ground truth: that the cause of all evil and mischief be because man be ignorant in the scripture. thus much of the first instance of the sufficiency of the scripture without tradition, whereby the popish doctor be convince to be the false prophet of which our savior forewarn we in these word: beware of false prophet. the second instance, which i propose as the touchstone to try the false prophet by be the worship of other god in stead of the true and live god. of false prophet. the second instance which i propose as the touchstone to try the false prophet by: be the worship of other god in stead of the true and live god which be god almighty, bless for evermore. for so moses say: describe to we the false prophet, deuteronom, etc. if there arise among you a prophet or a dreamer of dream and give thou a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder which he have tell thou come to pass, say: let we go after other god which thou have not know and let we serve they. thou shall not hearken to the word of the prophet or unto the dreamer of dream, etc. from which testimony of moses gather this true proposition that and let we serve they. thou shall not hearken to the word of the prophet or unto the dreamer of dream, etc. from which testimony of moses gather this true proposition that in cap match whosoever withdraweth we from god the creator to the creature, he doubtless be a false prophet. and one of these wolf clothe under the sheep weed now by this note, the popish doctor, be so manifest. descry, as nothing can be more plain and evident, for these have make unto themselves their god-saint and their god-saint relic, their breaden-god, their crucifix-god, their image-god of gold, silver, brass, wood, stone and i know not what. all they have make the saint not only their mediator and intercessor unto god, but also join they with. their image-god of gold, silver, brass, wood, stone and i know not what all they have. make the saint not only their mediator and intercessor unto god, but also join they with god as their protector and defender. so say in his epistle to the king prefix: before the miracle of our lady of mont-aigne, chamber our english in their battle, call upon george the scottish nation, and the burgundian upon andrew, the french upon denice, the spaniard upon james i i chamber ibid. they fly unto they in their malady and disease, for their particular help, as to sebastian and roch to be preserve from the plague, to hubert for the bite of mad dog, to blasius for the pain and swell of the throat, etc. as help as to sebastian and roch to be preserve from the plague, to hubert for the bite of mad dog, to blasius for the pain and swell of the throat, etc. as though god be not all-sufficient and able of himself, or at least wise, not willing to defend and succour we, they build and dedicate temple and altar in their honor, appoint their festival day and set form of service. they burn incense before their relic and image, light taper before they go on pilgrimage unto they. they garnish they with all manner offer of gold, silver, jewel and whatsoever else may serve to make they seem glorious in the eye of foolish and superstitious man they reverence. they with cap and knee fall down prostrate before gold, silver, jewel and whatsoever else may serve to make they seem glorious in the eye of foolish and superstitious man they reverence. they with cap and knee fall down prostrate before they make their prayer unto they, before their image. yes, to the image themselves. thus, although their forehead be not yet grow so whorish and impudent as to call they in plain term god, yet in give to they that divine and religious service and worship which be proper to god, only they make they god, set they up in their church to be, adore and worship. time will not permit. neither be it my intent to prosecute all these several sort of idolatry, but to insist only upon that which, of all other, be the. adore and worship, time will not permit. neither be it my intent to prosecute all these several sort of idolatry, but to insist only upon that which, of all other, be the most blockish and foolish, namely the worship of image, of which, when i shall make it apparent that the papist stand convict, you may the more easy judge of the rest of their idolatry. first, therefore, this be evince by the second commandment: exodus, thou shall make thou no grave image, neither any similitude of thing that be in heaven above, neither that be in the earth beneath, nor that be in the water under the earth. thou shall not bow down to they, neither serve they, in which commandment, by the first clause, the make. in the earth beneath, nor that be in the water under the earth. thou shall not bow down to they, neither serve they in which commandment? by the first clause, the make of a image to represent god by be forbid. by the second, all manner kind of religious worship whereby superstitious man go about to adore god at, in or before a image any manner of way whatsoever. thus lib origin write against celsus: give the true sense of the commandment. say that religion keep jew and christian from worship of god in temple, altar image, because the law say there shall be no other god unto thou before my face and thou shall not make to thyself any grave image, etc. thou shall not bow down. image, because the law say: there shall be no other god unto thou before my face, and thou shall not make to thyself any grave image, etc. thou shall not bow down to they, nor worship they. to this commandment, bellarmine say it may be, answer in a word that it forbid the make of god image, thereby to express his nature, which whosoever shall attempt shall erect a true idol and so be guilty of the breach of this commandment. but this the gentile know, especial the wise sort among they, hermes, zenophon, euripides, plato, as the ancient father of the church in clemens, alexandrinus, li arnobius and li julian cyril record, namely that god in his nature be incomprehensible and that it be impossible to signify. as the ancient father of the church in clemens alexandrinus, li arnobius and li julian cyril record, namely that god in his nature be incomprehensible and that it be impossible to signify and represent he in a body who himself have none. and therefore they make not their image, by they to express their divine nature, but only some effect of it to which they suit their image. worship god and his virtue respective in they and not the image themselves, as in aquin quaes ar caietane and in actor with other of their own observe, so that if by this answer the papist can salve themselves from breach of the commandment, the gentile in like manner may do as much who? yet by the judgement of paul, so that if by this answer the papist can salve themselves from breach of the commandment, the gentile, in like manner, may do as much, who yet, by the judgement of paul, be condemn of idolatry because they turn the glory of the incorruptible god to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man and of bird, and of fourfooted beast and of creep thing, rom verse. this the cardinal happy understand. very well, leave his first answer and fly to a second. understand the commandment to forbid the make and worship of bell imag sanct li, such image which be repute and take for god, but this be already forbid in the first commandment. so that this answer of they confound the commandment make oporte^ latini. sanct li, such image which be repute and take for god, but this be already forbid in the first commandment, so that this answer of they confound the commandment. make oporte^ latini bell imag sanct li one of two, as the papist do in their primar and catechism, that so man may not take notice of their idolatry. when the commandment be after this manner, as it be raze out, but the commandment be distinct. the first: condemn all false god. thou shall have no other god before i exodus. the second: all false worship, either in make of idol by they to represent god, or in worship they with any manner of religious service. thou shall make theen grave image, etc. thou shall not bow down to. in make of idol, by they to represent god, or in worship they with any manner of religious service, thou shall make theen grave image, etc. thou shall not bow down to they nor worship them, exodus. for as god and his worship be two distinct thing, so the commandment concern they be two different precept. thus the jew, who be most accurate in calculate the law and every member and part thereof, understand they to be distinct, as appear out of josephus and philo, as also do in athanasius, and a origin origin acknowledge that some take they but for one, but say he, if we do so, the number of the ten commandment will not be complete. and what then shall become of the truth of? some take, they but for one, but, say he, if we do so, the number of the ten commandment will not be complete. and what then shall become of the truth of the decalog? furthermore, it be worthy the inquiry: who these be so sottish that take image make by the work of man hand for god, as bellarmine say? sure they be not the jew who worship the golden calf, do not somuch as once imagine that it be god, but by it do represent and in it worship the true god, jehovah, which bring they out of the land of egypt. nor the gentile, for they, as orat, dion, chrysostom and sermon tirius maximus declare, profess that in their image make of gold, silver, brass, ivory. they out of the land of egypt, nor the gentile, for they, as orat dion, chrysostom and sermon tirius maximus declare, profess that in their image make of gold, silver, brass, ivory, etc. they do worship the chief, first and great god, the creator and preserver of all thing. as for the christian origin, acquit they, as you have already hear, the papist only remain, who, herein especial the ignorant sort, be more blockish than the gentile, repute the very image of wood and stone who they adore for god and his saint. thus, jnuentor ca, polydore, virgil, one of their own, and therefore more like to cover their nakedness then to lay open their shame more than truth, urge report of they that they be come to. polydore virgil, one of their own, and therefore more like to cover their nakedness then to lay open their shame more than truth. urge report of they that they be come to that height of madness that they worship image make of wood, stone, brass or paint upon the wall and set forth in diverse cullom, not as figure or shape but as if they have some sense in they. yes, say he. they put more trust and confidence in they, then in christ himself. he tax other their folly in their offer and pilgrimage unto they. but be too lavish of his tongue. the popish index, expurgator belgic, in polydor, censor have. teach he to be more silent hereafter and not to publish so unnatural. the spiritual. they, but be too lavish of his tongue. the popish index expurgator, belgic, in polydor, censor, have teach he to be more silent hereafter and not to publish so unnatural, the spiritual fornication of his mother, the holy church. raze and expunge out of he what i have observe and much more. thus, notwithstanding whatsoever, have be hitherto answer to the contrary. the worship of image use in the church of rome be idolatry and condemn by the second commandment, king, and therefore by no mean nor in any consideration whatsoever lawful. hereunto may be add the example of that godly king hezekiah who, when the people of judah worship the brazen serpent, numb and burn incense unto it, break it in piece, though before time it have. the example of that godly king hezekiah who, when the people of judah worship the brazen serpent numb and burn incense unto it, break it in piece though before time it have be erect at the commandment of god himself, leave thereby a example to christian magistrate. what be to be do with image erect only by the will-worship and curiosity of superstitious man, when religious service be do unto they revel. for if the angel, when saint john fall down to worship before his foot, correct he and forbid. he say, see thou do it not. add not only a reason thereof, for i be thy fellow servant, but also instruct he in the true service. act ve, worship thou, god. and if saint peter, when cornelius not add not only a reason thereof, for i be thy fellow servant, but also instruct he in the true service. act ve, worship thou god. and if saint peter, when cornelius fall down at his foot and worship he, take he up, say: stand up, for even myself be a man. what may we imagine they will have? say, if they have find any so blockish and superstitious addict as to have worship their image, which the papist will not, i suppose, make fellow servant with god. saint isaiah, as not be so good as mortal man but such as the holy prophet, describe they abomination and profitable for nothing. jeremiah habac, the doctrine of vanity and teacher of lie, than which the frog and mouse, the mortal man but such as the holy prophet describe they abomination and profitable for nothing. jeremiah habac, the doctrine of vanity and teacher of lie, than which the frog and mouse, the mole and the batre and every creep thing be better because, as in protreptic clemens alexandrinus say, these have life and sense but image have none. as the psalmist describe they. they have eye and see not, ear and hear not. last of all, will the papist have we worship image. let they produce some example out of holy scripture for this practice and we will follow it. let they allege some precept of god, some exhortation of the holy apostle or prophet for our warrant and we obey, which, if they can do, as hitherto. we will follow it. let they allege some precept of god, some exhortation of the holy apostle or prophet for our warrant and we obey, which, if they can do as hitherto they have not, neither can do themselves with one voice, confess that this point of doctrine be ground upon tradition, wherein, what force there be have be, declare, than we say with saint augustine in his treatise, or who soever he be, that compile that work, rom, the holy scripture, pitch the rule of our doctrine in such sort that we presume not to understand above that which be meet to understand, as the apostle teach, not dare, in matter of religion and god service, to turn aside from the holy scripture so much as one. understand above that which be meet to understand, as the apostle teach, not dare, in matter of religion and god service, to turn aside from the holy scripture so much as one step either to the right hand or to the left, how much less than to the worship of image, forbid by god himself and condemn by all. the ancient father, or the church, when she be most pure and in her prime cont? quideu^ origin, say that it can be that a man shall know god and worship image. and i, i cap lactantius, put it out of all doubt that there be no religion where a image be erect to be worship. therefore, lib clemens alexandrinus, teach that man be to learn from the apostle. put it out of all doubt that there be no religion where a image be erect to be worship. therefore, lib clemens alexandrinus, teach that man be to learn from the apostle that they have no image in the world because among the creature there be nothing that can resemble the image of god. oer ^ur t^eodosii ambro. yet more direct to the purpose, speak of helen who, by the title, find out the cross whereon our savior be crucify. she worship, say he, the king, not the wood at all. this be the error of the gentile and the vanity of wicked man, but she worship he who hang on the tree, that be christ, the lord, whereof ado rare non dehent in ^a daniel hierom give. the gentile and the vanity of wicked man, but she worship he who hang on the tree, that be christ the lord, whereof ado rare non dehent in ^a daniel hierom give the reason, because such as be worshipper of god ought not to worship a image. so likewise saint augustine, i know, say he, that there be many worshipper of sepulchre and picture etc. who manner the church condemn and which she endeavour to correct and amend daily as be evil son, which be the labor and diligence of church of rome in the time of ep, ep, ep. gregory the great, as appear by his epistle to serenus, in which he teach: express that image be not to be worship, and this be the current doctrine. of ep, ep, ep. gregory the great, as appear by his epistle to serenus, in which he teach: express that image be not to be worship and this be the current doctrine of the church for the space of year after christ the great. be the untruth which cardinal imagine imag li bellarmine set abroach. affirm that image have always have due honor in the church. for until the second, which be in the year centre, magdebur, cent pa nicene council, assemble by the superstitious empress eirene, the honor and worship of image be never public. establish and then be, authorize it be eftsoons disannul by a council, hold at anno cent magd ib pa frank-ford under charles the great, which define out of god word that the establish and then be, authorize it be, eftsoons disannul by a council, hold at anno cent magd ib pa, frank-ford, under charles the great, which define out of god word that the worship of image be unlawful, pronounce against that of niece, that it be a false synod or council and therefore no credit to be give to it. since which time, many have rise among themselves in the very height of popery which have gainsay it. holcot, in his lecture upon the book of wisdom, say that the spirit of god reprove idolater that worship image and artificial figure, condemn the determination of thomas distinct that the same honor be due to the image which be due to he who image it be and so imagine necsoem. image and artificial figure, condemn the determination of thomas distinct that the same honor be due to the image, which be due to he who image it be. and so imagine necsoem rational li. we do not say he adore image, nor call they god, nor put our hope in they, because this be to commit idolatry. imagine in, exposit gerson. in like manner, image be forbid to be, make to be, adore and worship, either inward by the affection of the mind, or outward in the body, by bow before they, or bend the knee unto they, who further advise and a ecclesiastic, the clergy of his time to consider whether such variety of image and picture in the church be profitable or not, and whether they. unto they who further advise, and a ecclesiastic, the clergy of his time to consider whether such variety of image and picture in the church be profitable or not, and whether they do not sometime pervert the simple people to idolatry. that which gerson propose by way of question eras, a man of exquisite learning, after diligent inquiry, make. deliver in plain word, after this manner, that as it be more easy, so it be also more saf to remove all image out of church. they to obtain that either a mean be keep in their worship or that superstation be not mingle with al. to these i may add their bishop, a catharinis and pa fol li peresius. both of they deny that image be to be. worship or that superstation be not mingle with al. to these i may add their bishop, a catharinis and pa fol li peresius. both of they deny that image be to be worship with divine worship. you bellarmine himself, howsoever, he maintain the doctrine which now be most current in the church of rome, that the image of christ and the crucifix be to be worship with latria, that be divine worship. by his distinction of, by which distinction every thing may be worship with, and divine worship, say catherine, so foolish be this distinction in his judgement. yet, as though his conscience check he, he think it no sound kind of speech for the preacher to use in the pulpit, and rather the contrary, that no image. his judgement. yet as though his conscience check he, he think it no sound kind of speech for the preacher to use in the pulpit, and rather the contrary. that no image be to be worship with divine worship. a wholesome piece of doctrine, you may suppose, which dare not abide the light. yet herein he say, not so much as do before he who acknowledge the position of the papist to be false, that the same reverence be to be give to the image that be give to the thing signify thereby. yet, say he in examine council tridentin par pag. we must speak and say as the many do. thus you see, the popish doctor, like judg the midianite, sheathe their sword, every man in his in examine council tridentin par pag. we must speak and say as the many do. thus, you see, the popish doctor, like judg the midianite, sheathe their sword, every man in his neighbour bowel. only gregory of valencia, more audacious that i say, not more impudent than the rest, not be able to purge himself and his church from this sin of idolatry, endeavour to prove that co^tendonon idol, all worship of image be not forbid, that be that some idolatry be lawful, because saint peter write it be sufficient for we that we h^ue spend the time pass of the life, after the lust of the gentile walk in wantonness, lust, drunkenness in glutronie, drink idoloru^ and in unlawful worship of image. as he read after the the time pass of the life, after the lust of the gentile, walk in wantonness, lust, drunkenness, in glutronie, drink idoloru^ and in unlawful worship of image, as he read after the vulgar for that which i, i, erasmus, arrias, other of his own, very learned, translate: abominable worship of image, fron which word this great jesuite make, this collection that a man may think without absurdity, that saint peter give we to understand that some worship of idol, namely of holy image, be right, when he will deter the faithful by name from the unlawful worship of image, for else what need he to have note so distinct the unlawful worship of image and idol, if he have think that no kind of worship have be lawful? worship of image, for else what need he to have note so distinct the unlawful worship of image and idol. if he have think that no kind of worship have be lawful, which manner of reason, if it be sound, then may some sin be say to be godly, which be to speak good of evil for which there be a woe. store up isaiah, because saint jude call sinner wicked, which he need not to have do so distinct. if some sinner be not godly, and shechem or any wanton fornicator or adulterer may as well maintain his filthy lust, because it be say of the defile of dinah gen that it be a unlawful thing which the spirit of god need not to have note so. well maintain his filthy lust, because it be say of the defile of dinah gen that it be a unlawful thing which the spirit of god need not to have note so distinct if he have think that no deflower of virgin have be lawful. and in that fox act and pag and great controversy which busy the head of all the learned in the famous university of europe, i mean the cause of divorce between henry the of famous memory, and the lady catherine, princess dowagar, sometime wife to his brother prince arthur. the advocate on the lady part may have argue strong out of the scripture, after valencia, his manner for the lawfulness of the marriage. because it be say, levitic the man that take his. on the lady part, may have argue strong out of the scripture, after valencia, his manner for the lawfulness of the marriage, because, it be say levitic, the man that take his brother wife commit a unlawful thing. for if some marriage of a man with his brother wife be not lawful, what need moses, at the commandment of god, to have note so distinct the unlawful marriage of the brother wife? ignorant man, shall i say, or malicious, blind, that either know not or dissemble that which boy in the school learn in their first rudiment that epithet be use not so much for distinction sake as by way of amplification and exaggeration, and yet as though the former of distinction be only in use. so the rudiment that epithet be use not so much for distinction sake as by way of amplification and exaggeration, and yet as though the former of distinction be only in use. so the jesuite pervert the place of peter, who use the epithet of abominable or unlawful. when he say abominable idolatry, exaggerate the heinousness of the offence, because idolatry be the great and most heinous of all sin, as himself idololat li ca elsewhere. true, prove out of the holy scripture. thus, by the verdict of god word and testimony of the ancient father, the papist stand convict of idolatry, thereby show themselves to be the offspring of these old heretic, the euseb history, eccl. simonian, the li ca gnostics, the epiphan and colliridian, and to be those stand convict of idolatry, thereby show themselves to be the offspring of these old heretic, the euseb history eccl. simonian, the li? ca gnostics, the epiphan and colliridian, and to be those false prophet and raven wolf clad in sheepes-cloathing, of which our savior here give warning: beware of false prophet. and so i come to the three instance which, be their miracle, allege common as a argument as for other point of their doctrine, so for the worship of image, the confutation of the one will be the overthrow of the other. now concern these false prophet. we have our savior prediction, matth: there shall arise false christ and false prophet and shall show great sign and wonder so that, if it be possible, they shall deceive. false prophet. we have our savior prediction, matth. there shall arise false christ and false prophet and shall show great sign and wonder, so that, if it be possible, they shall deceive the very elect as than our savior. teach we by the parable of the figtree, matth: when her bough be tender and it bring forth leaf, we know that summer be near. so, likewise, when we see and hear the sign and wonder whereby the church of rome labor to commend unto we many her novel and superstitious doctrine, and among they the worship of image, we may by they take perfect notice of the come of antichrist, which the holy apostle foretell shall be thess by the work of satan with all power and sign. of image. we may, by they, take perfect notice of the come of antichrist, which the holy apostle foretell shall be thess by the work of satan, with all power and sign and lie, wonder, and in all deceivableness of unrighteousness which, in these latter age of the dote world, we have see accomplish in the false prophet of the roman synagogue, for among they, their image, for example, sake have be see concil nicen. secund: action to sweat, to weep, to laugh, to distill drop of dew with which disease have be cure, to shift themselves from place to place. yes, rom, in thom aquin to speak also, thereby to convince the prophet david of falsehood who say of they, they have mouth and speak not psalm. themselves from place to place. yes, rom, in thom aquin to speak also, thereby to convince the prophet david of falsehood who say of they, they have mouth and speak, not psalm verse, the action father of the second nicene council, be frequent in this argument. report that a woman sick of the palsy, prave, before the image of anastasius rise up whole and sound, another possess with a foul spirit, bring before the same saint image at rome. be so cure. and that a man molest with the devil, be by he. tell that if he will not have he struggle and wrestle with he. he must beware that he worship no more the image of the virgin bear christ in her arm, as she be usual. he will not have, he struggle and wrestle with he. he must beware that he worship no more the image of the virgin bear christ in her arm, as she be usual paint, whereupon carol abbot theodorus infer that a man be better frequent all brothel house, then to omit the worship of that image. example of this sort be infinite. it be a endless travel to recite the only bare name, as in his epistle to the king, prefix before the miracle of our lady of mont-aigue, robert chamber, a fugitive priest, say of those who have, laudable as he suppose, implote their labor herein and therefore omit other. i commend only to your consideration that pamphlet translate our of french by he into our mother tongue. who have, laudable as he suppose, implote their labor herein and therefore omit other. i commend only to your consideration that pamphlet. translate our of french by he into our mother tongue, of the miracle late wrought before the image of our lady of mont-aigue in the low country, and dedicate not long since to the king majesty. these, in his epistle dedicatory he avouch to be semblable to those divine operation whereby the savior of the world do manifest his godhead to the world. for, say he, turn his speech to the king here. your grace may behold how the blind see, the deaf h^are, the lame walk, the devil be expel, the leper be cleanse and many other painful, deform and desperate malady be cure indeed. grace may behold how the blind see the deaf h^are, the lame walk. the devil be expel, the leper be cleanse and many other painful, deform and desperate malady be cure. indeed, our savior say little more when he will show to john baptist, his two disciple, that he be that christ, foretell by the prophet to come into the world for the redemption of mankind. matthew, go, say he, and show john what thing you have. hear and see. the blind receive sight and the halt go. the leper be cleanse and the deaf hear the dead be raise up and the poor receive the gospel and bless be he. that shall not be offend in. i the great be the blasphemy of this popish priest to. the dead be raise up and the poor receive the gospel and bless be he. that shall not be offend in. i the great, be the blasphemy of this popish priest to ascribe that to a wooden image which be the handy work of christ, god and man, the savior and redeemer of the world. yet what he brief repeat in his epistle be to be read at large in the history of these miracle in which he be so confident that he say it can be, imagine that his royal wisdom will pass they over, as though his grace have no apprehension of they. yet to make his imagination the more sure and strong, he gather together the reason and argument which his great master allege for as though his grace have no apprehension of they. yet to make his imagination the more sure and strong, he gather together the reason and argument which his great master allege for proof of the miracle wrought in the roman church epistle dedic. and first, say he, where miracle be see to favour the person or thing that appertain to their congregation. who can deny but that god be well, please with they and well allow of their rite, faith and profession? will he know who can deny this? i will not now answer he with the authority of the ancient father, of who i shall speak hereafter, neither of all the reform church in christendom, which happy in his eye be, but deform his fellow priest in the authority of the ancient father, of who i shall speak hereafter. neither of all the reform church in christendom, which happy in his eye be, but deform his fellow priest in his answer to suttl^ffe, his appendix fol matthew kellison, in effect, deny it, acknowledge that simon magus, montanus, maximilla and the gnostique heretic deceive many by their illusion and that antichrist at his come shall seduce many more. as much do cardinal bellarmine recite out of valerius maximus and ciero miracle wrought by the pagan, as that a vestal virgin draw water in a, that a southsaier cut a whetstone with a razor which, if ecclesiastes bellarmine set light by, as though they be, as he call they, light and of small account. yet those which that a southsaier cut a whetstone with a razor which, if ecclesiastes bellarmine set light by, as though they be, as he call they, light and of small account. yet those which be recount by the same valerius tit li ca may not be so. answer as, namely, where the image of fortune be report to have, say to the matron and lady of rome: lady and matron, you do right, see i. and as well consecrate i for as unlikely a miracle as this be chronicle in their reform. roman breviary of the infesto thom aquin. image of the crucifix, before which thomas of aquine pray. he hear a voice, the a a antonin, he par ^it crucifix speak it be^e scripfistide i thoma, thomas, thou have aquin image of the crucifix. before which thomas of aquine pray. he hear a voice, the a, a antonin, he par ^it crucifix, speak it be^e scripfistide i, thoma. thomas, thou have write well of i which be true. if that be true, which he write, that the tomorrow quaes artic image of the crucifix be to be worship, with such worship as we give to god, for thereby he make the crucifix a god, which be well. i trow for the crucifix. will any man think that have eye in his head that both these miracle come not out of one shop, from one and the self same forge? the same valerius report that the chapel of the salij be burn. nothing be find in it romuli. miracle come not out of one shop from one and the self same forge. the same valerius report that the chapel of the salij be burn. nothing be find in it. romuli ib, beside romulus, his deum staff, the like be record among the miracle wrought by our lady of mont-aigue that pa certain heretic ransack her chapel and burn the foorme and seat and other thing of wood within it. yet the chapel take no fire, although they labor to burn it. also beside these, report by valerius maximus. what shall be say of that which, in his life, suetonius write of vespasian, that he restore sight to a blind man by spit into his eye and heal another of a lame leg or thigh by touch. which, in his life, suetonius write of vespasian, that he restore sight to a blind man by spit into his eye and heal another of a lame leg or thigh by touch of he with his heel, as also of that which aelias ib spartianus record of adrian, that he restore one to sight that be bear blind. of that which julius jb capitolinus report of antoninus surname the philosopher who by his prayer procure lightning from heaven to set his enemy engine on fire and rain for his army when they faint with thirst. of that which lib philostratus have commit to write of hercules and apollonius tyanaeus that they raise up the dead to life. these and such like bellarmine must not blow away with his. that which lib philostratus have commit to write of hercules and apollonius tyanaeus, that they raise up the dead to life. these and such like bellarmine must not blow away with his breath term they light for great miracle than these be not record in the most lie and fabulous legend of saint francisco, saint dominick, saint antony of padua, of franciscus xaverius out of the indies or out of the low-countries, of the image of our lady of mountaigue. if chamber his reason be good, it follow that god. be well, please, with these pagan and allow of their rite faith and profession, because miracle favour their person, and then let the papist see what will become of their church, which, bellar, they say be know by. and allow of their rite, faith and profession, because miracle favour their person. and then let the papist see what will become of their church, which bellar they say be know by her miracle, when the pagan miracle be as glorious as they. what distinction can the work of miracle make? they, i, i, bel, and chambin, his epistle, will say that these miracle and cure wrought by the pagan be no true miracle but be do by the aid and assistance of the devil. be it so, and what hinder why we may not answer in like manner as bellarmine do, of the cure wrought at the image of our lady of mountaigu, if any be wrought, and such like, that the devil be in the eye. in like manner as bellarmine do, of the cure wrought at the image of our lady of mountaigu, if any be wrought, and such like that the devil be in the eye of one, in the leg of a other and so in the rest which be report to have be cure. hinder the use of those member to the end that our lady to speak with the papist may seem to cure they, when the devil do desist and leave off to hurt and hinder they. but miracle, say chamber be work that surpass the power of any creature and therefore, where god vouchsafe to work any miracle in the defence or honor of any person or any point, belong to any religion or belief in his power of any creature and therefore, where god vouchsafe to work any miracle in the defence or honor of any person or any point, belong to any religion or belief in his epistle, such a miracle be as it be his very word. i answer: if we take miracle in a strict sense, for such work as be do against nature, as to stay the course of the sun in the firmament, to ra^^e down manna from heaven, etc. so the holy angel themselves as by themselves can work no miracle, much less the devil or any his instrument, antichrist or false prophet whatsoever, neither be they such that be wrought before the image of montaigu, but if we will speak as saint augustine do and call that any his instrument, antichrist or false prophet whatsoever, neither be they such that be wrought before the image of montaigu. but if we will speak as saint augustine do and call that a miracle, which be hard or not usual, appear to be do beyond the hope and ability of man that wonder at it, as it be common take such miracle the devil can work and false prophet and sorcerer by his assistance, and not only the holy angel. but these be no way to be compare with the authority of god, word in as much as true miracle themselves, without their dependence and congruity with the scripture. can now adays give any credit or authority to any point of doctrine or religion and therefore, etc. no, much as true miracle themselves, without their dependence and congruity with the scripture, can now adays give any credit or authority to any point of doctrine or religion? and therefore, etc. no, in, etc, in, etc. ecclesiastes augustine have to deal with the donatist in the question of the church. provoke and call they from their sign and wonder to the prescript of god word which be the touchstone of all miracle, as in mat fol, as right observe from the testimony of moses and our savior, upon which he ground this true conclusion, that doctrine must not have his proof from miracle, but miracle from the truth of doctrine howsoever. in his epistle chamber, most untrue, if not blasphemous, aver that miracle be more evident proof of. must not have his proof from miracle, but miracle from the truth of doctrine howsoever, in his epistle chamber, most untrue, if not blasphemous, aver that miracle be more evident proof of a true religion, then be the scripture jbid. but god, say he be truth itself, can, by his omnipotency, give his testimony to any error or falsehood. aend be very goodness itself. it be impossible that he will permit we to be seduce by any his extraordinary supernatural operation etc. which, as i willing, acknowledge to be true in the elect. so i further add that god permit satan and his member sometime to work miracle, not to the end that he will thereby give credit and authority to their false doctrine and heresy, but as add that god permit satan and his member sometime to work miracle, not to the end, that he will thereby give credit and authority to their false doctrine and heresy, but, as in matht and promp, nor aestival post pentecost, stapleton his doctor observe, and that true for the proof and trial of the good, his choose and excaecation of the wicked, and reprobate according herein, with moses deut, the lord your god, prove you to know whether you love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul. but miracle have be always in the church, from her first infancy, and so have continue from age to age, even to our time, as li ecclesiastes bellarmine observe, which to in his epistle dedicatory: be always in the church from her first infancy and so have continue from age to age, even to our time, as li ecclesiastes bellarmine observe, which to, in his epistle dedicatory chamber, seem a argument unanswerable. we answer: not as he vain conceive that all such history be fiction, neither by bare and incredulous denial as he will make we, but we distinguish the time, acknowledge that in the primitive church, miracle be true, wrought. the exigence of the time so require, when the doctrine of the gospel be strange, new and incredible to the natural man and, as paul say, corinthian, to the jew, a stumble block and to the greek foolishness which gift continue in the church until both jew and gentile be general gather. natural man and, as paul say, corinthian. to the jew a stumble block and to the greek foolishness, which gift continue in the church until both jew and gentile be general gather to christ his flock. and yet, what small force there be in miracle, even in those time of themselves, to bring man to the truth. when god withhold the inward operation of his holy spirit by the efficacy of the word preach be manifest by some unbelieve jew who ascribe the miracle wrought by our savior himself, matth, etc. to the power of beelzebub, the prince of the devil. as for the miracle of the latter age, we answer with ecclesiastes augustine: either they be not true, such as be many the legendary fable and the the prince of the devil. as for the miracle of the latter age, we answer with ecclesiastes augustine, either they be not true, such as be many the legendary fable and the miracle wrought among the indian by franciscus xaverius and other, of that crew, as the bellar ecclesiastes li jesuite report, or some of they be true as haeretike and impostor in all age have wrought some and still do, by the assistance of satan. and then we be to be the more wary of they, as ecclesiastes augustine teach, we as be wrought by the permission of god for the trial of his child and further obdurance of the wicked, and that we make no more reckon of their miracle. they must not take it amiss. the permission of god for the trial of his child and further obdurance of the wicked, and that we make no more reckon of their miracle. they must not take it amiss at our hand, the wise and better learn among they have. teach we to do so if we know it not before. a, a, etc. gloss in daniel acknowledge that the people be sometime much deceive in the church by miracle make by priest and their consort for worldly gain and for the writer of the legend of their saint, which be full fraught with they. ca man, li, cornelius, agrippa give this testimony of they that they do and make miracle after their own device and fain terrible fable. ludovicus vives say that they hold. with they. ca man li, cornelius agrippa, give this testimony of they that they do and make miracle after their own device and fain terrible fable. ludovicus vives say that they hold it for a point of godliness to coin lie in defence and maintenance of religion, and tim d^gress claudius, that no stable be so full of dung as the legend be of fable and that very fiction be contain in their portess. so apparat, tit, apochry, posseuine the jesuite, the critic of our age, confess that many history of the saint life be so write that they give occasion to heretic. it be the livery which the jesuite bestow upon we to laugh in their sleeve to man of courage and judgement, to suspect they to write that they give occasion to heretic. it be the livery which the jesuite bestow upon we to laugh in their sleeve to man of courage and judgement, to suspect they to devout and godly man occasion to weep and lament they. but of all other, their bishop canus set they forth in their colour. first, he say that the historiographer among the gentile, laertius, suetonius and such like longe, etc. loc theolog fol, write the life of their philosopher and emperor with much more integrity and sincerity than their catholic have write the life of their martyr, virgin and confessor, which he utter not by way of reproach but from the very grief of his heart. he say further that while they follow their fond affection too, their martyr, virgin and confessor, which he utter not by way of reproach but from the very grief of his heart. he say further that while they follow their fond affection too much, they make we such saint sometime as the saint themselves, if they may, will by no mean be such in very deed, of which sort the example be so many that they can be number for multitude. he add further that they savour either of the imposture and deceit of covetous man or, as pope gelasius say, of the untimely fruit of heretic. i who think they can declare the noble deed of saint excellent, well, unless they garnish they with feign both revelation and miracle. his censure of the golden legend be this that: i who think they can declare the noble deed of saint excellent. well, unless they garnish they with feign both revelation and miracle. his censure of the golden legend be this that a man may often read in it: monstrous miracle rather than true, brand the compiler of it. with that mark which sueton in neronis licinius crassus set first upon domitius, that he be a man of a iron face and a leaden heart and a mind neither severe nor wise to divine, he give this wholesome admonition that they do not forthwith persuade themselves that all thing be absolute, perfect, which great author have write, because they slide sometime and follow their own wit will and yield too much to the common people in this rank. that all thing be absolute, perfect. which great author have write because they slide sometime and follow their own wit will and yield too much to the common people? in this rank he place his pope gregory, and our venerable bede, the one in his dialogue, the other in his english history, insert such miracle, as be usual in every man mouth and common believe, which the rigid censor of this age will judge and repute for no better than uncertain. and speak of vincentius and antonine. he say that they both endeavour not so much to describe matter true and certain, as that they may not omit aught that they find, write in every scroll and cast piece of paper. now, if the case thus stand, as to describe matter true and certain as that they may not omit aught that they find, write in every scroll and cast piece of paper. now, if the case thus stand, as the learned papist themselves deliver, not only with the legendary, with vincentius and antonine, but also with bede and pope gregory, yes, with holy man, and very great that they have, after this manner, stuff the history of their saint with such prodigious and monstrous false miracle, be it not a wonder to behold this puny priest chamber, after the judgement and censure of so many learned repute among they, so bold to insult and bear himself upon the miracle collect out of their chronicle and legend in his epistle, as though no man be able. so many learned repute among they, so bold to insult and bear himself upon the miracle collect out of their chronicle and legend in his epistle, as though no man be able, reasonable to make answer to this historical demonstration gather before to his hand by his great bell, eccl. master bellarmine. yet will not this true answer of augustine give he satisfaction, unless we be able, by some ancient and in his epistle authentic chronicle, record, doctor or learned writer to note the time when god withdraw his powerable hand from these kind of supernatural work, or that ever they shall end, so long as his church shall last here. then let chamber hear the record of augustine, who he call and that worthy the renown and work or that ever they shall end, so long as his church shall last here. then let chamber hear the record of augustine, who he call, and that worthy the renown and famous champion of god church. who, to some demand of curiosity why those miracle be not wrought now, adays, which be do in the time of our savior and his apostle, i may say he answer that miracle be needful before the world believe that. so by they the world may believe. but he that still require miracle to make he believe, credit himself be a great wonder and miracle. who believe, not now that the world be bring to faith and belief, of which assertion of he concern the cease of miracle. after that, the be a great wonder and miracle. who believe not now that the world be bring to faith and belief, of which assertion of he concern the cease of miracle, after that the world be bring to the faith of christ homily? in euangel johan he give many reason in other his treatise, as in his book, this among other, ne animus, that the mind of man shall not still seek after thing visible and mankind wax cold through the daily use of miracle, with the novelty whereof it burn with zeal at the first and at. because miracle will not move man unless they be wonderful, and wonderful they will not be if they be usual. with saint augustine accord chrysostom affirm that the ask of miracle now because miracle will not move man unless they be wonderful, and wonderful they will not be if they be usual with saint augustine accord chrysostom affirm that the ask of miracle now adays be a tempt of god. and to the question that some then make, as the papist do now, why be not miracle wrought as in former age, he return this answer: if thou be faithful, as thou ought to be, if thou love christ, as thou ought to do, thou need not sign and miracle for these, say he, be for unbeliever. so the author of the unperfect work upon saint matthew, his gospel, the work of sign and miracle be now cease and at a end, and it be find to be do rather. the author of the unperfect work upon saint matthew his gospel. the work of sign and miracle be now cease and at a end, and it be find to be do rather among they who be false christian. let the papist, if there be any here present, mark the evidence that this author give in these step of august and chrysostom. tread their pope, greg miracle. say he be needful in the church in the begin thereof, when faith be to be nourish by they, as man do water plant, which be new, set until they have take root, which be do the water cease. and so say i do miracle in the church. so likewise our english, a bede. what say he? do we not believe because have take root, which be do the water cease. and so say i do miracle in the church. so likewise our english a bede. what say he? do we not believe because we work not these sign and miracle, but these be needful in the begin of the church. and isidor hispalensis, the reason why the church work, not the same miracle which be do in the time of the apostle, be because the world be then to be bring to faith by miracle, but now believe it must shine with good work. and again, he that now require miracle when faith be plant, seek after vain glory that he may be praise. he proceed further and avouch in plain term that miracle shall cease in the church. that now require miracle. when faith be plant seek after vain glory that he may be praise, he proceed further and avouch, in plain term, that miracle shall cease in the church before the come of antichrist, whereof he allege. these reason that by this the patience of saint may be famous and the levity of the which be offend may be show, and the boldness of persecutor may be make the more fierce. to this grave testimony of the ancient father i will add the witness of some of his own writer that the negligent stupidity of this popish priest may be see of all man, more apparent among they, catharinus, in his discourse of the worship of image, have this say in the end of his stupidity of this popish priest may be see of all man, more apparent among they. catharinus, in his discourse of the worship of image, have this say in the end of his treatise: man shall not look for oracle and miracle from the worship of image, which say he be rare and not grant to curious person, neither be it expedient that they shall be give to man that be imperfect, and as for such as be perfect, they need they not. stella say that miracle now a day will rather hurt. then profit we as prop which be needful for child to learn to go by, be a hindrance unto they when they be grow to man estate. so say he, if miracle be wrought now. adays. prop which be needful for child to learn to go by, be a hindrance unto they when they be grow to man estate. so say he. if miracle be wrought now, adays, man will be offend by they and say that our faith be not as yet well ground. beware, therefore, lest it befall they to demand a sign at god hand. let the old sign and miracle suffice and do not now seek after new. as much say fisher, sometime bishop of rochester, christ promise that his disciple shall cast out devil, which promise we see to take no effect now, adays, because no man now do cast out devil bodily, nor cure disease. yet be not that promise of our savior vain, which he will not. see to take no effect now, adays, because no man now do cast out devil bodily nor cure disease. yet be not that promise of our savior vain, which he will not have to be always effectual, but for the time wherein the church be bear and grow up with who accord also our unnatural countryman thomas stapleton as s^^th. he miracle be needful in the time of our savior, that faith may be breed in man heart. so afterward, the good work of preacher be necessary to bring forth the work of faith which he confirm with the testimony of augustine and gregory, which you have already hear now. then, if augustine, chrysostom, gregory bede isidore be ancient and authentic doctor, if catharine stella roffensis stapleton be confirm with the testimony of augustine and gregory, which you have already hear. now. then if augustine, chrysostom, gregory bede isidore, be ancient and authentic doctor, if catharine stella roffensis stapleton be learned writer- as i assure myself, chamber dare not gainsay- then we have from they a answer to his demand and prove out of they which he say i, i, in his epistle, can never be. do not only that true miracle and wrought by the finger of almighty god be, cease in the church and the time when, namely when the world be general, bring to the faith of christ, but further that, such as in the clear sunshine light of the gospel, yet require miracle still, as the papist do do, tempt god in. general bring to the faith of christ, but further that, such as in the clear sunshine light of the gospel, yet require miracle, still, as the papist do do, tempt god in so do that they be infidel, without faith and belief that they love not christ, as they ought to do, that they be false christian and hunter after vain glory, all which convince chamber of much ignorance, both in the ancient father and his own modern writer, and argue much folly in he to conceive not only of his majesty, who wisdom and learning all that know admire, but of any of we, that we shall be so simple and credulous as to believe those miracle which the most learned among they reject as fabulous and all that know admire, but of any of we, that we shall be so simple and credulous as to believe those miracle which the most learned among they reject as fabulous and foolish as have be show. it irk i to follow the pursuit of this ignorant priest who, from his blunt argument, come in the end to the usual popish rhetoric of rail and revile term we heretic and spend his jest upon we ib, who therefore think miracle superfluous because we can work none, as the fox will eat no grape because he can get they. but lay aside all bitterness and scurrile jest in matter so weighty and serious and to speak the word of truth and soberness, we therefore think miracle superfluous unto we. get they, but lay aside all bitterness and scurrile jest in matter so weighty and serious and to speak the word of truth and soberness. we therefore think miracle superfluous unto we, not because we can work none which we acknowledge and therefore we attempt none, but because we profess the same doctrine which our savior and his apostle, and such apostolic man as succeed in the primitive church, have confirm to our hand by so many true sign and divine miracle which all belong to, we and our church, who profess the same faith which our savior and his apostle preach. as for the faith of the church of rome, as it be new and strange, degenerate from the ancient catholic faith, so it be no marvel. our savior and his apostle preach. as for the faith of the church of rome, as it be new and strange, degenerate from the ancient catholic faith, so it be no marvel if it be confirm by new miracle which be of the same nature with their new faith. false both the one and the other, and yet to stop the mouth of our insolent adversary, which be always crake of their miracle, if with a single eye they will look upon our church, they may, in it and among we, behold such miracle as make great for god glory, our private comfort and the true honor of our church, for both the restore of the purity of religion in these late time from the dross and corruption. great for god glory, our private comfort and the true honor of our church. for both the restore of the purity of religion in these late time from the dross and corruption of antichrist be not without the extraordinary and powerful work of almighty god and the preservation thereof unto this day. maugre all the conspiracy and force of our enemy against our prince and our people be such as evince sufficient that it be the lord do and it be wonderful in our eye again if they will observe the fruit and efficacy of god word sincere preach among we. they may from thence behold matth sermon see chrysost homily in corinthian and greg homily in euangel and bernard ser in ascensione and raban in psalm maius. word sincere preach among we. they may from thence behold matth sermon, see chrysost homily in corinthian and greg homily in euangel and bernard ser in ascensione and raban in psalm. maius lazaru^ ib, gregor as augustine speak. those great cure and great wonder wrought among we, in our church, even those cure and wonder for which our savior and his apostle do vouchsafe to work, those less cure upon man body, for although now adays, the blind man be not restore to his sight by our lord miracle, yet corinthian, the blind heart of man, open the eye of his understanding by the efficacy of his word. preach among we. the carcass that lie dead in the grave be not raise up, but the soul that lie open the eye of his understanding by the efficacy of his word. preach among we. the carcass that lie dead in the grave be not raise up, but the soul that lie dead even in the live body by reason of sin and trespass, be quicken among we by the preach of the gospel. the ear which be deaf before and stop at the cry of the poor, the hand which be fast bind and shut from their relief. be open to hear their groan and request and loose liberal for their comfort. witness your own eye and ear, this very day, here at home, among yourselves, which may hear and see the multitude of christ, his poor and distress member most charitable and careful. relieve in your eye and ear this very day, here at home, among yourselves, which may hear and see the multitude of christ, his poor and distress member, most charitable and careful. relieve in your see the number of these poor. affix to the psalm of thanksgiving sing by the child of the hospital upon monday in easter week. hospital to the great glory of god, the comfort of the poor and afflict, and the eternal memory of the worthy founder and benefactor of the same witness. abroad the plant intend, or rather already, happy begin of our english colony in virginia, whither the charity of our late sovereign of all bless memory, lady elizabeth, and of his most excellent majesty now reign. assist with the godly endeavour of many chief. colony in virginia, whither the charity of our late sovereign of all bless memory, lady elizabeth, and of his most excellent majesty now reign. assist with the godly endeavour of many chief and of principal note in this noble city have extend to their great cost labor and peril for the gain and win to christ, his fold and the reduce unto a civil society, as hope may just conceive, of so many thousand of those silly, brutish and ignorant soul now fast bind with the chain of error and ignorance, under the bondage and slavery of the devil, which be the principal scope of this business. we may, with god blessing assure, expect the fruit which usual accompany such godly enterprise as be the honor of his. of the devil, which be the principal scope of this business, we may, with god blessing assure, expect the fruit which usual accompany such godly enterprise as be the honor of his majesty, who name shall by this mean be glorious unto the end of the world, the enlarge and further strengthen of his realm and dominion, the ease of this land which even groan under the burden and number of her inhabitant, the plentiful enrich of ourselves and our country, with such commodity as she now labor, with the penury of they all, which, and many other of this sort, i witting, passove as have be at sundry time and place by diverse of mor^ ability and leisure, commend to your godly consideration. nothing remain to be. many other of this sort, i, witting passove as have be at sundry time and place by diverse of mor^ ability and leisure, commend to your godly consideration. nothing remain to be say by i in this kind, but that, with all thankfulness, we acknowledge and with most hearty prayer we commend to almighty god the happy preservation and continuance among we of that noble instrument of his glory. our most gracious, sovereign lord king james, by who he effect so powerful, his miraculous work, now adays in our church to the wonder and astonishment of the world, not willfull, malignant. thus, if need be, we can speak, and that without vanity, of the true miracle of our church. as for those false and fabulous sort which i the world not willfull, malignant. thus, if need be, we can speak, and that without vanity, of the true miracle of our church. as for those false and fabulous sort which i have touch, i leave they to those as, tractat in euangel johannis augustine, call they our popish miraclemonger, by which they be descry to be the very limb of antichrist and natural brother of these old heretic, the aug severians and the id ecclesiastes, and tractat in johan donatist, and therefore those false prophet of which our savior forewarn we when he say: beware of false prophet. the four instance which i propose as a note to distinguish the true and false prophet, be their life and conversation which answer to true faith and doctrine be. of false prophet, the four instance which i propose as a note to distinguish the true and false prophet: be their life and conversation which answer to true faith and doctrine. be a note of the true prophet. it be sincere and holy, as otherwise, if corrupt, a sign of the false. for chrysost in mat homily, a man work be the manifestation of his heart and mind and therefore, though he be clothe with the sheep weed, if he teach one thing and do another, if he be a shame and obloquy to his profession, he be a false prophet. ibid, as chrysostom right observe from the word of our savior: you shall know they by their fruit. here then, if i shall go about to rip, he be a false prophet. ibid, as chrysostom right observe, from the word of our savior, you shall know they by their fruit. here then, if i shall go about to rip up the life of the roman prelate, as there will be no end of it, so the savour thereof will be most unpleasant and offensive to your chaste sense, which i can make evident not as they do from the slanderous report of bolseck, coclaeus, staphilus and such companion against our reverend pastor luther caluin beza, to who they be profess enemy, but out of their own writer, and some of they so near as that they be eye-witness of the thing which they report. tacitus say, long since of rome heathenish, that all shameless and of their own writer, and some of they so near as that they be eye-witness of the thing which they report. tacitus say, long since of rome heathenish, that all shameless and heinous enormity run into it as into a common sewer which theodoricus of paris, etc. niem one attend. sometime on, the pope make good upon rome. popish apply certain verse unto it, wherein it be compare with nilus which breed monster and nourish crocodile. and there saint bridget affirm that she hear the bless virgin say to her son that roman ferace^ cate-log test ton pag. rome be a fruitful field to who christ shall answer. it be so indeed, but the fruitfulness thereof consist in tare. epistol petrarch call it the mother of all idolatry. ton pag. rome be a fruitful field to who christ shall answer. it be so indeed. but the fruitfulness thereof consist in tare. epistol petrarch, call it the mother of all idolatry, the refuge and sanctuary of all error. bernard complaint, be not so many as just he say of the whole clergy that in name they be the minister of christ but in very deed the servant of antichrist who sin be grow to that height as a platina one of the pope secretary report that they scarce. leave any room with god for his mercy. now all these and many of this sort put together say no more than what pope adrian the six give his legate in charge to confess before the state of germany. mercy. now all these and many of this sort put together say no more than what pope adrian the six give his legate in charge to confess before the state of germany at a meeting of they that rome have for many year together offend and that many way, and that all this corruption and infection flow from the pope as from the head unto the inferior and low prelate, according with the prophet jeremy. verse from the prophet of jerusalem, be wickedness go forth into all the land, you hear the pope answer. guilty to the crime object. what need then have we of any more witness if sanctity of life, especial of chief pastor, be a note of the church, as bellarmine say, than a the? the crime object. what need then have we of any more witness if sanctity of life, especial of chief pastor, be a note of the church, as bellarmine say, than a the wicked and abominable life of our roman prelate argue sufficient that they be the false prophet of which our savior give we this watchword: beware of false prophet, whereby it appear what may be infer upon that antecedent which, in his preface to his detection of master, jewel error and lie, thomas harding himself make and acknowledge. what if pope have suffer, great prince and monarch, to kiss their foot, to hold their stirrup, to lead their horse by the bridle? what if a pope show himself cruel and without pity in suffer francis dandalus the? and monarch to kiss their foot, to hold their stirrup, to lead their horse by the bridle. what if a pope show himself cruel and without pity in suffer francis dandalus, the venetian ambassador, to lie under his table like a dog while he be at dinner? what if pope alexander use frederick the emperor more proud than become a man of his call? what if the pope, at certain time, care not or for the wretchedness of man? ill inclination can not, or for great consideration will not utter purge the city of rome of courtesan and brodel-house? what if the life of many priest, bishop, cardinal, yes, of some pope also, have just deserve to be reprove? must this now be? make a good argument some. courtesan and brodel-house. what if the life of many priest, bishop, cardinal, yes, of some pope also have just deserve to be reprove? must this now be make a good argument? some of their life be sinful, their doctrine be false. not so harding, we conclude. not so, but we infer out of homily in mat chrysostom and ecclesiastes ca bellarmine, the life of many, your pope and chief praelat, be most sinful, flagitious, and therefore they be no sound member of the true church, but such false prophet as be, clothe with sheep skin be notwithstanding, inward no better than raven wolf. how then come it to pass, beloved in the lord, that this famous and ancient city of london, the mother city of the kingdom, the? notwithstanding inward no better than raven wolf. how then come it to pass, beloved in the lord, that this famous and ancient city of london, the mother city of the kingdom, the beauty and glory of the land, be become a cage of these unclean and filthy bird and a den for such raven wolf as thirst after nothing more than your blood, and that not of the body alone, but much more of your soul? gal, have you be deliver from the bondage and darkness of egypt into the glorious liberty of the son of god and sunshine light of the gospel, to return again in your heart into bondage and darkness more than aegyptiacal. shall i demand, with the apostle who have bewitch you, that you god and sunshine, light of the gospel, to return again in your heart into bondage and darkness more than aegyptiacal. shall i demand with the apostle who have bewitch you that you shall not obey the truth. be they these popish siren with their allure song of hope and expectation of a golden day so long expect and so hopeful conceive in the decline age of that most renown lady elizabeth, our late sovereign. but the tune of that song be alter. god have the glory for it. and they lament anotherwhile, and so may they ever, with fallace our deceitful hope, our vain dream, our idle imagination. bishop, in his epistle to the king, the state be now settle, they say, and so let it be lord. ever with fallace our deceitful hope, our vain dream, our idle imagination. bishop, in his epistle to the king, the state be now settle, they say. and so let it be lord even for ever and ever, and a continual posterity be like to ensue of one nature and condition. amen, lord jesus. be it the splendour of their miracle, which so long have dazzle the eye of the world, but these be convince to be false and fabulous or no better than the work of satan and illusion of antichrist. be it the sincerity of their doctrine, but that be no better than the beggar cloak patch together of old heresy, long since condemn by the catholic church, as in part have be show and may, as their doctrine, but that be no better than the beggar cloak patch together of old heresy long since condemn by the catholic church, as in part have be show and may as easy be prove in the rest. i, i see faxa. they rob god of his honor and give it to stock and stone. they take christ, his office from he and join saint with he in his mediatorship. god sacred word be but a babble with they and of no worth in regard of their tradition and unwritten verity. their religion be the high way to atheism and all impiety. there be no sin so heinous, so enormous, which they dispense not with by their indulgency and pardon, by their absolution: incest, rape, murder, vow, perjury. way to atheism and all impiety. there be no sin so heinous, so enormous, which they dispense not with by their indulgency and pardon, by their absolution. incest, rape, murder, vow, perjury, all venial, so money be not want their profession, be know to be the dethrone and murder of prince, and for their practice it be the utter overthrow of civil state and society. by swear and forswear, by equivocate and dissemble, take a-away all truth and sincere deal from among man. as for their life and manner, no puddle be more impure than this sink rom, and that by the just judgement of almighty god. god give they up to vile affection and to reprobate mind because that when they know god, they glorify he not. sink rom and that by the just judgement of almighty god, god give they up to vile affection and to reprobate mind because that when they know god, they glorify he not as god. neither be thankful as the apostle, speak of the gentile and be as true verify in the romanist, so that if any man here present will still be mislead and seduce by the false prophet, notwithstanding the warning that have be give, i must pronounce of he, though with much grief of heart, that he be guilty of his own blood. ecclesiastes, his blood be upon his own head. for my part, i say as be in the prophet. for the integrity of my conscience and discharge of this duty, i have deliver my his blood be upon his own head. for my part, i say as be in the prophet. for the integrity of my conscience and discharge of this duty, i have deliver my own soul. now look you to it. but for you, beloved in the lord of who we have, persuade ourselves better thing and such as accompany salvation, stand fast. i beg you. in the bowel of christ, in the doctrine of the prophet and apostle which you have, receive ground upon christ, the cornerstone and seal unto you with his blood and with the blood of his holy martyr in all age. and beware of false prophet. beware of these sheep-skined wolf. try their spirit, examine their faith, look into their manner. by these fruit you. blood of his holy martyr in all age, and beware of false prophet. beware of these sheep-skined wolf. try their spirit, examine their faith, look into their manner. by these fruit you may know they and know they. avoid their step, which lead to hell and destruction. which that you may be able to do. that, god of mercy and father of all goodness, which command the light to shine out of darkness, enlighten the eye of your understanding, confirm you with his grace and guide you with his holy spirit amid the storm of these last and perilous time, that so, in the end, you may arrive at the haven of all bliss and happiness. amen. last and perilous time that so, in the end, you may arrive at the haven of all bliss and happiness. amen.