a true declaration of the estate in virginia. there be a great distance betwixt the vulgar opinion of man and the judicious apprehension of wise man. opinion be as blind oedipus, who can see nothing but will hear all thing to hawk after the wing report of a vagabond rumour. but judgement be as solomon in his throne, able by the spirit of wisdom to discern betwixt contest. truth and falsehood neither depend on the popular breath of fame, which be ever partial, nor upon the event of good design, which be ever casual. these two commander of our affection have divide the universal spirit of our land. whilst in the honourable enterprise for plantation in virginia, some be carry away with the tide of vulgar opinion and other be encourage by the principle of religion and reason. but because it be for hawk and not for man to build their nest in air, and because the honour and prosperity of this so noble a action be eclipse by the interposition of clamorous and tragical narration, the compiler of this relation endeavour to wash away those spot which, foul mouth to justify their own disloyalty, have cast upon so fruitful, so fertile and so excellent a country. wherein he profess that he will relate. nothing concern virginia, but what he have from. the secret of the judicial council of virginia, from the letter of the lord ware, from the mouth of sir thomas gate, who wisdom he conceive be not so shallow as easy to be deceive of other, nor conscience so wretched as by pretence to deceive other. but when a matter of such consequence be not to be shuffle over with supine negligence, and when no man raise a fair building that lay not a firm foundation, it will not be impertinent to dig a little deep, that we may build a great deal high and from the universal policy of all civil state in replenish the world with colony of domestical subject, to derive this wisdom to our populous state and country colonies. that which origen say. of christ. action in virtue moral hold proportion with god. action in government, political. god action be our instruction. who, in the eleven of genesis, turn the great curse into the great blessing and by confusion of tongue keep they from confusion of state, scatter those cleave people into as many colony over the face of the earth as there be diversity of language in the earth. now, if tertullians rule, be true that every action be most beautiful in the original. can there be a better beginning then, from god who wisdom be not question and who footstep in all succeed? age have be follow. search the record of divine truth and human monument of state. you shall find salmanasar. transport the babylonians and other gentile to. samaria and replenish with the captive of israel the dispeople confine of media. you shall find that 140. year after the destruction of troy, the ionian colony be carry from greece to asia, by which that famous city of ephesus be first build and inhabit. you shall find the egyptian plant babylon, argos and athens. the phoenicians first inhabit carthage, utica and thebes. that timolcon and the city of corinth at one time repeople sicily with 10000 soul. that the roman deduce 53. colony out of the city of rome into the womb of italy. that a englishman by birth but son in law to the king of france, with a equal three part of the kingdom, enter into the heart of italy. give the prime sack to. the city of rome and divert from thence to gallograecia. who offspring possess that land unto this day. that the admiral of france, among all the fear and discouragement of civil war, never give over the project of plantation in florida. which heroical action have not be undertake by so mighty state and prince upon trivial and vulgar motive. when, by these course, that first blessing of and increase and multiply have be sanctify, the mean sort have be provide, the matter of plague, famine and sedition have be exhaust, the fen of a state politic be drain, the enemy of their peace be bridle, the revenue of their treasury be augment and the limit of their dominion be enlarge. which divine human, external and domestical example do. shine before we as a pharaoes tower that we shall not make shipwreck of our intention. concern virginia, black envy and pale fear be not able to produce any argument why that shall be lawful for france, which be in we unlawful. that which to rome be possible, to we be impossible. that which to other be honourable and profitable in we shall be traduce as incommodious, base and contemptible. three head: lawful, possible, profitable. wherefore, under these three head of lawfulness, possibility and commodity, will i marshal all those reason which may resolve the religious, encourage the personal, confirm the noble and satisfy the timorous adventurer? first. if it be unlawful, it must be so either in respect of the law of god or in regard of the law of man. if, in respect of god, law consider our primary end be to plant religion, our secondary and subalternate end be for the honour and profit of our nation. i demand a resolution of this plain question: whether it be not a determinate truth that the gospel shall be preach to all the world before the end of the world. if it must be preach, as heaven and earth must pass away, but god word shall not pass away, then must it be preach one of these three way: either mere apostolical, without the help of man, without so much as a staff, or mere imperial, when a prince have conquer their body, that the preacher may feed their soul. or mix by discovery and trade of merchant, where all temporal mean be use for defence and security but none for offence or cruelty. for the first to preach apostolicallie, it be simple, impossible. except we have the gift of tongue, that every nation may hear the word of god in their own language, or the gift of miracle that it may be confirm with wonder from heaven. which two be cease questionless, the identical commission of the apostle be expire or, if yet the matter be urge that god by fisher do convert emperor, and therefore that we must adventure our life without human help. yet must it be remember that there be no apostolical preach, but where we may expect either their conversion or our martyrdom. but we can expect neither, not their conversion- who can understand we? nor our martyrdom, when the people of florida do devour the preacher of the word without speak any word, not because they be christian man, but because they be man. we can be say to be martyr when we be not kill because we be christian. and therefore the jesuite acosta confess, notwithstanding bellarmine relation of indian miracle, that they have no tongue, they have no sign from heaven and they can have no martyrdom and by consequent, there be no mean leave of apostolical preach for the second to preach the gospel to a nation conquer and to set their soul at liberty when we have bring their body to slavery. it may be a matter sacred in the preacher, but i know not how justifiable in the ruler who, for their mere ambition, do set upon it the gloss of religion. let the divine of salamanca discuss that question. how the possessor of the west indies first destroy and then instruct the three belong to we who, by way of merchandise and trade, do buy of they the pearl of earth and sell to they the pearl of heaven. which action, if it be unlawful, it must proceed from one of these three ground: either because we come to they or trade with they, or tarry and dwell and possess part of their country among they. be it unlawful because we come to they, why be it not a duty of christianity to behold the imprint footstep of god glory in every region under heaven? be it not against the law of nation to violate a peaceable stranger or to deny he harbour. the ethiopian, egyptian and man of china be brand with a foul mark of sanguinary and barbarous inhumanity for blessing their idol with the blood of stranger. it be not unlawful to trade with they, except solomon shall be condemn for send for gold to ophir, abraham for make a league with abimelech and all christendom shall be traduce for have commerce with turk and miscreant final. it be not unlawful that we possess part of their land and dwell with they and defend ourselves from they, partly because there be no other moderate and mix course to bring they to conversion, but by daily conversation where they may see. the life and learn the language each of other. partly because there be no trust to the fidelity of human beast except a man will make a league with lion, bear and crocodile. partly because there be room sufficient in the land, as sichem sometime say, for they and we the extent of a hundred mile be scarce people with 2000 inhabitant. partly because they have violate the law of nation and use our ambassador as ammon do, the servant of david. if in he it be a just cause to war against the ammonite, it be lawful in we to secure ourselves against the infidel but chief, because paspehay, one of their king, sell unto we for copper land to inherit and inhabit powhatan, their chief king. receive voluntary a crown and a sceptre with a full acknowledgement of duty and submission. principal, when captain newport be with powhatan at warow a comaco, he desire he to come from james town as a place unwholesome and to take possession of a other whole kingdom which he give unto he, if any man allege that this be do in subtlety, not that they ever mean we shall possess they, but that they may first gain by we and then destroy we. this make our cause much the just when god turn their subtlety to our utility. give unto we a lawful possession, as pharaoe give goshen to israel, or ephron sell his cave to abraham and free we from all impious and sinister construction, if any. man allege that yet we can possess no far limit than be allot by composition, and that fortitude without justice be but the firebrand of iniquity. let he know that plato define it to be no injustice to take a sword out of the hand of a mad man, that austen have allow it for a lawful offensive war that revenge bloody injury, so that if just offence fhall arise, it can be no more injustice to war against infidel than it be when, upon just occasion, we war against christian. and therefore i can see but that these truth will fan away all those chaffy imputation which any romish boaster that challenge a monopoly of all conversion will cast upon it or any scrupulous conscience can impute. unto it certain the church of geneva, in the year 1555.. determine, in a synod whereof caluine be precedent, to send peter richier and william quadrigarius, under a french captain, to brasilia who, although they be supplant by the come of the cardinal of lorraine and the treachery of their double heart leader, yet will not the church of geneva, after a synodical consultation, have send their minister to such a adventure? have not all scruple in their judgement? be clear by the light of scripture. when, therefore, it be a sweet smell, sacrifice to propagate the name of jesus christ, when the babylonish enchantress, if her own calendar be to be credit, have compass sea and land to make six, eight or ten million of romish proselyte. when there be no other mix, moderate course to transport the virginian soul to heaven. when there have be a real concession from their rural emperor that have license we to negotiate among they and to possess their country with they. when there be more unpeople continent of earth than we and they, before the dissolution of the pillar of heaven, can overburden with multitude. when we never intend to play the rehoboams and to scourge they with scorpion, it be not good to create more sin than god ever censure, nor to brand that action with impiety which god have begin for promulgate of his glory. be the action therefore deform because a false glass do slander. it concern the other branch of this discourse, wherein some sly whisperer will seem to cast a aspersion of injustice upon the action. suppose some foreign prince to have a former interest? certain he be but a rot subject that quarrel the action of his country descry a serpentine sting under the fair leaf of piety. and though it be not for a theoretical scholar to circumscribe the dominion of prince, yet a few proof from antiquity shall suffice to control ignorant or presumptuous folly. in the year 1170.. madocke, the son of owen guyneth, prince of north-wales, leave the land in contention. betwixt, his two brother, howell and david, sail into the west indies and, after a second and a three return and supply, settle himself in those dominion in the year 1495.. john cabot, a venetian, but the endenize subject of king henry the seven, discover the north part of america to, and so it be annex to the crown of england. as for the donation of alexander the six, it be but a reciprocal claw. when emperor create their servant, bishop universal, and shaveling create their lord, emperor general, if the donation of constantine be not more virtual for saint peter patrimony, we shall have need of more purgatory to maintain fuel in the pope kitchen. for if the kingdom of christ be not on earth, what a transubstantiate power do the pretend vicar of christ claim to dispose? all the kingdom of the earth? petrarch record a memorable history of sautius, brother to the king of spain, who be elect general against the saracen of egypt and come to rome for that purpose. the bishop of rome make it to be proclaim in the consistory that he bestow the kingdom of egypt upon sautius. sautius, understanding this favour by his interpreter, command to proclaim the pope great caleph of baldacho perfume, the son of pride, with his own smoke. the pope have no more power to make sautius a king than sautius have power to make the pope a caleph. let such retailer. of crown, remember who it be that sometime say: all these will i give thou if thou will fall down and worship i. and yet, with this item that the devil pretend to give no more than he see these point be. thus define, i come to the possibility against which three main impediment be object. first, the dangerous passage by sea. second, the barrenness of the country. three, the unholesomnesse of the climate. the storm that separate the admiral from the fleet prove the first. the famine among our man, import the second. the sickness of our man, argue the three. all which discouragement do astonish our man with fear, as though our expense be unprofitable when our end be impossible. but before i shall enter into this discourse i must crave leave to make a necessary digression and to justify his reputation, who worth be of special regard in this plantation. sir thomas gates suppose himself accuse public and in print of a treeble defect. first, that he run so far southerly and into the tropic that the heat cause the infection in the ship. second, that he give a seal direction that if they be separate by any storm, that they shall make for the baruada in the west indies which direction himself follow it cause his shipwreck but the other ship, upon better judgement, decline these instruction arrive safe in virginia. three, that he carry in one bottom all the principal commissioner who shall successive have govern the colony. against all which imputation he make this just apology. first, he confess that a little before they come unto the canary, that he enter into consultation with sir george summer, captain newport and the other, of chief regard in the fleet, wherein it be resolve by a uniformity of consent to run southerly into the tropic, which they do till they come to the height of four and twenty. but he deny that this course be any cause of infection, for in the falcon, the blessing the lion, and in the admiral, wherein be one hundred and fifty soul, there be not one sick of the pestilence nor other disease. in the other two ship the infection be somewhat hot, but they ship the same from london to the second. he affirm that he first give they seal instruction not to be open till a time of storm which direct they to the baruada, but after, when they come to the height of four and twenty, he countermand those direction by word of mouth and assign they that if they be scatter, that they shall make with all speed for virginia, which himself esteem the price of time unualuable will have execute. have not the violent leak of the ship hinder he, so that the other ship, safe arrival in virginia, proceed original from his advice and authority to the three, he brief signify that no other commissioner. be in his ship, but such as, for especial reason, be precise and peremptory, appoint by the council of virginia. and thus you see that tacitus wise, observe two great enemy of great action: the ignorance of truth and the emulation of virtue. to return, therefore, unto the main channel of this discourse and to dispel the cloud of fear that threaten shipwreck and seadanger, for we be not to extenuate the sea tempestuous violence, nor yet, therefore, to despair of god assist providence for true it be that, when sir thomas gate, sir george summer and captain newport be in the height of 27. and the 24. of july 1609., there arise such a storm as if jonas have be fly unto tarshish. the heaven be obscure. and make a egyptian night of three day, perpetual horror. the woman lament, the heart of the passenger fail the experience of the sea captain, be amaze the skill of the mariner, be confound the ship most violent leak and though two thousand ton of water by pump from tuesday noon till friday noon be discharge notwithstanding, the ship be half fill with water and those which labour to keep other from drown be half drown themselves in labour. but god that hear jonas cry out of the belly of hell. he pity the distress of his servant. for behold, in the last period of necessity, sir george, summer descry land which be by so much the more joyful by how much their danger be despairful the island. on which they ^ell be the bermudos, a place hardly accessable through the environ. rock and danger notwithstanding, they be force to run their ship on shore which, through god providence, fall betwixt two rock that cause she to stand firm and not immediate to be break. god continue his mercy unto they that, with their long boat, they transport to land before night all their company, man, woman and child, to the number of one hundred and fifty. they carry to shore all the provision of unspent and unspoyled victual, all their furniture and tackle of the ship leave nothing but bare rib as a pray unto the ocean. these island of the bermudos have ever be account as a enchant pile of rock and a desert. inhabitation for devil, but all the fairy of the rock be but flock of bird, and all the devil that haunt the wood be but herd of swine. yea, and when acosta, in his first book of the history of the indies, aver that though in the continent there be diverse beast and cattle, yet in the island of hispaniola, jamaica, marguarita and dominica there be not one hoof, it increase the wonder how our people in the bermudos find such abundance of hog that for nine month space they plentiful suffice, and yet the number seem not much diminish. again, as in the great famine of israel, god command elias to fly to the brook cedron, and there feed he by raven. so, god, provide for our disconsolate people in the midst of the sea by fowl, but with a admirable difference: unto elias, the raven bring meat. unto our man, the fowl bring themselves for meat. for when they whistle or make any strange noise, the fowl will come and sit on their shoulder. they will suffer themselves to be take and weigh by our man, who will make choice of the fat and fair and let fly the lean and light. a accident, i take it, that can be parallel by any history, except when god send abundance of quail to feed his israel in the barren wilderness. last they find the berry of cedar, the palmeto tree, the prickle pear, sufficient fish, plenty of tortoise and diverse. other kind which suffice to sustain nature. they find diversity of wood which minister material for the build of two pinnace, according to the direction of the three provident governor. consider all these thing together. at the instant of need, they descry land half a hour more, have bury their memorial in the sea. if they have fall by night, what expectation of light from a uninhabited desert. they fall betwixt a labyrinth of rock which they conceive be moulder into the sea by thunder and lightning. this be not ariadne thread but the direct line of god providence. if it have not be so near land, their company or provision have perish by water. if they have not find hog and foul and fish, they have perish. by famine. if there have not be fuel, they have perish by want of fire. if there have not be timber, they can not have transport themselves to virginia but must have be forget forever. he be too impious, fearful, that will not trust in god so powerful. what be there in all this tragical comedy that shall discourage we with impossibility of the enterprise, when, of all the fleet, one only ship by a secret leak be endanger. and yet, in the gulf of despair, be so gracious, preserve that which we account. a punishment of evil be but a medicine against evil. after nine month abode in these island, on the ten of may 1610. they embark themselves in their two new build pinnace, and after. some eleven day sail, they arrive near point comfort, upon the coast of virginia, where they have intelligence of so woeful misery, as if god have only preserve they to communicate in a new extremity, from which calamity, the other argument of impossibility, be frame for, if the country be barren or the situation contagious, as famine and sickness destroy our nation, we strive against the stream of reason and make ourselves the subject of scorn and derision. therefore, in this main point of consequence, i will propound this plain and simple method: first, to demonstrate that there be and may be in virginia a sufficient mean, in all abundance, to sustain the life of man. next, that the climate be wholesome and temperate. agree with the constitution. of our man three, that those extremity proceed from accidental and not inherent evil. last, i will delineate the state of the, the colony as sir thomas gate leave it under the government of the honourable l laware, whereby it shall appear that all difficulty be amend and that the state of that country be sufficient manage to begin with the staff of bread. it be avow unto i in write, in the word of the author that have be there, as follow: they use to put their wheat into corn, the ground five corn in one spit of earth and two bean with they, which wheat corn multiply into diverse stalk, grow up twelve or fourteen foot high, yield some four, five or six ear on every. stalk and in every ear some five hundred, some six hundred, some seven hundred corn. the two bean run upon the stalk of the wheat as our garden pease upon stick, which multiply to a wondrous increase. i can let slip a great secret, say the author, whereof i will avouch no more. then, with my hand and eye i have handle and see and whereof, to my great comfort, i have often taste the wheat be sow thick, some stalk bear ear of corn and some, like science, in tree bear none. but in those barren stalk there be as much juice as in some sugar cane, of so delicate a taste as no fruit in england be comparable to it, out of which sir ralph lane. conceive that we may extract sugar in great quantity. but sir thomas gates affirm that our man do make cordial drink thereof to their great comfort. pease beside the natural pease of the country, fruit return a increase innumerable. our herb garden fruit, both root herb and flower, do spring up speedy. all thing commit to the earth. do multiply with a incredible usury beast, the beast of the country, as dear, red and fallow do answer in multitude people. for people consider to our proportion of ox which appear by these experience. first the people of the country be apparel in the skin of these beast. next, hard by the fort. two hundred in one, hear have be usual. observe further: our man have see 4000 of. these skin pile up in one wardroabe of powhaton, last infinite store, have be present to captain newport, upon sundry occurrent such a plenty of cattle as all the spaniard find not in the whole kingdom of mexico, when all their present be but hen and ginycock and the bread of maize and cent. there be arocoun and apossoun in shape like to pig, shroud in hollow root of tree. there be hare and coney and other beast proper to the country in plentiful manner. our transport cattle, as horse, cow, hog and goat do, thrive most happy, which be confirm by a double experiment: one of sir ralph lane, who bring cow from the west indian island, the other of our colony, who need take no other. care of they, but lest they shall stray too far or be steal from they. the turkey of that country be great and fat and exceed in plenty the river. from august or september till february be cover with flock of wlidfoule, wildfowl as swan goose, duck, mallard, teal, wigeon, hearon, bitter curlewe, godwight snight, dotterel cormerant, to use the word of sir thomas gate, in such abundance as be not in all the world to be equal fruit. the fruit as apple run on the ground, in bigness and shape of a small lemon, in colour and taste like to a preserve, apricock, grape and walnut innumerable. the vine be as common as bramble, the walnut tree as the elm in england. what shall i speak of? cucumber, musk, melon, pompion, potato, parsnep, carrot, turnip, which our garden yield with little art and labour. god in this place be ever concur with his gracious influence if man strangle not his blessing with careless negligence. it shall suffice to conclude in the word and phrase of that noble governor, the lo laware as it be warrant to i, by the copy of his letter send to the virginian council: howsoever man have belie, both it and themselves, heretofore, yet let no rumour of the country, as if in the womb thereof lie not these elemental seed of plenty and increase. wave any man fair purpose or wrest they to a decline and fall off from the business. temperature for the healthiness and temperateness of the climate. agree to our constitution. much need not be relate, since in all the former write treatise it be express: observe: no man ought to judge of any country by the fen and marsh, such as be the place where james town stand. except we will condemn all england for the wild and hundred of kent and essex. in our particular we have a infallible proof of the temper of the country, for of a hundred and odd, which be seat at the fall under the government of captain francis west, and of a hundred to the seaward on the south side of the river, in the country of the nansamunds, under the charge of captain john martin, of all these two hundred, there do not so much as one man miscarry. when in james town, at the same time and in the same month, 100 sicken and half the number die, the like experiment be long since in the regiment of sir ralph lane, where, in the space of one whole year, not two of one hundred perish. add unto this the discourse of philosophy. when in that country, flesh will receive salt and continue unputrify, which it will not in the west indies, when the most delicate of all flower grow there, as familiar as in the field of portugal, where the wood be replenish with more sweet bark and odour than they be in the plesant place of florida. how be it possible that such a virgin and temperate air shall work such contrary effect? but because our fort that lie as a semy-iland be most part environ with a ebb and flow, salt water, the owze of which send forth a unwholesome and contagious vapour. to close up this part with sir thomas gate, his experiment. he profess that in a fortnight space he recover the health of most of they by moderate labour. who sickness be breed in they by intemperate idleness. if any man shall accuse these report of partial falsehood, suppose they to be but utopian and legendary fable, because he can conceive that plenty and famine, a temperate climate and distemper body, felicity and misery can be reconcile together. let he now read with judgement, but let he not judge before he have read the ground of all those misery. be the permissive providence of god who, in the forementioned violent storm, separate the head from the body, all the vital power of regiment. be exile with sir thomas. gate in those infortunate yet fortunate land. the break remainder of those supply make a great shipwreck in the continent of virginia by the tempest of dissension. every man overvalue his own worth, will be a commander. every man underprize a other value, deny to be. command the emulation of caesar and pompey, water the plain of pharsaly with blood and distract the sinew of the roman monarchy. the dissension of the three besiege captain, betray the city of jerusalem to vespasian. how much more easy may ambitious discord tear in piece a infant colony where no eminent and respect magistrate have authority to punish presumptuous disobedience. tacitus have observe that when nero send his old train soldier to tarantum, and but without their captain, and that they rather make a number than a colony, every soldier secret glide into some neighbour province and forsake their appoint place which hatch this consequent mischief. the city be uninhabited and the emperor be frustrate. when therefore licence, sedition and fury be the fruit of a heady dare and unruly multitude, it be no wonder that so many in our colony perish. it be a wonder that all be not devour. every inordinate soul become his own punishment. the next fountain of woe be secure negligence and improvidence, when every man shark for his present booty but be altogether careless of succeed penury. now i demand whether sicilia or sardinia, sometime, the barn of rome can hope for increase without manure. a colony be therefore denominate, because they shall be the tiller of the earth and steward of fertility. our mutinous loiterer will not sow with providence and therefore they reap the fruit of too dear-bought repentance. a incredible example of their idleness be the report of sir thomas gate, who affirm that after his first come thither, he have see some of they eat their fish raw, rather than they will go a stone cast to fetch wood and dress it. god, sell we all thing for our labour when adam himself may not live in paradise without dress the garden? unto idleness, you may join treason wrought by those. unhallowed creature that forsake the colony and expose their desolate brother to extreme misery. you shall know that 28. or 30. of the company be appoint in the ship, call the swallow to truck for corn with the indian and have obtain a great quantity by trade. the most seditious of they conspire together, persuade some and enforce other to this barbarous project. they steal away the ship. they make a league among themselves to be profess pirate, with dream of mountain of gold and happy robbery. thus, at one instant, they wrong the hope and subvert the care of the colony, who depend upon their return, fore-slowed to look out for further provision. they create the indian, our implacable enemy, by some violence they have offer. they carry away the best ship which shall have be a refuge in extremity. they weaken our force by substraction of their arm and succour these, be that scum of man that fail in their piracy, that be pinch with famine and penury after their wild rove upon the sea. when all their lawless hope fail, some remain with other pirate. they, man upon the sea, the other resolve to return for england, bind themselves by mutual oath to agree all in one report to discredit the land, to deplore the famine and to protest that this their come away proceed from desperate necessity. these be they that roar out the tragical history of the man eat of his dead wife in virginia, when the master of this ship willing, confess before 40 witness that at their come away they leave three month victual and all the cattle live in the fort. sometime they report that they see this horrible action, sometime that captain davies say so, sometime that one beadle, the lieutenant of captain davies, do relate. it vary this report into diversity of false colour which hold no likeness and proportion. but to clear all doubt, sir thomas gate thus relate the tragedy. there be one of the company who mortal hate his wife and therefore secret kill she, then cut she in piece and hide she in diverse part. of his house. when the woman be miss, the man suspect his house search and part of her mangle body be discover. to excuse himself, he say that his wife die, that he hide she to satisfy his hunger and that he feed daily upon she. upon this, his house be again, search where they find a good quantity of meal, oatmeal, bean and pease. he thereupon be arraign, confess the murder and be burn for his horrible villainy. now shall the scandalous report of a viperous generation preponderate the testimony of so worthy leader. shall their venomous tongue blast the reputation of a ancient and worthy peer who, upon the ocular certainty of future blessing, have protest in his letter that he will sacrifice himself for his country in this service. if he may be second and if the company do give it over, he will yet lay all his fortune upon the prosecution of the plantation, shall swear, lie and combine oath so far privilege, treachery and piracy as to rob we of our hope and to quell our noble resolution. god forbid a liar confidence be but a blaze. diffidence unto treason. you may join covetousness in the mariner who, for their private lucre, partly embezzle the provision, partly prevent our trade with the indian, make the match in the night and forestalling our market in the day, whereby the virginian be glut with our trifle and enhance the price of their corn and victual that copper, which before will have provide a bushel, will not now obtain so much as a pottle. the consequent of sordid gain be untimely wretchedness. join unto these a other evil. there be great store of fish in the river, especial of sturgeon, but our man provide no more of they. then, for present necessity, not barrel up any store against that season the sturgeon return to the sea and not to dissemble their folly, they suffer fourteen net which be all they have to rot and spoil, which by orderly dry and mend may have be preserve but be lose. all help of fish perish, fundamental loss that can be repeal ought, with the great caution to be prevent. the state of the colony by these accident begin to find a sensible decline which powhatan, as a greedy vulture, observe and boil with desire of revenge. he invite captain ratclife and about thirty other to trade for corn and, under the colour of fair friendship, he bring they within the compass of his ambush whereby they be cruel. murder and massacre. for upon confidence of his fidelity, they go one and one into several house which cause their several destruction. when, if but any six have remain together, they will have be a bulwark for the general preservation. after this, powhatan in the night cut off some of our boat. he drive away all the dear into the far part of the country. he and his people destroy our hog to the number of about six hundred. he send none of his indian to trade with we but lay secret ambush in the wood that if one or two drop out of the fort alone they be endanger. cast up this reckon together, want of government, store of idleness. their expectation, frustrate by the traitor their market, spoil by the mariner our net, break the dear chase our boat, lose our hog, kill our trade with the indian forbid. some of our man flee, some murder and most by drink of the brackish water of james fort, weaken and endanger. famine and sickness by all. these mean increase here at home. the money come in so slow that the lo laware can not be dispatch till the colony be wear and spend with difficulty. above all have neither ruler nor preacher. they neither fear god nor man, which provoke the wrath of the lord of host and pull down his judgement upon they. now, whether it be that god in mercy to we will weed out these. rank hemlock, or whether in judgement to they he will scourge their impiety, or whether in wisdom he will try our patience that we may beg great blessing. earnest our hope be that our sun shall not set in a cloud since this violent storm be disperse, since all necessary thing be provide a absolute and powerful government be settle, as by this ensue relation shall be describe, when sir thomas gate arrive in virginia, the strange and unexpected condition wherein he find the colony give he to understand how never be there more need of all the power of judgement. then at this present, it be now his charge both to save such as he find so forlorn and wretched as to redeem himself and he from fall into the like calamity. all which consider, he enter into consultation with sir george summer and captain newport and the gentleman and council of the former government. they examine first their store, which after two cake a day to a man will hold out, but sixteen day, it be five month, betwixt the steal away of the swallow and his land, the corn of the indian, but new sow, not a eye of sturgeon as yet appear in the river. and therefore, at the same consultation it be conclude by a general approbation that they shall abandon the country and in the four pinnace which remain in the river they shall make for the new find land. where it be fish time they may meet with many english ship into which they hope to disperse the most of the company. this conclusion take effect upon the seven of june. sir thomas gate have appoint every ship her complement and number and deliver likewise to each a proportionable weight of provision. cause every man to repair aboard his company and of his company himself. remain last on shore to keep the town from be burn, which some of our own company malicious, threaten. about noon they fall down with the tide to the island of hog and the next morning to the mulbury island. at what time they discover the long boat of the lord laware, which his lordship hear of this resolution by the captain of the fort which stand at the mouth of the river, sudden dispatch with letter to sir thomas gate which inform he of his lordship arrival. upon receipt of these letter, sir thomas gate bear up the helm and that night, with a favourable wind, reland all our man at the fort. before which the ten of june be sunday, his lordship come with all his fleet, go ashore in the afternoon, hear a sermon, read his commission and enter into consultation for the good. of the colony, in which secret counsel i will a little leave, his lordship that we may due observe the reveal counsel of god. he that shall but turn up his eye and behold the spangle canopy of heaven, shall but cast down his eye and consider the embroider carpet of the earth, and withal shall mark how the heaven hear the earth, the earth hear the corn and oil and they relieve the necessity of man. that man will acknowledge god infinite providence. but he that shall further observe how god incline all casual event to work, the necessary help of his saint must needs. adore the lord infinite goodness. never have any people more just cause to cast themselves at the footstool of god and to reverence his mercy than our distress colony. for if god have not send sir thomas gate from the bermudos within four day, they have all be famish. if god have not direct the heart of that worthy knight to save the fort from fire at their ship, they have be destitute of a present harbour and succour. if they have abandon the fort any long time and have not so soon return, questionless the indian will have destroy the fort which have be the mean of our safety among they and a terror unto they. if they have set sail soon and have launch into the vast ocean, who can have? promise that they shall have, encounter the fleet of the lo la-ware especial when they make for the new-found land a course contrary to our navy approach. if the lord la-ware have not bring with he a year provision, what comfort can those soul have receive to have be reland to a second destruction? this be thearme of the lord of host who will have his people to pass the red sea and wilderness and then to possess the land of canaan. it be divine speak of heathen, socrates, prote cur. if god for man be careful, why shall man be over distrustful? the noble lord governor, after mature deliberation, deliver some few word to the company. lay just blame upon they for their haughty vanity and sluggish. idleness. earnest, entreat they to amend those desperate folly, lest he shall be compel to draw the sword of justice and to cut off such delinquent, which he have rather draw even to the shed of his vital blood, to protect they from injury, hearten they with relation of that store he have bring with he constitute officer of all condition to rule over. they allot every man his particular place to watch vigilant and work painful. this oration and direction be receive with a general applause. you may short behold the idle and resty disease of a divide multitude by the unity and authority of this government to be substantial cure. those that know not the way to goodness before but cherish singularity and faction, can now chalk out the path of all respective duty and service. every man endeavour to outstrip each other in diligence. the french prepare to plant the vine, the english labour in the wood and ground. every man know his charge and discharge the same with alacrity. neither let any man be discourage by the relation of their daily labour, as though the sap of their body shall be spend for other man. profit, the settle time of work to effect all themselves or the adventurer need desire, require no more pain, then, from six of clock in the morning until ten, and from two of the clock in the afternoon till four, at both which time they be provide of spiritual and corporal relieve. first they enter into the church and make their prayer unto god. next they return to their house and receive their proportion of food. nor shall it be conceive that this business exclude gentleman who breed never know what a day labour mean, for though they can dig, use the square, nor practice the axe and chisel. yet may the stay spirit of any condition find how to employ the force of knowledge, the exercise of counsel, the operation and power of their best breed and quality. the house which be build be as warm and defensible against wind and weather as if they be tile and slate. be cover above with strong board and mat round within, according to the fashion of the indian. our force be now such as be able to tame the fury and treachery of the savage. our fort, assure the inhabitant and frustrate all assailant, and to leave no discouragement in the heart of any who, personal, shall enter into this great action. i will communicate a double comfort. first sir george summer. that worthy admiral have undertake a dangerous adventure for the good of the colony. upon the fifteen of june, accompany with captain samuel argoll, he return in two pinnace unto the bermudos. promise, if by any mean god will open a way to that island of rock, that he will soon return with six month provision of flesh and with live hog to store again virginia. it be but eleven day sail, and we hope that god will send a pillar of fire to direct his journey. the other comfort be that the lord governor have build two new fort, the one call fort henry and the other fort charles, in honour of our most noble prince and his hopeful brother, upon a pleasant hill and near a little rivulet which we call south hampton river. they stand in a wholesome air, have plenty of spring of sweet water. they command a great circuit of ground, contain wood, pasture and meadow with apt place for vine, corn and garden. in which fort it be resolve that all those that come out of england shall be at their first land quarter, that the wearisomeness of the sea may be refresh in this, please, part of the country. the fertility of the soil, the temperature of the climate, the form of government, the condition of our people, their daily invocate of the name of god, be thus express. why shall the success by the rule of mortal judgement be despair? why shall not the rich harvest of our hope be seasonable? expect, i dare say, that the resolution of caesar in france, the design of alexander in greece, the discovery of hernando cortes in the west and of emanuel, king of portugal, in the east, be not encourage upon. so firm ground of state and possibility, all which i can demonstrate out of their own record, be i not prevent with haste to satisfy their long. who, with a open care, hearken after the commodity of the country, who appetite i will no long frustrate than their eye can run over this succinct narration. i call it a succinct narration because the commodity in former treatise have be large describe which i will only here epitomize lest any man shall change his resolution when the same ground remain which be the cause of his former adventure. the council of virginia find the smallness of that return which they hope shall have, defray the charge of a new supply, enter into a deep consultation and propound among themselves whether it be fit to enter into a new contribution or, in time, to send for home the lord la-ware and to abandon the action they resolve to send. for sir thomas gate, who be come, they adjure he to deal plain with they and to make a true relation of those thing which be present, to be have or hereafter to be hope for in virginia. sir thomas gate, with a solemn and sacred oath, reply that all thing before report be true that the country yield abundance of wood as oak, wainscot, walnut, bay tree. ash, sarsafrase, live oak, green all the year. cedar and fir which be the material of foape ash and pot ash, of oil of walnut and bay, of pitch and tar, of clap board, pipe, staff mast and excellent board of forty, fifty and sixty length and three foot breadth, when one fir tree be able to make the main mast of the great ship in england. he avouch that there be incredible variety of sweet wood, especial of the balsamum tree which distill a precious gum, that there be innumerable white mulberry tree which in so warm a climate may cherish and feed million of silk worm and return we in a very short time as great a plenty of silk as be vent into the whole. world, from all the part of italy. that there be diverse sort of mineral, especial of iron oar lie upon the ground for ten mile circuit, of which we have make trial at home. that it make as good iron as any be in europe. that a kind of hemp or flax and silk grass do grow there, natural, which will afford stuff for all manner of excellent cordage. that the river swarm with sturgeon, the land abound with vine, the wood do harbour exceed store of beaver, fox and squirrel, the water do nourish a great increase of otter, all which be cover with precious fur that there be in present discover die and drug of sundry quality. that the orange which have be plant do prosper. in the winter which be a infallible argument that lemon, sugar cane, almond, rice aniseed and all other commodity which we have from the staight may be supply to we in our own country and by our own industry. that the corn yield a treble increase more than we. and last, that it be one of the goodly country under the sun, enteruein with five main river and promise as rich entrail as any kingdom of the earth to who the sun be no near a neighbour. what these thing will yield, the merchant best know, who find by experience that many hundred of thousand of pound be yearly spend in christendom in these commodity. the merchant know that caviar and train which come from russia can be. bring hither, but once in the year in regard of the ice, and that sturgeon which be bring from the east country can come but twice a year and that not before the end of april or the begin of may, which many time, in regard of the heat of those month, be taint in the transportation when from virginia they may be bring to we in four and twenty day and in all the cold season of the year. the merchant know that the commodity of soap and pot ash be very scant in prussia, that they be bring three hundred mile by land and three hundred mile by river before they come to the sea, that they pay a custom there and another in denmark which enhance the price exceed, but in virginia they may have they without carriage by land or custom, because five navigable river do lead up five several way into the bowel of the whole country. as therefore the like river be the cause of the riches of holland, so will these be to we a wondrous cause of save of expense. the merchant know that through the trouble in poland and muscovy, who eternal war be like the antipathy of the dragon and elephant, all their traffic for mast deal, pitch, tar, flax, hemp and cordage be every day more and more endanger and the wood of those country be almost exhaust, all which be to be have in virginia with far less charge and far more safety. last, the merchant know that for our commodity in the staight as sweet wine, orange, lemmonds, aniseed etc. that we stand at the devotion of politic prince and state who for their proper utility, devise all course to grind our merchant, all pretence to confiscate their good and to draw from we all marrow of gain by their inquisitive invention. when, in virginia, a few year labour by plant and husbandry will furnish all our defect with honour and security, especial since the frenchman who be with the lord governor, do confident promise that within two year we may expect a plentiful vintage. when, therefore, this noble enterprise by the rule of religion be express justify, when the passage by sea be all open and discover, when the climate be so fruitful temper, when the natural riches of the soil be so powerful, confirm, will any man so much betray his own inconsiderate ignorance and bewray his rashness that when the same sun shine, he shall not have the same eye to behold it? when the same hope remain, he shall not have the same heart to apprehend. it at the voyage of sir thomas gate. what swarm of people desire to be transport. what alacrity and cheerfulness in the adventurer, by free will, offering to build up this new tabernacle. shall we now be deject? shall we cast down our head like bull rush because one storm at sea have defer our joy and comfort? we be too effeminate in our long and too impatient of delay. god al-disposing providence be not compellable by man violence. let any wisdom give a solid reason why his purpose shall be change when those ground which give life to his first purpose be not change. it be but a golden slumber, that dream of any human felicity which be not sauce with some contingent misery, grief and pleasure. be the cross sail of the world, ever-turning-windmill. let no man therefore be over wise to cast beyond the moon and to multiply needless doubt and question hannibal. by too much wisdom, lose opportunity to have sack rome. charles the eight of france, by temporize, lose the kingdom of naples and the government of florence, henry the seven. by too much over-warines, lose the riches of the golden indies. occasion be precious, but when it be occasion, some of our neighbour will join in the action, if they may be joint inheritor in the plantation, which be a evident prose that virginia shall no soon be quit by we than it will be reinhabit by they. a dishonour of that nature that will eternal blemish our nation, as though we be like the furious pyrrhus or impetuous swisser who in a brunt can conquer any thing but with wisdom can maintain nothing. it be time to wipe away such a imputation of barbarism, especial since the consequence be so pregnant that without this or the like, the state can subsist without some dangerous and imminent mutation. he be over blind that do not see what a inundation of people do overflow this little island. shall we vent this deluge by indirect and unchristian policy? shall we imitate the bloody and heathenish counsel of the roman to lean a catthage stand that may exhaust our people by foreign war? or shall we nourish domestical faction? that, as in the day of vitellius and vespasian, the son may imbrue his hand in the blood of the father? or shall we follow the barbarous footstep of the state of china to imprison our people in a little circle of the earth and consume they by pestilence? or shall we, like the beast of babylon, deny to any sort the honourable estate of marriage and allow abominable stew that our people may not over increase in multitude? or shall we take a inhuman example from the muscovite, in a time of famine, to put ten thousand of the poor under the ice as the mouse and rat of a state politic? if all these be diabolical and hellish project, what other mean remain to we but by settle so excellent a plantation to disembark some million of people upon a land that flow with all manner of plenty? to wade a little further, who ever salute the monument of antiquity and do not find that carthage aspire to be empress of the world by her opportunity of haven and multitude of ship? what hinder the great mahumetane prince from seize upon all the territory of europe? but only the want of skilful mariner. what create the rich and free state of holland? but their wing navy? it be a fit emblem that paint death. stand upon the shore of france, germany and spain and look over into england, intimate. unto we that so long as we be lord of the narrow sea, death stand on the other shore and only can look upon we. but if our wooden wall be ruinate, death will soon make a bridge to come over and devour our nation. when, therefore, our mill of iron and excess of building have already turn our great wood into pasture and champion, within these few year, neither the scatter forest of england nor the diminish grove of ireland will supply the defect of our navy, when in virginia there be nothing want but only man labour to furnish both prince state and merchant without charge or difficulty again, whither shall we transport our cloth and how shall we sustain our artisan? shall we send it? into turkey, some private and deceitful avarice have discredit our merchandise. into spain, it abound with sheep and wool. into poland and muscovy, the danger do overbalance the gain in time of contention. into france and germany, they be for the most part supply by their own peace. when, if our colony be people in virginia, we shall exchange our store of cloth for other merchandise. let any man resolve why the council of virginia do now most earnest continue their adventure, why those that be eye witness of the former suppose misery do voluntary return with joy and comfort. why those noble and worthy personage do offer to make the action good upon the hazard of their life and fortune. and why, sir thomas gates long and hasten to go thither again and the lord la-ware desire so earnest to stay there. be not all these thing as dear to they as to any other of the adventurer. have not their hope? the same wing, their fear, the same fetter their estate, the same rock their life and soul, great gulf of peril and despair. and yet, neither the embracement of their wife, nor indulgence to their babe, nor the neglect of their domestic fortune, nor banishment from their natine soil, nor any experiment danger have break their noble resolution. and therefore, he that desire to purchase infallible hope of private utility, he that aim at the honour and wealth of his native country, he that esteem his own repute as dear as his own eye, he that ende^uo^reth to enlarge the dominion of his prince and the kingdom of his god, let he remember what he have already spend, which be all bury. let he consider the consequence of state which be all vanish into smoke. let he conceive what a scorn we shall be make to the maligner of our state abroad and our ill affect at home. let he meditate the external riches of other kingdom able to buy and sell the monarch of the west. let he hear the triumphant boast of the beast. of rome, as though god will not suffer our schismatical and heretical religion to be infuse into a new convert region. o all you worthy, follow the ever-sounding trumpet of a bless honour. let religion be the first aim of your hope, and and other thing shall be cast unto you. your name shall be register to posterity with a glorious title. these be the man who god raise to augment the state of their country and to propagate the gospel of jesus christ. neither ought any man to live under augustus, as if he live under to who. sluggishness and privacy be impute for wisdom and policy. the same god that have join three kingdom under one caesar will not be want to add a four if. we will dissolve that frosty joinesse which chill our zeal and make we so cold in the action. but it be a mere idea, speculation and fancy to sow, spare and yet expect for to reap plentiful when a penurious supply, be like the cast on of a little water upon a great fire that quench not the heat but augment it. when procrastinate, delay and linger counsel do lose the opportunity of fly time whereby we rather bewray our colony, then relieve they. let no man adore his gold as his god, nor his mammon as his maker. if god have scatter his blessing upon you as snow, will you return no tributary acknowledgement of his goodness? if you will, can you select a more excellent subject? then, to cast down the altar of devil, that you may raise up the altar of christ to forbid the sacrifice of man. that they may offer up the sacrifice of contrite spirit to reduce barbarism and infidelity to civil government and christianity. if i speak to a man void of piety, i speak but the word of wind and vanity. otherwise, how do that man groan under the world? corruption that do not, actual or vocal, hasten the world conversion? doubtye not. but god have determine and demonstrate by the wondrous preservation of those principal person which fall upon the bermudos, that he will raise our state and build his church in that excellent climate, if the action be second, with resolution and religion, deuce and auspice. christo.