by his majesty counseil for virginia, after the many disaster wherewith it please almighty god to suffer the great enemy of all good action and his instrument to encounter and interrupt, to oppress and keep weak this noble action for the plant of virginia, with christian religion and english people, it have, please he now, contrary of his especial great grace, so to bless and prosper our late, careful endeavour, as well for the repair of all former breach as for supply of the present defect wherewith the colony be keep down, that it have, as it be, on a sudden grow to double that height, strength, plenty and prosperity which it have in former time attain. we have, think it now the peculiar duty of our place. it be on a sudden grow to double that height, strength, plenty and prosperity which it have in former time attain. we have think it now the peculiar duty of our place, according as it have be also order by a general court to summon, as it be by a kind of love invitement, the whole body of the noble and other worthy aduenturor as well, to the conserve and perfect of this happy work, as to the reap of the fruit of their great expense and travail, and first to remove that unworthy aspersion wherewith ill dispose mind guide their action. by corrupt end have, both by letter from thence and by rumour here at home, seek unjust to stain and blemish that country as be barren. ill dispose mind guide their action by corrupt end, have, both by letter from thence and by rumour here at home, seek, unjust, to stain and blemish that country as be barren and unprofitable. we have think it necessary, for the full satisfaction of all, to make it public know that by diligent examination, we have assure find those letter and rumour to have be false and malicious, procure by practice and suborn to evil purpose and, contrary, disaduowed by the testimony upon oath of the chief inhabitant of all the colony, by who we be ascertain that the country be rich, spacious and well, water, temperate, as for the climate, very healthful after man be a little accustom to it, abound with all god natural blessing the. ascertain that the country be rich, spacious and well water, temperate. as for the climate, very healthful after man be a little accustom to it, abound with all god natural blessing. the land replenish with the goodly wood in the world and those full of deer and other beast for sustenance. the sea and river, whereof many be exceed, fair and navigable, full of excellent fish and of all sort desirable. both water and land yield fowl in very great store and variety. in sum, a country too good for ill people and, we hope, reserve, by the providence of god for such as shall apply themselves faithful to his service and be a strength and honour to our king and nation, but touch those commodity for which. by the providence of god for such as shall apply themselves faithful to his service and be a strength and honour to our king and nation, but touch those commodity for which that country be proper and which have be late set up for the aduenturor benefit. we refer you to a true note of, they late deliver in a great and general court and hereunto annex for your better information, by which and other approve information bring unto we. we rest in great assurance that this country, as it be seat near the midst of the world between the extremity of heat and cold, so it also participate of the benefit of both and be capable be assist with skill and industry of the rich commodity of the world between the extremity of heat and cold, so it also participate of the benefit of both and be capable, be assist with skill and industry of the rich commodity of most part of the earth. the rich fur, caviar and cordage which we draw from russia with so great difficulty, be to be have in virginia and the part adjoin, with ease and plenty. the mast, plank and board, the pitch and tar, the pot-ash and soap-ash, the hemp and flax, be the material of linen which now we fetch from norway, denmark, poland and germany, be there to be have in abundance and great perfection. the iron which have so waste our english wood that itself, in short time, must decay together with they be. and germany be there to be have in abundance and great perfection, the iron which have so waste our english wood that itself in short time must decay together with they be to be have in virginia, where waste of wood be a benefit for all, good condition answerable to the best in the world. the wine, fruit and salt of france and spain, the silk of persia and italy will be find also in virginia, and in no kind of worth inferior. we omit here a multitude of other natural commodity, dispeirse up and down the diverse part of the world, of wood rootes and berry for excellent die, of plant and other drug for physical service, of sweet wood oil and gum for pleasure and other. the diverse part of the world, of wood rootes and berry for excellent die, of plant and other drug for physical service, of sweet wood oil and gum for pleasure and other use, of cotton-wool and sugarcane, all which may there also be have in abundance, with a infinity of other more, and will conclude with these three: corn, cattle and fish which be the substance of the food of man. the grain of our country do prosper there very well. of wheat they have great plenty, but their maze be the natural grain of that country do far exceed in pleasantness, strength and fertility. the cattle which we have transport thither be now grow near to five hundred, become much big of body than the breed from. country do far exceed in pleasantness, strength and fertility. the cattle which we have transport thither be now, grow near to five hundred, become much big of body than the breed from which they come, the horse also, more beautiful and full of courage, and such be the extraordinary fertility of that soil that the do of their deer yield two fawn at a birth and sometime three. the fish at cape codd be within those limit, will, in plenty of fish, be equal to those of newfound land and in goodness and greatness, much superior. to conclude, it be a country which nothing but ignorance can think ill of and which no man but of a corrupt mind and ill purpose can defame. now touch the present. to conclude, it be a country which nothing but ignorance can think ill of and which no man but of a corrupt mind and ill purpose can defame. now touch the present estate of our colony in that country. we have think it not unfit, thus much brief to declare: there have be send thither this last year and be now present in go, twelve hundred person and upward, as particular appear in the note above specify, and there be near one thousand more remain of those that be go before the man late send have be. most of. they choice man bear and breed up to labour and industry out of devonshire, about a hundred man bring up to husbandry out of warwickshire and staffordshire, above one. be most of. they choice man, bear and breed up to labour and industry. out of devonshire about a hundred man bring up to husbandry, out of warwickshire and staffordshire above one hundred and ten, and out of sussex about forty, all frame to ironworke. the rest disperse out of diverse shire of the realm. there have be also sundry person of good quality, much commend for sufficiency, industry and honesty, provide and send to take charge and government of those people. the care likewise that have be take by direction, instruction, charter and commission to reduce the people and affair in virginia into a regular course have be such and so great that the colony begin now to have the face and fashion of a orderly state. reduce the people and affair in virginia into a regular course have be such and so great that the colony begin now to have the face and fashion of a orderly state and such as be likely to grow and prosper. the people be all divide into several burrough. each man have the share of land due to he set out to hold and enjoy to he and his heir. the public land for the company here, for the governor, there for the college, and for each particular burrow for the minister also and for diverse other necessary officer be likewise lay out by order and bound. the particular plantation for diverse private society be settle in their seat, be allot to their content, and each in convenient. other necessary officer be likewise lay out by order and bound. the particular plantation for diverse private society be settle in their seat, be allot to their content and each in convenient distance. the rigour of martial law wherewith before they be govern, be reduce within the limit prescribe by his majesty and the laudable form of justice and government use in this realm establish and follow as near as may be the governor be so restrain to a counseil, join with he that he can do wrong to no man who may not have speedy remedy. each burrow and each particular plantation partly have, partly be bind to have in short time a sufficient minister for who maintenance be ordain to each of two hundred pound a. remedy, each burrow and each particular plantation partly have, partly be bind to have, in short time, a sufficient minister, for who maintenance be ordain, to each of two hundred pound a year value, which orderly proceed there by direction from hence have cause the colony now at length to settle themselves in a firm resolution to perpetuate the plantation they fall, to build of house, each for his own private, and the generality to the rear of public guest house for entertain of new man upon their first arrival. they fall to set up their plough to the plant of vineyard to the pursue of the staple commodity furnish and commend from hence. in sum, they be now so full of alacrity and cheerfulness that in a plough to the plant of vineyard, to the pursue of the staple commodity, furnish and commend from. hence in sum, they be now so full of alacrity and cheerfulness that in a late general assembly they have, in the name of the colony, present their great possible thanks to the company for the care that have be take for the settle of the plantation. neither be it to be omit the care which have be have here late at home, for the reduce of all the proceed and affair of the company to a orderly course of good government and justice, wherein, to begin with the fountain thereof, his majesty, authority and pleasure, there have be a collection make of all the branch of the same disperse in. of good government and justice wherein, to begin with the fountain thereof, his majesty, authority and pleasure, there have be a collection, make of all the branch of the same, disperse in his letter, patent now three time, renew, as also out of other instruction, proceed from his majesty out of both which, together with such other order as authorise by his majesty the company themselves have think necessary to make, have be, compile a book of stand, order and constitution, approve by the general consent of all the company, whereby both the company here and the colony in virginia have their business, carry regular, industrious and just every man know both his right and duty to their general great content and the great advancement of the action. the colony in virginia have their business carry regular, industrious, and just every man know both his right and duty to their general great content and the great advancement of the action, and whereas the colony likewise have be often suitor. in effect, to reduce into a compendious and orderly form in writing, the law of england proper for the use of that plantation, with addition of such other as the nature of the place, the novity of the colony and other important circumstance shall necessary require a course be likewise take for the effect of this work. yet so as to submit it first to his majesty view and approbation, it be not fit that his majesty subject shall be govern by any other law than such. this work yet so as to submit it first to his majesty view and approbation. it be not fit that his majesty subject shall be govern by any other law than such as receive the influence of their life from he. and now to come to that which concern the aduenturor, in particular by who charge care and labour next unto his majesty especial grace, this famous plantation have not only be undertake but through so many difficulty uphold and continue. we shall be very great injurious to they if we shall not acquaint they with this seasonable time for the reap of that benefit and reward which be due unto they. we therefore let they know that in this last year now end, there have be grant. this seasonable time for the reap of that benefit and reward which be due unto they. we therefore let they know that in this last year now end, there have be grant by the company under their legal seal eleven, several patent for particular plantation, and more be in hand to be pass this next quarter-court. it be not unprobable that upon each of these patent, diverse hundred of person will soon plant. in virginia there have be already transport upon the first, above three hundred man. these and other, like planter, have priority of time, will have priority also in choice of the seat of their plantation. see, therefore, the only matter of retribution to the aduenturor be by a fair proportion of land to they and will have priority also in choice of the seat of their plantation. see, therefore, the only matter of retribution to the aduenturor be by a fair proportion of land to they and their heir, namely of one hundred acre for every share of twelve pound and ten shilling upon a first division and as much more upon a second. the first be people with fifty acre for every person, to be double in like manner, which, at their own charge, they shall transport to inhabit in virginia before the 24. day of june 1625.. if he continue there three year, either at one or several time, or die after he be ship for that voyage, it stand they upon who be not willing to be the last in. continue there three year, either at one or several time, or die after he be ship for that voyage. it stand they upon who be not willing to be the last in the benefit to be partake, not to be the least in set forth to the choice and people of their land, wherein what favour or assistance may by we be give they, they shall be well assure of it, in equal proportion with ourselves, as their charge and long expectance have well deserve. and to the end, that not only the aduenturor now live but the heir also of the decease may take certain notice of the several proportion of land which, ratable to their adventure in money, be due and belong to they, and likewise but the heir also of the decease may take certain notice of the several proportion of land which, ratable to their adventure in money, be due and belong to they. and likewise that posterity may true know by who charge this plantation next, under his majesty, have be happy, found, maintain and continue. we have here, according to a order of court, set down in a alphabetical table, the name of all the aduenturor with all their several sum adventure, wherein, if by error or other mis-accident there have wrong be do to any man, if within one twelve month after the date hereof, he give notice and make proof thereof to the company auditor, he shall be set right and the table reform. there be not any. within one, twelve month after the date hereof, he give notice and make proof thereof to the company auditor, he shall be set right and the table reform. there be not any thing more dear unto we, then, to do right unto they, with all justifiable courtesy, who have be beginner and continuer of this glorious work, tend so much to the propagate of the true service of almighty god, to the add of greatness and honour to our king and to the benefit of our whole nation, in disburden their multitude 22. 1620. * * a note of the ship man and provision send to virginia by the treasurer and company in the year 1619.. ship, the of 200. tun, send in august 1619. with 120 person. a note of the ship, man and provision send to virginia by the treasurer and company in the year 1619.. ship, the of 200. tun, send in august 1619. with 120 person. the duty of 70. tun send in january 1619. with 51. person. the jonathan of 350. tun, send in february 1619. with 200. person. the trial of 200. tun, send in february 1619. with 40. person and 60. cow. the falcon of 150. tun, send in february 1619. with 36. person and 52. cow and 4. mare. the london merchant of 300. 200. person. tun send in march 1619. with the swan of barnstable of 100 tun in march 1619. with 71. person. the bonau^nture of 240 tun, send in april 1620. with 153. person beside. tun, send in march 1619. with the swan of barnstable of 100. tun in march 1619. with 71. person, the bonau^nture of 240 tun, send in april 1620. with 153. person. beside these set out by the treasurer and company, there have be set out by particular adventurer for private plantation: the garland of 25.. tun, send in june 1619. for mr john ferrars plantation with 45. person who be yet detain in the summer land. a ship of bristol of 80. tun, send in septemb 1619. for mr barkley plantation with 45. person. there be also two ship in provide to be short go for about 300. person. more to be send by private adventurer to virginia: 300. person. sum of the person: 1261.. whereof in the also two ship in provide to be short go for about 300.. person more to be send by private adventurer to virginia: 300.. person: sum of the person: 1261.. whereof in the eight ship set out by the treasurer and company, 871.. people of these person there be send for public and other pious use. these ensue: tenant for the governors, land beside fifty send the former spring: 80.. tenant for the company, land: 130.. tenant for the college: land: 100. tenant for the minister glebe land: 50.. young maid to make wife for so many of the former tenant: 90.. boy to make apprentice for those tenant 100. servant for the public: 50.. man send by their labour to bear up the charge of bring up thirty. of the former tenant: 90.. boy to make apprentice for those tenant: 100. servant for the public: 50.. man send by their labour to bear up the charge of bring up thirty of the insidel child in true religion and civility, 50.. sum of person for public use, etc. 650.. the 611.. remain be send for private plantation commodity, the commodity which these people be direct principal to apply next to their own necessary maintenance, be these ensue: iron, for which be send 150.. person to set up three iron work. proof have be make of the extraordinary goodness of that iron cordage for which, beside hemp, direction be give for the plant of silkegrasse natural grow in those part in great abundance which be approve to make. the extraordinary goodness of that iron cordage for which, beside hemp, direction be give for the plant of silkegrasse, natural grow in those part in great abundance which be approve to make the best cordage and linen in the world. of this, every householder be bind to set 100 plant and the governor himself have set five thousand pot-ash and soap-ash, pitch and tar for the make whereof the polacker be return to their work, timber of all sort with mast, plank and board for provision of ship etc. there be not so good timber for all use in any one know country whatsoever, and for the ease and increase of diverse of these work, provision be send of man and material for the set up of sundry. all use in any one know country whatsoever, and for the ease and increase of diverse of these work, provision be send of man and material for the set up of sundry saw milles silk for which that country be exceed proper. have innumerable store of mu berry tree of the best and some silkworm natural find upon. they produce excellent silk, some whereof be to be see for the set up of which commodity his majesty have be gracious, please now, the second time the former have miscarry, to bestow upon the company plenty of silkworm seed of his own store. be the best vine whereof the country yield natural great store and of sundry sort which by culture will be bring to excellent perfection for the. silkworm seed of his own store, be the best vine whereof the country yield natural great store, and of sundry sort which by culture will be bring to excellent perfection for the effect whereof diverse skilful vignerons be send with store also, from hence, of vine plant of the best sort. salt, which work have be late, suffer to decay. be now order to be set up in so great plenty as not only to serve the colony for the present, but, as be hope in short time, also the great fish on those coast for the follow work, and perfect of these commodity, all provision necessary for the present be send in good abundance, as likewise the people that go be plentiful, furnish with apparel, bedding, victual. the follow work and perfect of these commodity. all provision necessary for the present be send in good abundance as likewise the people that go be plentiful furnish with apparel, bedding, victual for six month, implement both for house and ^abour, armour, weapon tool and sundry other necessary, and a supply of armour powder and many necessary. provision be make for those of the colony which be there before. yet, without any prejudice to the former magazine gift, there have be give to the colony this year by devout person. these gift ensue. two person unknown have give fair plate and other rich ornament for two communion table, whereof one for the college and the other for the church of mistress mary robinson sound, who in the former have give fair plate and other rich ornament for two communion table, whereof one for the college and the other for the church of mistress mary robinson sound who in the former year by her will give 200. pound towards the sound of a church in virginia. another unknown person, together with a godly letter, have late send to the treasurer 550. pound in gold for the bring up of child of the infidel, first in the knowledge of god and true religion and next in fit trade whereby honest to live master nicolas ferrar decease have by his will give 300. pound to the college in virginia to be pay when there shall be ten of the infidel child place in it, and in the mean time have by his will give 300. pound to the college in virginia to be pay when there shall be ten of the infidel child place in it, and in the mean time four and twenty pound by year to be distribute unto three discreet and godly man in the colony which shall, honest, bring up three of the infidel child in christian religion and some good course to live by a unnamed person. send to the treasurer the sum of ten pound for advance of the plantation patent. there have be patent grant this year for particular plantation as here ensue to the society of southampton hundred, to master heath recorder of london, to master wincopp, to master tracie, to doctor bohun, to master pierce, to master delbridge. particular plantation, as here ensue to the society of southampton hundred, to master heath recorder of london, to master wincopp, to master tracie, to doctor bohun, to master pierce, to master delbridge, to master pointz, to master barkley, to captain bargrave, to captain ward, who have undertake to transport to virginia great multitude of people with store of cattle. it be to be know that touch the college for the infidel child. it have be think more expedient to begin first with the plant and people of the land, which have be do this year, and afterward to proceed to the erect of the fabric which be to be perform out of the revenue of the land. a declaration of the supply intend to be send to virginia. afterward to proceed to the erect of the fabric, which be to be perform out of the revenue of the land. a declaration of the supply intend to be send to virginia in this year 1620. by his majesty, counseil for virginia, 18.. 1620. whereas the right honourable henry earl of southampton, with the advice and consent of the counseil and company for virginia, have resolve and conclude to employ all good mean in this present year 1620. not only for the advance of the plantation in strength and multitude of good people, but also for the enrich thereof with store of cattle of diverse sort and by set up or increase such staple commodity as be proper for that country may be also of most necessary use. the enrich thereof with store of cattle of diverse sort and by set up or increase such staple commodity as be proper for that country, may be also of most necessary use for this realm and redound in fine to the great benefit of both aduenturor and planter, and last, for the establish there of such good government. original derive from the king, most excellent majesty, the first and chief founder of this glorious work, as whereby the people there divide in soil only but still participate in the religious and happy government of this their native country may continue always as one and the same people with we, according to the most princely direction of his majesty, we have think it very necessary for the second and native country may continue always as one and the same people with we, according to the most princely direction of his majesty. we have think it very necessary for the second and forward of those so noble design, not only to publish they to the aduenturor in general, thereby to invite they to concur with we in the same, but also to set down such particularity requisite as whereby the preparation of all sort needful, may, upon this timely warning, both better and more seasonable be make and compass first, therefore, we have think fit to make it public know that, beside the great store of particular plantation, now in provide and like very short, in large proportion to augment the company, have resolve, in a late general. make it public know that beside the great store of particular plantation now in provide and like very short in large proportion to augment the company, have resolve in a late general court, by the blessing of god, to set out this year at the public charge and to send to virginia eight hundred choice person of the quality ensue: first, four hundred to be tenant of the general land of the company, to make up the number of those tenant full 500, whereof 200.. to be place at elizabeth city with the company deputy, 100 at henrico, 100 at charles city and at james city there be a hundred and more already. second, one hundred to be tenant to such officer, etc. as the court already have. at henrico, 100 at charles city and at james city there be a hundred and more already, second one hundred to be tenant to such officer, etc. as the court already have or shall short appoint viz: 10. for the deputy of the college, 40. for the company deputy, 20. for the secretary, 10. more beside, 50. already send for the minister and 20. for the physician. their care for the ease and prosperity of the colony be such and so great as to cause they to endow those office and place, as they have former do, other with fair possession, furnish with tenant and other fit provision that the people may have the benefit by they and yet be free from the burden. three, one hundred young. do other with fair possession, furnish with tenant and other fit provision that the people may have the benefit by they and yet be free from the burden. three, one hundred young maid to make wife for these tenant, as the former 90. which have be late. send four, one hundred boy to be apprentize likewise to the public tenant. five, one hundred servant to be dispose among the old planter which they great desire and have offer to defray their charge with very great thanks. and although by reason of the preparation already make, the difficulty may be well conceive to be in great part overcome and the profit much more near and more easy to come by, yet the company whole affect the people, prosperity have. difficulty may be well conceive to be in great part overcome and the profit much more near and more easy to come by. yet the company whole, affect, the people, prosperity have determine to deal both as favourable in the contract and as bountiful in all sort of furniture and provision with the tenant which shall now go as they have do with those which have be former send, which condition it have be think fit here to reinsert and publish: every man transport into virginia with intent there to inhabit as tenant to the common land of the company or to the public land, shall be free land there, at the charge of the company, and shall be furnish with provision of victual for one whole year. land of the company or to the public land shall be free land there, at the charge of the company, and shall be furnish with provision of victual for one whole year next after his arrival, as also of cattle, and with apparel, weapon, tool and implement, both of house and labour, for his necessary use. he shall enjoy the ratable moiety of all the profit that shall be raise of the land on which he shall be plant as well corn and cattle as other commodity whatsoever. the other half be due to the owner of the land. he shall be tie by covenant to continue upon that land for the term of seven year which be expire. it shall be in his choice whither to continue. of the land he shall be tie by covenant to continue upon that land for the term of seven year which be expire. it shall be in his choice whither to continue there or to remove to any other place at his own will and pleasure. of these person, one hundred and twenty, such as be to be tenant, be to be ship here for virginia by the midst of august now at hand, and the rest in january and february, ensue the next preparation be of cattle of diverse sort, whereof there be intend in the next spring to be send. these ensue one hundred cow for this addition of 500 tenant, one hundred cow more to remain in a perpetual stock upon the company land to the next spring to be send these ensue one hundred cow for this addition of 500 tenant, one hundred cow more to remain in a perpetual stock upon the company land to be send to new planter, as have be former order. four hundred goat, twenty mare fourscore ass to be procure from france the care of provide, which be commend to diverse select person by part, and the whole to the oversight of the general committee. the ^ast provision appoint to be make be for the set up or increase of diverse principal commodity for silk. there be provision to be make of great store of silke-worme-seede about michaelmas next, as also of man skilful in the order as well of the worm as of their silk. silk. there be provision to be make of great store of silke-worme-seede- about michaelmas next- as also of man skilful in the order as well of the worm as of their silk, which be to be send away in a pinnace in october, betimes for hemp and flax, pot-ash and soap-ash, pitch and tar. there be a treaty already on foot for procure of man skilful in those trade from the eastern part beside the polaker, yet remain in virginia for wine. it be also order that man skilful be procure in the plant and dress of vine out of france and from the rhine, and from thence also and other part to procure plant of the best kind for oil, beside great quantity to be make out. of vine out of france and from the rhine and from thence also and other part, to procure plant of the best kind. for oil, beside great quantity to be make out of the walnut grow natural in virginia in great abundance, olive-plant be to be provide from marseilles and ligorno for fish which on those coast be take in great plenty and in worth much better than in newfoundland. there be care and a course take to preserve the company liberty and to set up the fish in better sort than heretofore. for salt order be give for the make of it in abundance and after the manner of those hot climate which may prove a great help to increase the plantation. for iron there be sufficient. be give for the make of it in abundance and after the manner of those hot climate which may prove a great help to increase the plantation. for iron there be sufficient do already, and for sawing-milles, beside those already go, this spring there be late. come from hamborough diverse workman very skilful to be send in the next ship, and that nothing may be want for the company tenant, there be a pinnace already, and other boat shall be provide to remain there at the deputy command to traffic and trade for the company and their tenant under his charge. these large supply of man, cattle and commodity as they tend to the accomplish of this great work of the plantation, so can they not be themselves. their tenant under his charge. these large supply of man, cattle and commodity as they tend to the accomplish of this great work of the plantation, so can they not be themselves effect without large provision of money, be the sinew and move instrument in these great action, to which end we desire the noble and worthy aduenturor to be assist to we by such mean as they shall please especial that the remain of all promise adventure may, in michaelmas term next be, pay in without fail, which we trust will now be do cheerful on all part, the invitement of this year. be well, consider that as the present of their first payment have be the beginning, so the performance of the late may be the on all part the invitement of this year be well, consider that as the present of their first payment have be the beginning, so the performance of the late may be the perfect and finish of this work so glorious before god and man. and here, by the way, for the clear of some scruple and error through mistake of our write late publish, we be to advertise that the alphabet of adventurer and sum adventure, neither then convenient, can nor be intend to extend any further then to such sum as have be pay in to the treasurer of the company and to sir baptist hicks, by special order of court, and whereas diverse other bill of adventure have be heretofore deliver partly upon personal adventure and to the treasurer of the company and to sir baptist hicks, by special order of court, and whereas diverse other bill of adventure have be heretofore deliver, partly upon personal adventure and no money pay in, partly upon gift from the company in regard of desert, partly for sum pay to other man who account hang yet unclear and not to the treasurer, and partly for good which never come within the treasurer account but of other inferior officer into who hand they be deliver, for which, notwithstanding, bill of adventure have be deliver mention as if it be money pay to the treasurer. if the aduenturor shall be please, within the time prefix, to put in their just claim by these or any other way whatsoever there. if it be money, pay to the treasurer. if the aduenturor shall be, please, within the time prefix to put in their just claim by these or any other way whatsoever, there shall be right do to they and a new alphabetical book shall be: publish, embrace, exact all kind of aduenturor with their several sum, either real adventure or otherwise, accept, allow or bestow, be it upon what cause or in what kind soever. now, if the auenturor be thus, request with much great reason, be all accountant to the company, to be pray and require to prepare and make perfect their several account and to pay in those money which shall remain due to the company. that so all part concur with their duty and endeavour. require to prepare and make perfect their several account and to pay in those money which shall remain due to the company. that so all part concur with their duty and endeavour, the work may proceed with general joy, last as heretofore. so we now also declare that the person to be admit to go as the company tenant, and with the foresay condition, shall be no other than good man, that be to say of good trade, of skill in husbandry or industrious labourer, and such of those as shall be commend for their honest conversation, which person repair to the city of london in the begin of august and in the middle of january next, according to the several number at those time to be send. conversation, which person repair to the city of london in the begin of august and in the middle of january next, according to the several number at those time to be send, shall from thenceforward be entertain at the company charge till such time as they be ship for virginia. there be especial care. likewise take for the provide of good commander and director of their work. give in a general court. hold for virginia the eighteen of july 1620.. the several tradesman to be entertain: husbandman, gardener, brewer, baker, sawyer, carpenter, joiner, shipwrights, boat-wrights, plough-wrights, mil-wrights, mason, turner, smith of all sort, cooper of all sort, weaver, tanner, potter, fowler, fisherman, fish-hookemakers, net-maker, shoe maker, rope maker, tilemaker, edgetoole-maker, brickmaker, bricklayer, dresser of hemp and flax, limeburners. mil-wrights, mason, turner, smith of all sort, cooper of all sort, weaver, tanner, potter, fowler, fisherman, fish-hookemakers, net-maker, shoe maker, rope maker, tilemaker, edgetoole-maker, brickmaker, bricklayer, dresser of hemp and flax, limeburners, lether-dresser, man skilful in vine, man for ironworke, man skilful in mine. the name of the adventurer with their several sum adventure pay to sir thomas smith, knight, late treasurer of the company for virginia. name of the adventurer with the sum pay by order to sir baptist hicks, knight. the name of the adventurer with the sum pay to sir edwin sandys, knight, treasurer of the company for virginia, from the 28. of april 1619.. to the 27. of june 1620.. order and constitution, partly collect out of his majesty letter, patent and partly ordain. treasurer of the company for virginia from the 28. of april 1619. to the 27. of june 1620.. order and constitution, partly collect out of his majesty letter, patent and partly ordain upon mature deliberation by the treasurer, counseil and company of virginia for the better govern of the action and affair of the say company, here in england reside 1619. and 1620. court i. there be four great general court, common call quarter court, appoint to be hold by the treasurer, counseil and company of virginia upon the four last wednesday, save one of every term, which only have and shall have power to choose counseilour and officer, as well for the company here as also for the colony and planter in virginia, to make law and term which only have and shall have power to choose counseilour and officer as well for the company here as also for the colony and planter in virginia, to make law and ordinance to distribute and dispose of the land in virginia and to settle matter of trade for the behoof of the company and colony. 2- every monday before a quarter-court shall be hold a court to prepare all kind of business. reserve to the power of the quarter court to determine. 3- every wednesday, fortnight, reckon from the great court shall also be hold a ordinary court for this company for dispatch of ordinary and extraordinary business, and it be not to be count a perfect court unless there be five of the there the treasurer. a ordinary court for this company for dispatch of ordinary and extraordinary business, and it be not to be count a perfect court unless there be five of the there, the treasurer or deputy be one and fifteen of the generality. 4: it shall be in the power of the treasurer or the deputy, in his absence, upon extraordinary cause, to call a extraordinary court. v. it shall not be in the power of any other than a quarter court to make any contract whereby to bind the company for any continuance of year, in which case it shall be propose also in the preparative court next precede. 5. pvblique business shall have the precedence in the court before private, unless there be extraordinary important cause to the. case it shall be. propose also in the preparative court next precede: 5: pvblique business shall have the precedence in the court before private, unless there be extraordinary important cause to the contrary. 7: if any thing order in a ordinary or lesser court be afterward reverse in one of the great and general court, it shall be from thence forward as though it have never be so. order 8: all court shall begin at two of the clock in the afternoon and dissolve at the rise of the treasurer or of the deputy in his absence. 9: nothing shall be put to the question after six of the clock in the afternoon. x: in regard of the great business for virginia: yearly increase, it shall be in: absence. 9: nothing shall be put to the question after six of the clock in the afternoon. x. in regard of the great business for virginia, yearly increase, it shall be in the power of the treasurer, if he see it so necessary, to assemble the quarter court both in the forenoon and afternoon of the day. appoint for they. 11: the company shall be summon to the quarter court and court extraordinary by the officer, but of the ordinary court themselves shall take notice and the secretary shall keep a book of the proceed of the court who, with the book keeper, husband and beadle, shall at all court give diligent attendance. 12: it shall be lawful, at a general court, and with consent thereof, to dispense the court who, with the book keeper, husband and beadle, shall at all court give diligent attendance. 12: it shall be lawful, at a general court, and with consent thereof, to dispense with all meeting in long vacation or in such part of they as may be spare, unless some extraordinary matter befall, in which case may be call extraordinary court. 13: the treasurer and company be a body and commonalty perpetual. shall have one fair and common seal to be keep by the treasurer and not to be affix to any grant or instrument whatsoever otherwhere, then in public court or by warrant from thence. 14: the treasurer and the counseil or the court have power to admit any into this society election. 15 at the great otherwhere, then in public court or by warrant from thence. 14: the treasurer and the counseil or the court have power to admit any into this society election: 15: at the great and general court, common call the quarter court. in easter term all office of this company, except the counseil shall be void and the court shall proceed to a election of new officer in manner follow. 16: the treasurer, in the begin of the court, at the give up of his office, shall declare by word or write the present estate of the colony and planter in virginia and deliver into the court a book of his account for the year past. examine and approve under the auditor hand. declare withal the present estate of the and planter in virginia and deliver into the court a book of his account for the year past, examine and approve under the auditor hand, declare withal the present estate of the cash. 17: after the choice of a treasurer, a deputy shall be choose, then the auditor and comitty and last the secretary, book keeper, husband and bedle. 18: at the choice of each officer, the person nominate for the election shall withdraw themselves till the party choose. be public, so pronounce and general. no man shall be present in the court whilst himself or his matter pass the judgement of the court. 19: in regard of the weighty and manifold business of this company, which be also like daily to increase, no man shall be choose. his matter pass the judgement of the court. 19, in regard of the weighty and manifold business of this company, which be also like daily to increase, no man shall be choose treasurer of the company of virginia who at the time of his election be governor of any other company, but upon condition that before the next quarter court he effectual resign that other government. except it seem good for the behalf of both company that the same man be also governor of the summer land company. 20: it be for weighty reason, think very expedient that no man continue in the place of treasurer or deputy above three year at once. 21, for the avoid of diverse inconvenience, it be think fit that all election of expedient that no man continue in the place of treasurer or deputy above three year at once. 21: for the avoid of diverse inconvenience, it be think fit that all election of principal officer in or for virginia, as also of the treasurer and deputy here, be perform by a ballad box as in some other company. 22: every officer as he be choose shall open in court, take his oath or, if he be absent, at the next court he come to. 23: the treasurer, deputy, auditor and comitty have no certain allowance for their care and labour. the reward of these former officer, according to their desert be refer to the pleasure of the court wherein new officer be choose treasurer. 24: the treasurer duty be care and labour. the reward of these former officer, according to their desert, be refer to the pleasure of the court wherein new officer be choose treasurer. 24: the treasurer duty be to keep the ordinary court of virginia and upon cause extraordinary, to call court extraordinary and in all court and other meeting he be to have a cast voice. 25: he be to moderate the court in quality of a precedent and to cause gravity, decency and good order to be observe and for breach thereof, after a grave admonition first give and not prevail, to proceed to reformation by the judgement of the court. 26. he be to propound and put all thing to the question which the court require, under pain of be immediate. prevail to proceed to reformation by the judgement of the court. 26, he be to propound and put all thing to the question which the court require under pain of be immediate put from his office. if he refuse, in which case the deputy shall do it under the like pain, and if he refuse than any of the there present. 27, whereas the treasurer be to put to the question all thing which the court require it be explain to be intend of such thing as be not contrary to his majesty letter, patent or instruction, not to the stand law and order of the company. 28, he be to have care that the extraordinary comitty appoint by the court to several business do prosecute the same. instruction not to the stand, law and order of the company. 28- he be to have care that the extraordinary comitty appoint by the court to several business do prosecute the same and give seasonable account of their do to the court. 29- he be also to have a especial care that no grant or patent do pass from the company but upon examination thereof by a select comittie who be exact to observe the order, make concern they and to this end with diverse other. he be to have a vigilant eye on the company and counseils seal that they be not wrong by abuse of they. 30 the treasurer, upon receipt of public letter from or concern virginia shall assemble at least four of the to and counseils seal that they be not wrong by abuse of they. 30. the treasurer, upon receipt of public letter from or concern virginia, shall assemble at least four of the to impart they to they and, by their assent, shall cause they to be read in court, unless there be some cause of secrecy, in which case he shall communicate they with the only in like sort. the public letter and instruction to be send to the governor, counseil or people in virginia or otherwise concern they, he shall cause to be public, read and approve by the court or counseil, as the case shall require, and neither he nor any other shall, of his own head or authority, write or send any direction, swerve from such approve by the court or counseil as the case shall require, and neither he nor any other shall, of his own head or authority, write or send any direction swerve from such as the court or counseil shall give upon pain to be disfranchized. 31. the treasurer shall assemble the upon all weighty occasion, require serious deliberation and shall have care with they that the lord of his majesty, privy counseil, be acquaint with all matter of extraordinary and great importance concern the state. 32. he be to do his best that fit counsellor be choose and be choose be to have care that they take their oath. 33. the treasurer be to have care also that the general comitty keep their court with the deputy upon all. and be choose be to have care that they take their oath. 33 the treasurer be to have care also that the general comitty keep their court with the deputy upon all occasion of business. 34. he be to do his best that fit man be choose also to that place and that they which be choose be swear. 35 the treasurer, at his pleasure shall sit in any assembly of comitty, ordinary or extraordinary, unless it concern himself. 36 the treasurer shall stand charge with the public treasure of the company and be to have care th^t it be due, get in and not issue out, but by lawful warrant and to the company use. 37 a lawful warrant for charge of the present year. be that. care th^t it be due. get in and not issue out, but by lawful warrant and to the company. use 37: a lawful warrant for charge of the present year be that which be sign by the deputy and four of the comitty, and for former charge or debt that which be sign by three of the auditor, whereof one to be of the, and underneth or upon the back of every warrant, a acquittance shall be take for the receipt under the party hand. 38, the treasurer be also to yield up a true and perfect account of the general cash at the end of his year and to bring it in a fortnight before to the auditor to be examine and at all time be request. perfect account of the general cash at the end of his year and to bring it in a fortnight before to the auditor to be examine and at all time be request by the auditor to show in what case the cash do stand. 39. if any complaint or suspicion grow concern the account, there shall be a review make by twelve, choose by the court and the account be accept and approve by the court. the treasurer shall have his quietus under the company seal at the quarter court in trinuie term. then next ensue. 40. the stand wage of the cashier shall be suspend and his reward, such as that quarter court in easter term shall appoint deputy. 41 for matter of the court in the 40, the stand wage of the cashier shall be suspend and his reward, such as that quarter court in easter term shall appoint deputy. 41 for matter of the court. in the treasurer absence, the deputy shall perform his office and in his presence be assist to he. 42: he shall oversee the secretary for enter the order of court and shall give instruction for the write of letter, as he shall be direct and have care that according they be write. 43: the deputy shall also keep the court of comitty upon all occasion requisite and in they shall have a cast voice. 44: he shall suffer no warrant to be make and sign for issue out of money, but in the open court of comitty after. and in they shall have a cast voice. 44, he shall suffer no warrant to be make and sign for issue out of money, but in the open court of comitty, after due examination of the cause, unto all which warrant, his own hand shall be first set and after it other four hand or more of the comitty and the deputy and comitty shall not intermeddle with disbursment for any other charge than such as arise within the compass of their own year. 45, where a warrant be direct to the treasurer to pay any gross sum to the deputy to be issue out by he and the committee for the use of the company. in that case it shall not be requisite that the deputy hand gross sum to the deputy to be issue out by he and the committee for the use of the company. in that case it shall not be requisite that the deputy hand be to the warrant, so it be to the receipt. 46: general, he shall oversee all inferior officer. that they perform their duty. 47: the name of his majesty counseil for virginia shall be public read in every quarter-court in michaelmas term. they request by the treasurer to attend the service and warn to take their oath. 48: if there be defect in the number or attendance of the, then addition shall be make, and that but only of man of especial worth and quality and such as be likely to give attendance to that service. number or attendance of the, then addition shall be make, and that but only of man of especial worth and quality and such as be likely to give attendance to that service. they be to continue counseilor during life unless they be displace by a great and general court. 49 in regard of the present great number of the, and to preserve unto they that reputation which be fit for their place and employment, none hereafter under the degree of a lord or principal magistrate shall be choose to be of his majesty counseil for virginia, but such as by diligent attendance at the court and service of virginia for one year at least, before have approve their sufficiency and worth to the company l. seven of the: but such as by diligent attendance at the court and service of virginia for one year at least, before have approve their sufficiency and worth to the company. l seven of the be assemble by order, without practice or purpose to exclude the rest shall be count the li the counseil be to assemble upon all important occasion, be request by the treasurer or the deputy, in his absence and in defect of both, be desire by the court and without favour or displeasure, private or sinister respect, to give their faithful advice in all matter tend to the advancement or benefit of the plantation and especial touch the make of law and constitution for the better govern as well of the company here as also of the tend to the advancement or benefit of the plantation and especial touch the make of law and constitution for the better govern as well of the company here as also of the colony plant in virginia, wherein the policy and form of england be to be follow as near as may be. 52. the counseil shall have a especial regard by pious constitution and by other good politic, law and order to hold the people there in the true religion and service of god and in assure allegiance to his majesty and the crown of england, in due respect also to his majesty counseil here and to this company of virginia, and in justice, peace, uniformity and amity among themselves. 53. they shall also, according to the first in due respect also to his majesty counseil here and to this company of virginia, and in justice, peace, uniformity and amity among themselves. 53. they shall also, according to the first institution and profession of this company, advice and devise to the utmost of their power the best mean for the reclaim of the barbarous native and bring they to the true worship of god, civility, of life and virtue liv. all instruction to the governor and counseil and all other principal officer in virginia shall proceed from the and under their hand and seal, which seal shall be in the custody of the treasurer. 55. if any principal officer of the company here, or magistrate, great officer or counseilor in virginia shall, by the fame of, which seal shall be in the custody of the treasurer. 55: if any principal officer of the company here, or magistrate, great officer or counseilor in virginia shall by the fame of his misdesert or particular accusation merit to be call in question of be remove from his place or otherwise reform or censure, he shall be first convent and examine by the before his cause be produce in public court, and in case of his absence, the like course shall be hold for his business auditor. 56: the auditor shall be seven, whereof two at the least of the and three of they of the. 57: the auditor shall have care of the general account to examine the receipt and disbursment according to the order of the. the least of the and three of they of the. 57, the auditor shall have care of the general account to examine the receipt and disbursment according to the order of the company, and in all case of difficulty or of breach of those order they shall acquaint the treasurer and the general court therewith and from thence receive resolution and direction. 58, they shall also cause to be reduce into a several book the whole receipt and disbursement of that year and the same under four of their hand at the least, whereof two to be of the, shall be present by the treasurer at the quarter court in easter term at the give up of his and their office. 59, they shall sign no warrant for. be of the shall be present by the treasurer at the quarter court in easter term at the give up of his and their office. 59: they shall sign no warrant for the issue of money but only for old charge or debt that be to say due before that year of their office and that not otherwise. then, after due examination of the matter, have, in their appoint meeting, unto which warrant shall be first set the hand of one at the least of the and then two other or more of the rest of the auditor. 60: the auditor shall also employ their best industry and care for the recovery of the old debt due to the company, and their receipt shall transmit to the general the auditor. 60, the auditor shall also employ their best industry and care for the recovery of the old debt due to the company and their receipt shall transmit to the general cash. 61 and touch the old account now depend in, that be to say from the begin of the plantation till the 30. day of november 1616.. the auditor shall proceed in the examine and reduce they to order and to the final audit of they, with what expedition they well can and shall from time to time acquaint the treasurer and court with such impediment and difficulty as shall be. incident 62: in digest of the old account, the auditor shall take especial care to cause the secretary or book keeper in a several book. such impediment and difficulty as shall be. incident 62: in digest of the old account the auditor shall take especial care to cause the secretary or book keeper in a several book to set down particular and exact the name of all the aduenturor with their several sum adventure, as also what be pay or yet remain unpaid. as well that right may be do to the aduenturor as also the debt preserve which be due to the company, and this book of the aduenturor shall be extend till the quarter court in easter term 1619.. 63: the auditor shall keep their meeting once at the least every week in the term time or often if need require, and once every month at least in the vacation time. 63: the auditor shall keep their meeting once at the least every week in the term time or often if need require, and once every month at least in the vacation time to oversee the account and dispatch such other business as shall be commit to they. 64: they shall also have the authority of the court to call before they such person as be indebt or accountable to the company. 65: in regard of the greatness of the business for the present, the auditor be allow a officer to attend upon they who shall be salariate at the pleasure of the court. comitty 66: the comitty be to be sixteen and to be yearly choose. there shall be a yearly alteration, make of one four part at salariate at the pleasure of the court, comitty. 66: the comitty be to be sixteen and to be yearly- choose- there shall be a yearly alteration- make of one, four part at the least to the end. many be train up in the business. 67: the comitty office be together with the deputy to perform the order of court for set out, ship and buy provision for virginia, wherein especial care be to be have that neither the husband nor any one man alone be entrust with the make of those provision, but two at the least, to be appoint thereunto by the deputy and comitty in their court, who shall also bring in their bill and account to be examine and approve by the comitty. the like. least to be appoint thereunto by the deputy and comitty in their court, who shall also bring in their bill and account to be examine and approve by the comitty. the like care shall they have at the return of ship from virginia for the good belong to the company to be safe, keep and sell to the best advantage, either in court or otherwise by the court direction, the account of all which shall be transmit to the auditor and the money remain return to the cash. the deputy and comitty shall also have care of the inuoice to be make for the provision send to virginia and of the certificate of the receipt to be thence return, as likewise of the inuoice of the good send. of the inuoice to be make for the provision send to virginia and of the certificate of the receipt to be thence return, as likewise of the inuoice of the good send from virginia, all which shall be register fair in a book. 68: the comitty shall diligent keep their court whensoever occasion of business shall require. they shall be summon by order from the treasurer or deputy and it shall not be count a court of comitty unless the treasurer or deputy with six comitty be present. the secretary of the company shall keep a book also of their proceed. secretary 69: the secretary shall attend the treasurer and deputy in such service of the company as wherein they shall have cause to use he and beside. book also of their proceed. secretary. 69: the secretary shall attend the treasurer and deputy in such service of the company as wherein they shall have cause to use he and beside the general court. he shall of duty attend the court of comitty and keep several book of their proceed. the counseil auditor and comitty extraordinary. he shall then also attend when and so often as he shall be thereunto require. 70: he shall be bind by oath to keep secret all matter of secrecy and not to discover the proceed of the and comitty extraordinary till such time as themselves shall publish the same. 71: the secretary, upon reference of any business from the court to a select comittie, shall give a note to the messenger. extraordinary till such time as themselves shall publish the same. 71: the secretary, upon reference of any business from the court to a select comittie, shall give a note to the messenger contain the business time and place. 72: his office be also to be a remembrancer to the general court and to the court of comitty for the prosecute and perform of matter. former order as also touch motion, former make and refer to special comitty or other far consideration. 73: if at any time a general court shall order any money to be issue out of the cash, the secretary, under his hand, shall deliver a copy thereof to the auditor if it be of old debt and if otherwise then to the deputy and comitty. out of the cash, the secretary, under his hand, shall deliver a copy thereof to the auditor, if it be of old debt, and if otherwise then to the deputy and comitty who, respective, shall, under that order, make their warrant for the payment of that money, unless they find the court, by wrong information, to have be abuse and deceive in that order, whereof, at the next court they shall give. advertisement 74, the secretary office be to keep the book of the company and fair and orderly to enter in they, the particular here-und express, and in such manner as he shall be direct by the treasurer, deputy or auditor, first, a book contain the copy of the king letter patent to the company, also of express and in such manner as he shall be direct by the treasurer, deputy or auditor. first a book contain the copy of the king letter patent to the company, also of all letter, order, direction and other write from his majesty the lord of the and other great officer concern the company or the affair of virginia, together with the answer make unto they. 75. a second book shall be keep of all the law and stand order establish henceforward in the quarter court and beginning with this day as well, such as concern the government of the company and business here as also the government of the colony and affair in virginia. 76 in a three book shall be register all the patent, charter and indenture. government of the company and business here as also the government of the colony and affair in virginia. 76 in a three book shall be register all the patent, charter and indenture of validity heretofore grant or that hereafter shall be grant by the treasurer and company. all instruction from the all public letter write to virginia or from thence receive. 77 a four book shall be of the act of the general court, beginning with a new book at the last quarter-court. 78 a five book shall be of the act of the comitty, begin from the same court, in which book shall be register all inuoyce of the provision send to virginia from the company and the certificate of the receipt to be thence return as from the same court, in which book shall be register all inuoyce of the provision send to virginia from the company and the certificate of the receipt to be thence return as likewise the inuoyce of the good send from virginia with the husband certificate of the receipt or defect. 79 in a six book at the one end shall be register the name of all the aduenturor here by money or otherwise, by service, for which share of land in virginia have be give by the company in their quarter-court, together with the number of share to each person belong. where shall also be enter in a place by itself the lawful transport of share from one to another. here shall also be enter the name of. share to each person belong, where shall also be enter in a place by itself the lawful transport of share from one to another. here shall also be enter the name of his majesty counseil for virginia. at the other end of the same book shall be register the name of all the planter in virginia, as well for the public as upon private plantation, which be to be do distinct for each plantation by itself, and this be to be do upon the certificate hereafter return from the governor and counseil in virginia and from the head and body of particular plantation, according to the tenor and effect of the grant make unto they and other law and order make by the company, all which shall be the head and body of particular plantation according to the tenor and effect of the grant make unto they and other law and order make by the company, all which shall be first publish and allow in a general court and not register in this book but by direction from thence 80. the secretary shall also keep safe in the company chest of evidence the original of all the letter, patent and other write afore mention. all the book also aforesaid, all the treasurer book of their yearly account, the husband book of account of every voyage to virginia and all other account perfect and approve by the auditor. in the same chest shall be keep all charter party as well, cancel as uncancel all bond make to voyage to virginia and all other account perfect and approve by the auditor in the same chest shall be: keep all charter party as well, cancel as uncancel all bond make to the company or for their use and all bond of the company. discharge and cancel and all other write and muniment whatsoever belong to the company and the secretary shall deliver out. none of the company write but by direction from the treasurer, counseil or court take a note of the party hand for the true restore of they and in convenient time he shall make calendar of all the foresay write. 81. the secretary salary shall be twenty pound and of his pain extraordinary the court shall take consideration. book keeper. 82. the book keeper. shall make calendar of all the foresay, write. 81: the secretary salary shall be twenty pound and of his pain, extraordinary, the court shall take consideration. book keeper. 82: the book keeper, so long as he shall seem necessary, shall be whole, direct and order by the treasurer and auditor and shall receive his salary from the quarter court as the auditor shall report of his pain and desert. 83. the book keeper, upon conference with the secretary and the husband and they two in his defect, shall in every quarter court present, open to the treasurer a true note of the debt both owe by the company and aught unto they, together with the ground from whence they have rise, that the court may take order for. treasurer a true note of the debt both owe by the company and aught unto they, together with the ground from whence they have rise, that the court may take order for discharge of the one and recovery of the other husband. 84: the husband be to be order by the treasurer, deputy and comitty and to keep his account in exact and justifiable manner and to bring they from time to time to the deputy and comitty, to be first examine there and approve under their hand and then to be present to the auditor. 85: he shall, at the end of every voyage set out by the company, make a several book of the charge of that voyage to be present by he to the auditor. 85. he shall at the end of every voyage set out by the company make a several book of the charge of that voyage to be present by he to the auditor and by they to the court. 86. the husband shall also be require by the court be assist to other aaventuror upon particular plantation in make their provision and set out their ship. his wage shall be forty pound. bedel 87. the beadle or messenger be to be at command of the treasurer deputy and court. he be to warn all quarter-court and court extraordinary all meeting of the counsel, general comity and select comitty, his wage: forty pound. generality 88. the particular member of the company shall be subject to the general court in matter. extraordinary, all meeting of the counsel, general comity and select comitty. his wage: forty pound, generality. 88: the particular member of the company shall be subject to the general court in matter concern the company or plantation. if any man find himself aggrieve by a lesser or ordinary court, he may appeal to a great and quarter-court where the matter shall be hear and final order. if any man refuse to obey both the one court and other, he shall be disfranchize. 89: every man speak in court shall address his speech to the treasurer or deputy in his absence as represent the court, and all private speech or direct to particular person shall be forbear. 90: no man in one court shall speak above thrice to one. deputy in his absence as represent the court, and all private speech or direct to particular person shall be forbear. 90: no man in one court shall speak above thrice to one matter, save the treasurer and the deputy be to moderate the business. 91: no man with his speech shall interrupt the speech of another before he have finish, except the treasurer or, in his absence, the deputy, with approbation of the court, see cause to put any to silence for impertinency or other unseemly speak. 92: if any man be find by sinister course to practice his own advantage to the damnify of the public, or be find with the company money or good in his hand and refuse to deliver the same, be lawful thereunto. to practice his own advantage to the damnify of the public, or be find with the company money or good in his hand and refuse to deliver the same. be lawful thereunto require, if be summon to the court he refuse to appear or appear, perform not the order of the court, he shall be both disfranchize and far proceed against as a unworthy member and wrongdoer to the company. 93- if any man out of evil mind practice to raise faction or dissension in the company, he shall for the first time be admonish by the court or counseil and at the second disfranchize. 94. whosoever shall attempt by private solicitation to pack the court to any unjust or unlawful end shall, upon complaint, be convent before. the court or counseil and at the second disfranchize 94. whosoever shall attempt by private solicitation to pack the court to any unjust or unlawful end shall, upon complaint, be convent before the and be convict, shall be disfranchize. 95: if any man be find through corrupt reward to make a motion in the court tend to the public hurt or to the private wrong of another, he shall be forthwith disfranchize 96: no man shall presume to intercept letter, write by or to the counseil or company or to spread false rumour upon sinister intent to the wrong of the company or colony. the offender shall be disfranchize. 97: no man shall traduce any member of this company in any other court for any thing do or to the wrong of the company or colony, the offender shall be disfranchize. 97: no man shall traduce any member of this company in any other court for any thing do or speak in this court the offender for the first time shall be admonish, for the second suspend from the court for one year and the three time disfranchize. 98: to avoid the draw of the company into debt, henceforward it be order that no particular man make or propound any new project of charge to the company, but he withal offer good mean how to defray that charge and to uphold his project in such sort as the company never be draw again into any far debt. and the breaker of this order shall be exclude. to defray that charge and to uphold his project in such sort as the company never be draw again into any far debt. and the breaker of this order shall be exclude from the general court and from have voice or bear office for one year. after 99, if any man move for any charge to the company by way of gift, in what sort soever, it shall be first refer to a select comittie and if the charge fall out to be under thirty pound it may be order by the next court. if above, it shall be reserve till the quarter court ensue. c it shall not be lawful for any aduenturor to sell or transport his share to another, otherwise then in open court. and it shall be reserve till the quarter court ensue. c. it shall not be lawful for any aduenturor to sell or transport his share to another, otherwise then in open court and not before it do appear under three of the auditor hand that the party transport his share. stand clear and be not indebt to the company or the party to who they be pass. do pay the say debt. officer in virginia. 101. all principal officer in virginia, namely the governor, lieutenant governor, admiral marshal, chief justice and treasurer, shall be choose here by ballad in a quarter-court. 102. the counseil establish in virginia and all other officer there reserve to the choice of the company here shall be choose in a quarter-court by only erection. ballad in a quarter-court. 102: the counseil establish in virginia and all other officer there. reserve to the choice of the company here shall be choose in a quarter-court by only erection of hand, unless the court desire to have it pass by ballad. 103: the commission to all officer there shall be only for three year in certain and afterward during the company pleasure. only the governor shall upon no occasion hold that place above six year. 104: the company here shall not be charge with the maintenance of the officer there, but they shall be maintain there out of the public land. law 105: no law or stand order shall be make by the company, but in this manner: first after the propose of they in. be maintain there out of the public land. law 105: no law or stand order shall be make by the company, but in this manner: first, after the propose of they in court, they shall be refer to the examination of a select comittie. the comitty shall present their labour to the view of the. the counseil approve they. they shall be bring to the court of preparation on the monday before the quarter-court and there open read and last they shall pass the judgement of the quarter-court. 106: the law and order thus make shall be fair register by the secretary in a parchment book which he shall bring in every court and lay on the table that all man may peruse. they that be so dispose. be fair, register by the secretary in a parchment book which he shall bring in every court and lay on the table that all man may peruse. they that be so dispose. 107 in the quarter-court in hilary term, all law and stand order concern the company here shall be public read in the begin of the court. 108: the abrogate of a law or order shall proceed by the same degree by which the make. 109: all order heretofore make repugnant or swerve from these shall be henceforth void. grant of land: 110: all grant of land and liberty in virginia shall be pass by indenture, the counterpane whereof shall be seal by the grantee and keep in the company chest of evidence, and the secretary shall. of land and liberty in virginia shall be pass by indenture, the counterpane whereof shall be seal by the grantee and keep in the company chest of evidence, and the secretary shall have the engross of all such indenture. 111: no patent or indenture of grant of land in virginia shall be seal but be read and approve in a quarter-court. the same have be also first examine and allow under the hand of a select comittie for that purpose. 112: no liberty shall be grant tend to the exempt of any man from the authority of the governor of virginia or of the supreme counseils or court there establish in any case of treason, rebellion or sedition, or upon any duty to be perform for the necessary. of the governor of virginia or of the supreme counseils or court there, establish in any case of treason, rebellion or sedition, or upon any duty to be perform for the necessary defence of the country or the preservation of the public peace and suppress tumult within the land or for trial in matter of justice, by way of appeal or otherwise by lawful order to be from hence deliver or in case consent unto as well by a general assembly of the colony there as by the company here in a quarter-court. and all grant, former or future swerve from this order shall be so far forth, deem unlawful and surreptitious as be repugnant to the limitation in his majesty letter, patent 113 in all grant of. former or future swerve from this order shall be so far forth, deem unlawful and surreptitious as be repugnant to the limitation in his majesty letter patent. 113 in all grant of land: a five of the royal mine of gould and silver shall be reserve to the company, as a other five be already reserve to the crown. 114 in all patent or indenture of grant of land, the grantee shall covenant to employ their people in great part in staple commodity as corn, wine, silk, silk, grass, hemp, flax, pitch and tar, pot-ash and soap-ash, iron, clapboord and other material and not whole or chief about tobacco and sassaphras. 115, all grant of land in virginia to the old aduenturor, their heir and assign that be. soap-ash, iron, clapboord and other material and not whole or chief about tobacco and sassaphras. 115, all grant of land in virginia to the old aduenturor, their heir, and assign that be to such as have heretofore bring in their money to the treasury for their several share be of twelve pound ten shilling. the share shall be of one hundred acre, the share upon the first division and of as many more upon a second division when the land of their first division shall be sufficient people, and for every person which they shall transport thither before midsummer day, one thousand six hundred twenty five, if he continue there three year or die in the mean time after he be ship, it shall be to the transporter. thither before midsummer day. one thousand six hundred twenty five. if he continue there three year or die in the mean time, after he be ship, it shall be to the transporter of fifty acre the person upon the first division and fifty more upon a second division in like manner, without pay any rent to the company for the one or the other. and in all such grant the name of the aduenturor and the several number of each of their share shall be express. provide always that if the say aduenturor or any of they do not, true and effectual within one year next after the seal of the say grant, pay and discharge all such sum of money wherein by subscription or otherwise, upon notice. they do not true and effectual, within one year next after the seal of the say grant, pay and discharge all such sum of money wherein, by subscription or otherwise, upon notice thereof, give from the auditor, they stand indebt to the company, or if the say aduenturor or any of they have not lawful right, either by purchase from the company or by assignment from some other former aduenturor, within one year after the say grant or by special gift of the company upon merit precede in a full quarter court to so many share as he or they pretend. do not, within one year after the say grant, satisfy and pay to the say treasurer and company for every share so want, after the rate of as he or they pretend, do not, within one year after the say grant, satisfy and pay to the say treasurer and company for every share so want, after the rate of twelve pound ten shilling, the share that then the say grant for, so much as concern the whole part and all the share of the say person. so behind and not satisfy as aforesaid, shall be utter void. 116. all grant of land in virginia to new aduenturor, that be to say to such as hereafter, shall be free of the company, pay the company for their share before midsummer 1625.. shall for their own person and share be of like condition with the former to all intent and purpose, but for such other as shall. company for their share, before midsummer 1625. shall, for their own person and share be of like condition with the former to all intent and purpose, but for such other as shall, at their charge be transport into virginia before the say midsummer 1625.. in manner afore say shall be reserve a yearly rent of twelve penny for every fifty acre acrew to they by virtue of such transportation, to be answer to the say treasurer and company and their successor for ever, after the first seven year of every such grant. 117, all grant to all other person not comprise in the two order last before set down, that be to say to such planter as before midsummer day 1625. shall go into virginia with intent there. all other person not comprise in the two order last before set down, that be to say to such planter as before midsummer day 1625.. shall go into virginia with intent there to inhabit, if they continue there three year or die after they be ship. there shall be grant make of fifty acre for every person upon a first division and as many more upon a second division. the first be people, which grant shall be make respective to such person and their heir at who charge the say person go to inhabit in virginia shall be transport with reservation of twelve penny yearly rent as aforesaid. 118 in all the foresay grant shall be insert a condition or proviso that the grantee shall from time to shall be: transport, with reservation of twelve penny yearly rent as aforesaid. 118 in all the foresay grant shall be insert a condition or proviso that the grantee shall from time to time make a true certificate to the say treasurer, counseil and company, from the chief officer or officer of the place respective, of the number, name, age, sex, trade and condition of every such person. so transport or ship, before the say midsummer day 1625, to be enter by the secretary into a register book for that purpose to be make. 119 for the prevent of fraud and damage to the company in their rent by draw new aduenturor or planter upon purchase of a few old adventure into the immunity of the old aduenturor of. prevent of fraud and damage to the company in their rent by draw new aduenturor or planter upon purchase of a few old adventure into the immunity of the old aduenturor of not pay any rent for the share of fifty acre the person transport by they before the foresay day. it be order that in all indenture of grant of land to old aduenturor be for few than fifty share of the old adventure. the immunity of not pay rend for the share obtain by transport of person as aforesaid shall not be general but restrain to the proportion of four person to every share of the old adventure transport before midsummer day 1625.. 120. all grant of land shall be make with equal favour and grant. restrain to the proportion of four person to every share of the old adventure transport before midsummer day 1625.. 120: all grant of land shall be make with equal favour and grant of like liberty and immunity as near as may be, except the difference of rent above set down to the end that all complaint of partiality or unindifferency may be. prevent trade: 121: it shall be free for all his majesty subject, after the determination of the present joint stock for the magazine, to trade into virginia with the colony pay, the duty set down in his majesty letter. patent: 122: if any joint stock for a magazine be request by the court, refuse or forbear to send corn, cattle or munition for the necessary relief. down in his majesty letter, patent 122: if any joint stock for a magazine be request by the court, refuse or forbear to send corn, cattle or munition for the necessary relief and supply of the colony in virginia, it shall be lawful from that day forward for any person free to trade to and with the colony in virginia carry thither only cattle, corn and munition without pay any duty to the company for seven year. next come any former restraint to the contrary notwithstanding. 123: if either in the present joint stock for the magazine or any other hereafter to be erect the general company out of their common cash, bear part as a aduenturor, they shall ratable partake like profit and undergo like loss with. magazine or any other hereafter to be erect, the general company out of their common cash bear part as a aduenturor. they shall ratable partake like profit and undergo like loss with other aduenturor and any order make to the contrary shall be void. 124: during the time that the common cash bear part as a aduenturor in any joint stock for the magazine, the meeting of the aduenturor shall be in the same place and on the same day that the general court be keep, and either before the beginning or after the end of the court, unless the court upon extraordinary cause appoint some other time. college: 125: the quarter court in every trinity term shall appoint a choice comittie of five or seven to continue. the court, unless the court, upon extraordinary cause, appoint some other time. college: 125: the quarter court in every trinity term shall appoint a choice comittie of five or seven to continue for that year to take into their care and charge the matter of the college to be erect in virginia for the conversion of infidel, which comittie shall take a course for the recover of the money that have be collect for that work and shall likewise consult how the same may be best employ for the beginning, pursue and perfect of the same work, and shall from time to time acquaint the general court with their do from thence to receive approbation and direction. 126: the treasurer shall keep a several cash and account of. work and shall from time to time acquaint the general court with their do from thence to receive approbation and direction. 126: the treasurer shall keep a several cash and account of this money to be present to the auditor and from they to the court, and he shall not issue any money out of this cash. otherwise, then, by warrant under the great part of these comitty hand. 127, the auditor shall forthwith peruse the account of this cash and if any money have be issue out thereof by order of court, otherwise, then for the proper end to which it be intend it shall be restore out of the common cash of the company account. 128: no auditor extraordinary shall presume to intermeddle with the audit. the proper end to which it be intend, it shall be restore out of the common cash of the company, account. 128: no auditor extraordinary shall presume to intermeddle with the audit of any account wherein the body of the company be interest, but be appoint in the face and with the approbation of the court. 129: all accountant whatsoever and auditor extraordinary, if the court so require, shall have a oath minister unto they in the face of the court, the one for true account, the other for true audit. 130: no account shall be hold clear, nor accountant discharge, till the account be approve under the auditor hand, be present to the court and there lie open in court two court day to be view by hold clear nor accountant discharge till the account be approve under the auditor hand, be present to the court and there lie open in court two court day to be view by any that be so. dispose 131: if exception be take to any account whatsoever, the court shall proceed to a review as in like case of the treasurer. if no exception be take in the two court day or upon the review return and the account approve, the treasurer then, or deputy in his absence, shall sign the account in open court whereby the accountant shall be clear discharge. 132: if any officer or other accountant be slow in bring in their account to the auditor, ordinary or extraordinary, or within one month after their account. accountant shall be clear. discharge 132. if any officer or other accountant be slow in bring in their account to the auditor, ordinary or extraordinary, or within one month after their account be perfect, do not pay to the cash. the due sum remain unless the court see cause to give long time. the auditor or treasurer shall impart the same to the court. that order be thence give for redress thereof. these order have be first frame and digest by a select comittie and then present to the and by they approve. be afterward public read in the preparatory court hold on monday, the 7. of june 1619.. and last be again read, distinct and deliberate, in a great and general quarter court hold on wednesday, the read in the preparatory court hold on monday, the 7. of june 1619.. and last be again read, distinct and deliberate, in a great and general quarter court hold on wednesday, the 9 of june 1619.. where, with a full and general consent, by erection of hand, they be ratify and ordain to be the perpetual stand order of the company of virginia. some few addition and small alteration have since be make in the quarter court in easter term and trinity term 1620.