by his majesty counseil for virginia, a brief declaration of the present state of thing in virginia and of a division to be now make of some part of those land in our actual possession as well, to all such as have adventure their money, as also to those that be planter there, when first it please god to move his majesty mind at the humble suit of sundry, his love subject, to yield unto they his gracious privilege for the virginia plantation. it be a thing seem strange and doubtful in the eye of the world that such and so few undertaker shall enterprise a charge of that weight, as rather beseem a whole state and commonwealth to take in hand. but such be the success of world that such and so few undertaker shall enterprise a charge of that weight, as rather beseem a whole state and commonwealth to take in hand. but such be the success of their sundry attempt in the happy discovery of so goodly a land, the description of which, for the excellency of the climate and fertility thereof, have soon obtain to lay such a assure ground of future hope in the sense and understanding of all man. right weigh it that, not long after the^r new letter, patent with more ample privilege, grant by his majesty, be almost fill with many hundred name, both honourable and other of all sort, that give their hand and consent to further and uphold that honourable action upon which encouragement of so be almost fill with many hundred name, both honourable and other, of all sort, that give their hand and consent to further and uphold that honourable action upon which encouragement of so many worthy patron the company very deep engage themselves in, send man and ship cattle and all kind of provision with governor and captain for peace and war, insomuch as no earthly mean seem then want for the speedy reduce of that barbarous nation and savage people to a quiet christian commonwealth. but such be the will of almighty god, as the world well know that this great hope and preparation by many, disaster on sea and land, too long to be here, recite, be in a manner: clean defeat and there only remain a poor know that this great hope and preparation by many disaster on sea and land, too long to be here, recite be, in a manner, clean defeat, and there only remain a poor remnant of those man and woman, cattle and provision that escape the danger and which be now remain there to raise and build up that intend colony. which, when those gentleman, the adventurer here, see, and that the expectance of so great a preparation, bring nothing home but adverse success and bad report, they for the most part withdraw themselves in despair of the enterprise and so give it over, not endure to repair the ruin, nor to supply what themselves have underwrite to discharge the deep engagement whereinto the company be draw by their encouragement. enterprise and so give it over, not endure to repair the ruin, nor to supply what themselves have underwrite to discharge the deep engagement whereinto the company be draw by their encouragement, by who unconstancy and irresolution, the hope of that plantation, together with the life of our people there, have then utter perish. have not, god secret purpose, be more strong, fix to uphold the same by stir up the mind and undaunted spirit of a very small remnant of constant adventurer that, with sir thomas smith, their treasurer and governor from the beginning, in all that time of three year disaster, be never discourage nor withdraw themselves from weekly court and meeting, yield their purse credit and from time to time to make new supply even. all that time of three year disaster be never discourage nor withdraw themselves from weekly court and meeting, yield their purse credit and from time to time to make new supply, even beyond their proportion, to uphold the plantation insomuch as by the favourable assistance of god, who in his own wisdom do oftentimes effect the great end, by weak mean, it be now come to pass that our english colony there subsist in a very good and prosperous condition. they sow and reap their corn in sufficient proportion without want or impeachment. their cow multiply already to some hundred, their swine to many thousand, their goat and poultry in great number. every man have house and ground to his own use and now be able to maintain. already to some hundred, their swine to many thousand, their goat and poultry in great number, every man have house and ground to his own use and now be able to maintain themselves with food. they be also prepare and ready once have the mean to set upon the mineral, whereof there be many sort, as also to plant and sow such several kind of seed and fruit as may best befit the soil and climate, to make the land profitable to themselves and the adventurer. this be a true relation of the present state and hope of thing in virginia. we think good in this short manner to mention it by the way as well, to give those worthy governor in virginia their deserve praise for the hope of thing in virginia. we think good in this short manner, to mention it, by the way as well, to give those worthy governor in virginia their deserve praise for the unspeakable pain and hazard which they have endure there in frame the people and plantation to so happy a form, as also to withdraw the despair thought of such old, retire adventurer that make no other reckon but whatsoever have be spend upon the name of virginia to be lose and cast away. the special purpose of this, our publication, be to another end which, for the further satisfy of all reasonable mind, we will now, in few word, deliver. it be publish to the world about seven year since, and the time be now expire. which, for the further satisfy of all reasonable mind, we will now, in few word, deliver it be publish to the world about seven year since, and the time be now expire, wherein we promise to cause a divident to be make of the land in virginia, as well to every man person that go himself to the plantation, as to every particular man that have adventure, his money and in as much as we be now, by the native liking and consent, in actual possession of a great part of the country, the other part not as yet free from encumber of wood and tree, nor thorough survey whereby to make a divident of the whole, yet of that part which be now fit for plantation, we not as yet free from encumber of wood and tree, nor thorough survey whereby to make a divident of the whole, yet of that part which be now fit for plantation. we intend, god willing, to begin a present division by lot to every man that have already adventure his money or person, for every single share of twelve pound ten shilling fifty acre of land, till further opportunity will afford to divide the rest, which, we doubt not, will bring at least two hundred acre to every single share. this division be intend to be do by a new governor, with commissioner and surveyor to be send from hence to join with other that be there already to give every man his lot in due proportion, according. do by a new governor with commissioner and surveyor, to be send from hence to join with other that be there already to give every man his lot in due proportion, according to such indifferent direction as shall be give they in charge. and forasmuch as this course of send a governor with commissioner and a suruayor with man, ship and sundry, provision for fortification and other occasion, as all man may conceive, can be effect without great charge and expense to the company, it be therefore think requisite and determine that so many adventurer as will partake of this first divident shall present their name with their number of share into a book- remain at sir thomas smith for that purpose, before the 25. of june next. will partake of this first divident shall present their name with their number of share into a book, remain at sir thomas smith for that purpose, before the 25. of june next, and they shall also promise under their hand to contribute to the say charge the sum of twelve pound ten shilling to be pay within one month after subscription. whether his share be more or less, except, any man shall be please to adventure more and for which twelve pound ten shilling or more if he will, he shall also have a further divident of land in proportion as for all other, his money former adventure, but for such as be not able to lay down present money, if they shall desire favour, it be agree. of land in proportion as for all other, his money former adventure, but for such as be not able to lay down present money. if they shall desire, favour it be agree for they that the treasurer may receive the one half of their say adventure in present money after their underwriting to furnish out the ship, and the other half at six month after that, and that no man may hereafter excuse himself by ignorance nor tax the company for conceal their purpose. we declare to all man that this present division be to be only in the land lie along the king river on both side, and all about the new town erect in which so many as shall give in their name, as aforesaid may. only in the land lie along the king river on both side, and all about the new town erect, in which so many as shall give in their name, as aforesaid, may have their part, and those that will not may, at their pleasure, forbear till hereafter to take their lot upon the same term, in place more remote. the name of all such as will partake of this divident shall be give in write to the commissioner before they go. hence, at who return, they shall bring with they a perfect map and description of the, say, land and ground divide that every man may see and know in what condition and where his land lie, that according he may dispose thereof at his pleasure, either by the say land and ground divide, that every man may see and know in what condition and where his land lie, that according he may dispose thereof at his pleasure, either by go himself in person to possess it or by send family to manure it for yearly rent or for half the clear profit, as many other do. and furthermore, every man portion allot to he shall be confirm as state of inheritance to he and his heir for ever, with bound and limit under the company seal, to be hold of his majesty as of his manor of east greenwich, in socage tenure and not in, according to his majesty, gracious letter, patent already grant to the virginia company. in that behalf, and notwithstanding, as we of his manor of east greenwich in socage tenure and not in, according to his majesty gracious letter, patent already grant to the virginia company. in that behalf, and notwithstanding, as we hope, the chief brunt and doubt of that plantation be now overpass, whereof, to their great charge and hazard, the old adventurer have endure the most difficult part and may therefore just appropriate this present divident to themselves. yet, at the motion and desire of many gentleman and other intend to be new adventurer. it be resolve and grant by the company that all new adventurer subscribe and perform the condition before mention, for twelve pound, ten shilling or more shall partake in proportion as free in this present divident and in any other privilege, and new adventurer subscribe and perform the condition before mention, for twelve pound ten shilling or more, shall partake in proportion as free in this present divident and in any other privilege and freedom in virginia, as if with the old adventurer they have be partaker from the beginning. * @ *.