a true and sincere declaration of the purpose and end of the plantation begin in virginia, of the degree which it have receive and mean by which it have be advance, and the resolution and conclusion of his majesty council of that colony for the constant and patient prosecution thereof until, by the mercy of god, it shall retribute a fruitful harvest to the kingdom of heaven and to this commonwealth. it be reserve and only proper to divine wisdom to foresee and ordain both the end and way of every action. in human prudence, it be all can be require to propose religious and noble and feasable end, and it can have no absolute assurance and infallibleness in the way and mean which be contingent and various. be all can be require to propose religious and noble and feasable end, and it can have no absolute assurance and infallibleness in the way and mean which be contingent and various, perhaps equal, reasonable, subject to unpresent circumstance and doubtful event which ever dignify or beetray the counsel from whence they be derive. and the high the quality and nature and more remove from ordinary action such as this be of which we discourse, the more perplex and misty be the path thereunto upon which ground we purpose to deliver round and clear our end and way to the hopeful plantation begin in virginia and to examine the truth and safety of both, to redeem ourselves and so noble a action from the imputation and aspersion with and way to the hopeful plantation, begin in virginia, and to examine the truth and safety of both, to redeem ourselves, and so noble a action, from the imputation and aspersion with which ignorant rumour, virulent envy or impious subtlety daily callumniate our industry and the success of it, wherein we doubt, not not only to satisfy every modest and well-affected heart of this kingdom, but to excite and kindle the affection of the incredulous and lazy, and to cool and assuage the curiosity of the jealous and suspicious, and to temper and convince the malignity of the false and treacherous, the principal and main end out of which be easy derive to any mean understanding. infinite less. and yet great one wear first to preach and baptize. of the false and treacherous, the principal and main end out of which be easy derive to any mean understanding. infinite less, and yet great one wear first to preach and baptize into christian religion and, by propagation of that gospel, to recover out of the arm of the devil a number of poor and miserable soul, wrap up unto death in almost invincible ignorance, to endeavour the fulfil and accomplishment of the number of the elect which shall be gather from out all corner of the earth, and to add our mite to the treasury of heaven that, as we pray for the come of the kingdom of glory, so to express in our action the same desire, if god have please to use so weak instrument. of heaven that, as we pray for the come of the kingdom of glory, so to express in our action the same desire, if god have please, to use so weak instrument to the ripen and consummation thereof. second, to provide and build up for the public honour and safety of our gracious king and his estate, by the favour of our superior. even in that care, some small rampire of our own in this opportune and general summer of peace, by trans-planting the rankness and multitude of increase in our people, of which there be leave, no vent but age and evident danger that the number and infiniteness of they will outgrow the matter whereon to work for their life and sustentation, and shall one infest and leave no vent but age and evident danger that the number and infiniteness of they will outgrow the matter whereon to work for their life and sustentation, and shall one infest and become a burden to another. but by this provision they may be seat as a bulwark of defence, in a place of advantage against a strange enemy who shall in great proportion grow rich in treasure, which be exhaust to a low estate, and may well endure a increase of his people long waste, with a continual war and disperse use and loss of they both, which can choose but threaten we, if we consider and compare the end ambition and practice of our neighbour country with our own, last the appearance and assurance of private they both, which can choose, but threaten we, if we consider and compare the end, ambition and practice of our neighbour country with our own. last the appearance and assurance of private commodity to the particular undertaker by recover and possess to themselves a fruitful land from whence they may furnish and provide this kingdom with all such a a copper, iron, steel, timber for ship yard, mast cordage, soap-ash, necessity and defect under which we labour and be now enforce to buy and receive at the courtesy of other prince, under the burden of great custom and heavy imposition, and at so high rate in traffic, by reason of the great waste of they from whence they be now derive, which threaten almost a impossibilty long to. custom and heavy imposition, and at so high rate in traffic, by reason of the great waste of they, from whence they be now derive, which threaten almost a impossibilty long to recover. they or at least such loss in exchange as both the kingdom and merchant will be weary of the dearness and peril. these be the true and essential end of this plantation and correspond to our first rule of religious, noble and feasible, two of which be not question the three easy and demonstrable in the second limb, when we shall examine the cause of some disaster and distemper in the way unto they these be admit of, for such as we pretend they to be and stand yet firm and safe in themselves, we cause of some disaster and distemper in the way unto they these be admit of, for, such as we pretend they to be and stand yet firm and safe in themselves. we hope easy to justify the first part of our undertake and presume to aver that in this branch there arise to no peaceable man any scruple or doubt to suspect the issue, or to withdraw his affection and assistance, or to callumniat the project or our choice of it. in discussion and examination of the second part, which be the way by which we hope to arrive at these end, and in which no human reason can so provide, but that many circumstance and accident shall have as great a stroke in the event as any. hope to arrive at these end and in which no human reason can so provide, but that many circumstance and accident shall have as great a stroke in the event as any council shall have. we must first brief deliver the course of this plantation, from the infancy thereof, and then let we equal consider whether from so small a root it have not have a bless and unexpected growth. next, we will call before we all the objection and confess ingenuous all the error and discouragement which seem to lie so heavy as almost to press to death this brave and hopeful action and relieve it, we doubt not, from that which with reasonable man can at most be but a pause and no entire desertion. and press to death this brave and hopeful action and relieve it, we doubt not, from that which, with reasonable man, can at most be but a pause and no entire desertion, and restore it to the primary estate: life and reputation in the year 1606.. captain newport, with three ship, discover the bay of chessiopeock in the height of thirty seven degree of northerly latitude and land a hundred person of sundry quality and art in a river, fall into it and leave they under the government of a precedent and council, according to the authority, derive from and limit by his majesty letter patent his return. give we no hope of any extraordinary consequence, yet only upon report of the navigablenesse of the river, pleasure, fertility and derive from and limit by his majesty letter patent his return, give we no hope of any extraordinary consequence, yet only upon report of the navigablenesse of the river, pleasure, fertility and situation of the land. to our project end we, fresh and cheerful, send in the next year a like number and yet also receive nothing new. we have courage and constancy to relieve they the three time with one hundred more, at which return experience of error in the equality of governor and some outrage and folly commit by. they have a little shake, so tender a body, after consultation and advice of all the inconvenience in these three supply, and find they to arise out of two root: the form of government and length and so tender a body, after consultation and advice, of all the inconvenience in these three supply and find they to arise out of two root: the form of government and length and danger of the passage by the southerly course of the indies. to encounter the first, we do resolve and obtain to renew our letter patent and to procure to ourselves such ample and large privilege and power by which we be at liberty to reform and correct those already discover and to prevent, such as in the future, may thteaten we and so to set and furnish out, under the conduct of one able and absolute governor, a large supply of five hundred man with some number of family of wife, child and servant to take. set and furnish out, under the conduct of one able and absolute governor, a large supply of five hundred man with some number of family, of wife, child and servant, to take fast hold and root in that land, and this resolution be with much alacrity and confidence. and to meet the second inconvenience, we do also prepare to set out one small ship for discovery of a short way and to make trial of the fish within our bay and river. hitherto, until the send of this auisall for experience and fleet for settle, the government appear no distaste nor despair, for every supply, in some respect be great than other, and that in preparation, great than they all in every respect and must in reason hold. government appear no distaste nor despair for every supply in some respect be great than other, and that in preparation, great than they all in every respect, and must in reason hold anologie and proportion with our expectation and hope at the dis-inboging of it, so that whatsoev wound or palsy this noble action have get and the sickness under which it seem to faint must needs arise out of the success of these two, which we will now examine apart with all equity and clearness and weigh whither there be any such reason to desist from the prosecution thereof in rectify judgement or to fall so low in our resolution and opinion of it as rumour and ignorance do pretend we do or have cause to do. from the prosecution thereof in rectify judgement, or to fall so low in our resolution and opinion of it, as rumour and ignorance do pretend we do or have cause to do for the discovery. captain argoll receive our commission, under our seal, with instruction to avoid all danger of quarrel with the subject of the king of spain, not to touch upon any of his dominion, actual, possess or right entitle unto, and to shape his course free from the road of pyrotts that hang upon all straits and skirt of land, and to attempt a direct and clear passage by leave the canary to the east and from thence to run in a straight western course or some point near thereunto, and so to make a a direct and clear passage by leave the canary to the east and from thence to run in a straight western course or some point near thereunto, and so to make a experience of the wind and current which have affright all under-taker by the north, by which discovery there will grow to we much security and ease and all occasion of offence remove, and we shall husband and save a moiety of the charge in victual and freight which be expend and lose in the south, earn passage. to these end, he set sail from portsmouth the five day of may and shape his course southsouthwest to the height of thirty degree, leave the canary a hundred league to the east. he find the wind large and portsmouth the five day of may and shape his course southsouthwest to the height of thirty degree, leave the canary a hundred league to the east. he find the wind large and so take his course direct west and do never turn near the south and be in the longitude of the barmudos. he find the wind a little scant upon he yet, so that on the thirteen of july he recover our harbour and in trial find no currant nor any thing else which shall deter we from this way. he make his journey in nine week, and of that be becalm fourteen day, whereupon he have diverse time since his return, public avow and undertake to make this passage within seven week, and that the wind. nine week and of that be becalm fourteen day, whereupon he have diverse time since his return, public avow and undertake to make this passage within seven week, and that the wind in all this course be as variable as at other place and no apparent inconvenience in the way, so that the main end of this advice have succeed almost beyond our hope. the second, for fish prove so plentiful, especial of sturgeon, he that go for that purpose die in the way, of which sort he can have load many ship if he have, have some man of skill to pickle and prepare it for keep, whereof he bring sufficient testimony, both of the flesh and caviary, that no discreet man will question the truth of. have some man of skill to pickle and prepare it for keep, whereof he bring sufficient testimony, both of the flesh and caviary, that no discreet man will question the truth of it. so it appear clear that from hence there can be derive, no cause to suspect or desist from our first end, but so contrary, that in this project both our purpose and way be happy and successful, even to our desire. but from this ship arise a rumour of the necessity and distress our people be find in for want of victual, of which, though, the noise have exceed the truth. yet we do confess a great part of it, but can lay aside the cause and fault from the design, true and home upon. which, though the noise have, exceed the truth. yet we do confess a great part of it, but can lay aside the cause and fault from the design, true and home upon the misgovernment of the commander by dissension and ambition among themselves, and upon the idleness and bestial sloth of the common sort, who be active in nothing but adhere to faction and part even to their own ruin, like man, almost desperate of all supply, so conscious and guilty they be to themselves of their own demerit and laziness. but so soon as captain argoll arrive among they, who presence and example give new assurance of our care and new life to their endeavour by fish, only in few day they be all recover, grow hearty. argoll arrive among they who presence and example give new assurance of our care and new life to their endeavour by fish. only in few day they be all recover, grow hearty, able and ready to undertake every action so that, if it be consider that without industry, no land be sufficient to the inhabitant and that the trade to which they trust betray they to lose the opportunity of seed-time and so to rust and wear out themselves for the natural withdraw from all commerce and traffic, with they cunning, make a war upon they which they feel not, who dare no otherway, appear a enemy and they be at division among themselves and, without warrant from hence, can not resolve to enforce that which may have. which they feel not, who dare no otherway, appear a enemy and they be at division among themselves and, without warrant from hence, can not resolve to enforce that which may have preserve they and which, in such a necessity, be most lawful to do every thing: return from civil propryety to natural and primary community. last, if it be remember that this extremity in which they be now relieve, which be as happy in the presage of god future blessing as in his present providence and mercy, be but a effect of that we do foresee in the first government and for which the form be change and the new in project and therefore can be object as any just exception to the success of this. but foresee in the first government and for which the form be change and the new in project and therefore can be object as any just exception to the success of this, but a consequent consider and digest in the former. it be then, i say, evident that in all the progress of this discovery, or any thing accidental to it, there can be rack nor press out any confession either of error in the end or miscarriadge in the way unto they, to the establishment of a government such as shall meet with all the reveal inconvenience, we give our commission to a able and worthy gentleman, sr thomas gate, who we do and appoint sole and absolute governor of that colony, under diverse limitation and instruction express. inconvenience, we give our commission to a able and worthy gentleman, sr. thomas gate, who we do and appoint sole and absolute governor of that colony, under diverse limitation and instruction express in writing. and with he we send sir george summers, admiral and captain newport, vice-admiral of virginia, and diverse other person of rank and quality, in seven ship and two pinnace, with several commission seal successive to take place one after another. consider the mortality and uncertainty of human life, and these to be divide into several ship. our fleet weigh anchor from falmouth, the eight of june, the wind be fair. they shape a course for the height of the canary within few day. sail the governor, call a council of all the captain master. the eight of june, the wind be fair. they shape a course for the height of the canary. within few day, sail the governor, call a council of all the captain, master and pilot. it be resolve they shall run southerly unto the tropicque and from thence bear away west. which error will take up all the objection of sickness. the sun be then in it be the cause of all the infection and disease of our man. at this consultation be, deliver a instruction under seal to every master, with a provision: what course shall be take if the fleet be separate? which be that, if the wind scant or be contrary, or that any lose sight of the admiral, they shall steer away for the west. be take if the fleet be separate, which be that, if the wind scant or be contrary, or that any lose sight of the admiral, they shall steer away for the west indies and make the baruada, a island to the north of dominico, and there to have their rendezvous and to stay seven day one for another in this height and resolution, short of the west-indies, 150. league, on s james day, a terrible tempest over-took they and last in extremity, 48. hour, which scatter the whole fleet and wherein some of they spend their mast and other be much distress. within three day, four of the fleet meet in consort and hear no news of their admiral and the wind return large for virginia and they mast and other be much distress. within three day, four of the fleet meet in consort and hear no news of their admiral. and the wind return large for virginia and they weary and beat. it be resolve among they to bear right away for our bay and to decline their commission which within few day they make and arrive in the king river on the eleven of august. in this passage, fourteen degree to the southward of virginia, run no current with they which shall hinder or make difficult that, in proposition by the northwest, within six day after come in one and within five another of our fleet, the master of both have fall upon the same council by the opportunity of the wind not to within six day after come in one and within five another of our fleet, the master of both have fall upon the same council, by the opportunity of the wind, not to seek the baruada but to steer away for our harbour, which doubtless the admiral himself do not observe but obey his own direction and be the true or probable cause of his be cast so far into suspicion, where perhaps bind in with wind, perhaps enforce to stay the masting or mend of some what in his ship tear or lose in this tempest. we doubt not. but by the mercy of god he be safe with the pinnace which attend he and shall both or be by this time arrive at our colony, not long. we doubt not. but by the mercy of god, he be safe with the pinnace which attend. he and shall both, or be by this time arrive at our colony not long after these, another of our small pinnace, yet also unaccount for, recover the river alone and now seven of our fleet be in. they land in health, near four hundred person who be put a shore without their governor or any order from he all. the commissioner and principal person be aboard he. no man will acknowledge a superior, nor can from this headless and unbridled multitude be any thing expect but disorder and ryott, nor any council prevent or foresee the success of these way. now, if we compare the disaster of this supply with and unbridled multitude be any thing expect but disorder and ryott, nor any council prevent or foresee the success of these way. now, if we compare the disaster of this supply with the main end, it will appear they have weaken, none of they, but that they still remain safe and feasable for any thing arise in objection out of they. for that these accident and contingency be ever to be expect, and a resolution be to be put on at first arm against the probability of they who can avoid the hand of god or dispute with he. be he fit to undertake any great action. who courage be shake and dissolve with one storm. who know whither he that dispose of our heart to so good. dispute with he. be he fit to undertake any great action. who courage be shake and dissolve with one storm. who know whither he that dispose of our heart to so good beginning. be now, please, to try our constancy and perseverance, and to discern between the end of our desire whither piety or covetousness. carry we swift, for if the first be the principal scope, hence arise nothing to infirm or make that impossible, but as it fall out in business of great consequence sometime, the noble end upon which we be most intense be further remove from the first step, make unto they and must, by lesser and mean bee approach. so plantation of religion be the main and chief purpose, admit many thing of less. further remove from the first step, make unto they and must, by lesser and mean bee approach. so plantation of religion be the main and chief purpose, admit many thing of less and secondary consequence of necessity to be do before it for a error or miscarriage, in one of which to desist or staggar be to betray our principal end, cowardly and faint, and to draw upon ourselves just scorn and reprehension. whither we shall discourse out of reason or example that every action have proportional difficulty to the greatness thereof, such as must necessary be admit from the first conception and such as, even in the passage, dignify both the actor and the work if, with prudence, they foresee all the hazard and with patence and be admit from the first conception and such as even in the passage, dignify both the actor and the work. if, with prudence they foresee all the hazard and with patence and constancy, meet and encounter they, it must either be confess that it be folly from the origen and first step not to have be prepare for such as these, or that it be none now not to quit it for they but the great of all to say, who will have expect this? if we cast our eye upon the spanish conquest of the indies, how abundant their story be of fleet battle and army: lose, eighteen upon the attempt of guiana and more than seventy in both the indies, and yet with how indefatigable industry. indies, how abundant their story be of fleet, battle and army, lose eighteen upon the attempt of guiana and more than seventy in both the indies, and yet with how indefatigable industry and prosperous fate they have pursue and vanquish. all these, their many army maintain in europe, can witness with too lamentable a experience. if we compare the beginning, they be mean than we and subject to all the same and much more uncertainty. if the religion which shall crown the success, it admit no controversy nor comparison among those to who we write, if the commodity, they which we have in assurance and knowledge, be of more necessity and those in hope, equal, rich and abundant. but to come home to our purpose, that which seem, the commodity, they which we have in assurance and knowledge, be of more necessity, and those in hope, equal, rich and abundant. but to come home to our purpose, that which seem to dishearten or shake our first ground in this suppyle arise from two principal source, of which one be cause of the other. first, the tempest, and can any man expect a answer for that? next, the absence of the governor. a effect of the former, for the loss of he be in suspense, and much reason of his safety against some doubt, and the hand of god reach all the earth. now, if these two only be the main cross which staggar the feasablenesse, consider that of three voyadge, before no man miscarry in the. the hand of god reach all the earth. now, if these two only be the main cross which staggar the feasablenesse, consider that of three voyadge before no man miscarry in the way and that all other depend on these as the misgovernment of our man, their idleness, their want and the empty return of out fleet wherein, if we recover and correct the cause, we vanquish all thing consequent unto it. and yet, in appearance, if with these we compare, the advantage which we have get in the shortness and security of the passage in the intelligence of some of our nation, plant by sir water raleigh, yet a live within fifty mile of our fort, who can open the womb and bowel of this country as the intelligence of some of our nation, plant by sir water raleigh, yet a live within fifty mile of our fort. who can open the womb and bowel of this country, as be testify by two of our colony, send out to seek they who, though deny by the slavages, speech with they find cross and letter the character and assure testimony of christian new cut in the bark of tree with every werowan or king, be bury all his wealth, for they believe that he that die rich live in another world happy if we consider the assuredness of the commodity: wine, pitch, soap-ash, timber for all use, iron, steele, copper, die, cordage, silkegrasse, pearl, which though discoulered and soften by fire for want of skill in. consider the assuredness of the commodity: wine, pitch, soap-ash, timber for all use, iron, steele, copper, die, cordage, silkegrasse, pearl which, though discoulered and soften by fire for want of skill in the natural to pierce, they be find in great abundance in the house of their sepulture. if we consider, i say and compare these certainty and truth as less end to strengthen and produce our first and principal with those casual and accidental misadventure and error which have befall we before every equal and resolve heart, they will vanish and become smoke and air and not only keep upright but raise our spirit and affection and reconcile our reason to our desire. if any object the difficulty of keep that we shall possess if this discourse and not only keep upright but raise our spirit and affection and reconcile our reason to our desire, if any object the difficulty of keep that we shall possess. if this discourse can admit a disputation of it, it shall easy appear that our confidence against any enemy be build upon solid and substantial reason. and to give some taste thereof, our enemy must be either the native or stranger. against the first, the war will be as easy as the argument for the second. a few man may dispute the possession of any place wherein they be fortify. where the enemy be so much a stranger as that, he must discover and fight at once upon all disadvantage of straits, ford and wood, and where he can. they be fortify, where the enemy be so much a stranger as that he must discover and fight at once upon all disadvantage of straits, ford and wood, and where he can never march with horse nor with ordinance without they, nor can abide to stay many month when all his relief must be have from his ship which can long supply a number competent to besiege. neither be it possible to block we up by plant. between we and the sea, the river be so broad and so many outlet from they into the bay, beside the protection and privilege of subject to so potent a king who any wise estate will be wary to affront or provoke, we doubt not, but by examination of what be beside the protection and privilege of subject to so potent a king who any wise estate will be wary to affront or provoke. we doubt not, but by examination of what be say, our first end be yet safe, and the way unto they in no sort so difficult, as shall more affright and deter we now, then, at the first meditation of they. but if these be not sufficient to satisfy and encourage every honest affection, we will not so desist but urge the necessity of a present supply to redeem the defect and misadventure of the last that see all the danger and sickness have spring from want of effect, our purpose of send a able governor, we have conclude and resolve to set forth the of the last that see all the danger and sickness have spring from, want of effect, our purpose of send a able governor. we have conclude and resolve to set forth the right honour, the lord la war, by the last of january, and to give he all the liberty and privilege which we have power to derive upon he and to furnish he with all necessary fit for his quality person and the business which he shall undergo. and so, by god grace, to persist until we have make perfect our good and happy beginning, if these shall not yet suffice to resolution that a baron and peer of this kingdom who honour nor fortune need not any desperate medicine, one of so approve, courage, temper and if these shall not yet suffice to resolution that a baron and peer of this kingdom who honour nor fortune need not any desperate medicine, one of so approve, courage, temper and experience shall expose himself for the common-good to all these hazard and pain which we fear and safe talk off. as a door turn upon his hinge, so do the sluggard upon his bed that sit idle at home and bear a great part upon his own charge and revive and quicken the whole by his example, constancy and resolution. if you have no implicit faith nor trust in we prou 26. 14. that govern this business, to who there must be some advantage grant in our practice and intelligence, especial in this above ordinary person. implicit faith nor trust in we prou 26.. 14. that govern this business, to who there must be some advantage? grant in our practice and intelligence, especial in this above ordinary person, that we have no will nor intent to betray our poor countryman, nor to burden our own conscience, nor to draw so just scorn and reproach upon our reputation. if our knowledge and constant persuasion of the fruitfulness and wholesomeness of this land and of the recompense it shall in time bring to this kingdom and to every particular member of this plantation, be of no authority, if this seem not to you some argument that every man return be desirous to go back to that which they account and call their own home and do. of no authority. if this seem not to you some argument that every man return, be desirous to go back to that which they account and call their own home and do upon their life, justify which else they wilful betray, that if the government be settle and a supply of victual for one year send, so that they may have a seed and harvest before they, they will never need nor expect to charge we with more expense for any thing of necessity to man life, but they will have leisure and power to retribute with infinite advantage all the cost bestow upon they. if all these be yet too weak to confirm the doubtful or awake the drowsy, then let we come near and arise from with infinite advantage, all the cost bestow upon they. if all these be yet too weak to confirm the doubtful or awake the drowsy, then let we come near and arise from their reason and affection to their soul and conscience. remember that what be at first but of conveniency and for honour, be now become a case of necessity and piety. let they consider that they have promise to adventure and not perform it, that they have encourage and expose many of honourable birth and which be of more consequence. 600.. of our brother, by our common mother, the church, christian of one faith and one baptism to a miserable and un-evitable death. let not any man flatter himself that. it concern not he, for he that our common mother, the church, christian of one faith and one baptism to a miserable and un-evitable death. let not any man flatter himself that it concern not he, for he that forsake another who he may safe relieve, be as guilty of his death as he that can swim and forsake himself by refuse, be of his own. let every man look inward and disperse that cloud of avarice which darken his spiritual sight, and he will find there that when he shall appear before the tribunal of heaven, it shall be question he what he have do. have he feed and clothe the hungry and naked? it shall be require what he have do for the advancement of that gospel which have save he, and for he have do, have he feed and clothe the hungry and naked. it shall be require what he have do for the advancement of that gospel which have save he, and for the relief of his maker image, who he be bind to save. o, let there be a virtuous emulation between we and the church of rome, in her own glory and treasury of good work, and let we turn all our contention upon the common enemy of the name of christ. how far have she send out her apostle, and through how glorious danger. how be it become a mark of honour to her faith to have convert nation and a obloquy cast upon we that we have the better vine shall have worse dresser and how be it become a mark of honour to her faith to have convert nation and a obloquy cast upon we that we have the better vine shall have worse dresser and husbander of it. if piety, honour, easiness, profit nor conscience can provoke and excite. for to all these we have apply our discourse, then let we turn from heart of stone and iron and pray unto that merciful and tender god who be both easy and glad to be. entreat that it will please he to bless and water these feeble beginning and that, as he be wonderful in all his work, so to nourish this grain of seed that it may spread till all people of the earth. admire the greatness and seek the shade. as he be wonderful in all his work, so to nourish this grain of seed that it may spread till all people of the earth, admire the greatness and seek the shade and fruit thereof that, by so faint and weak endeavour, his great counsel may be bring forth and his secret purpose to light to our endless comfort and the infinite glory of his sacred name. amen, to render a more particular satisfaction and account of our care in provide to attend the right honourable the lord la war, in this conclude and present supply, man of most use and necessity to the foundation of a commonwealth, and to avoid both the scandal and peril of accept idle and wicked person such as shame or fear compel. man of most use and necessity to the foundation of a commonwealth and to avoid both the scandal and peril of accept idle and wicked person such as shame or fear compel into this action and such as be the weed and rankness of this land who be the surfeit of a able, healthy and compose body must needs be the poison of one so tender, feeble and yet unformed, and to divulge and declare to all man what kind of person, as well for their religion and conversation, as faculty, art and trade we purpose to accept of. we have think it convenient to pronounce that, for the first provision, we will receive no man that can bring or render some good testimony of his religion to. to accept of. we have think it convenient to pronounce that, for the first provision, we will receive no man that can bring or render some good testimony of his religion to god and civil manner and behaviour to his neighbour with who he have live. and for the second, we have set down in a table annex, the proportion and number. we will entertain in every necessary art, upon proof and assurance that every man shall be able to perform that which he do undertake whereby, such as be requisite to we may have knowledge and preparation to offer themselves, and we shall be ready to give honest entertainment and content and to recompense with extraordinary reward every sit and industrious person respective to his pain and and preparation to offer themselves, and we shall be ready to give honest entertainment and content and to recompense with extraordinary reward every sit and industrious person respective to his pain and quality. the table of such as be require to this plantation four honest and learned: minister, 2. surgeon, 2. druggist, 10. iron man for the furnace and hammer, 2. armourer, 2. gun-founder, 6. blacksmith, 10. sawyer, 6. carpenter, 6. shipwrights, 6. gardener, 4. turner, 4. brick-maker, 2. tilemaker, 10. fisherman, 6. fowler, 4. sturgeon dresser and preserver of the caneary, 2. salt-maker, 6. cooper, 2. collermaker for draught, 2. plow-wrights, 4. rope-maker, 6. vine dresser, 2. press maker, 2. joiner, 2. sope-ashe maker, 4. pitch boiler, 2. mineral man, 2. planter of sugar cane, 2. silk. 2. collermaker for draught, 2. plow-wrights, 4. rope-maker, 6. vine dresser, 2. press maker, 2. joiner, 2. sope-ashe maker, 4. pitch boiler, 2. mineral man, 2. planter of sugar cane, 2. silk dresser, 2. pearl drillers, 2. baker, 2. brewer, 2. collier.