a declaration of the state of the colony and affair in virginia, with a relation of the barbarous massacre in the time of peace and league treacherous execute upon the english by the native infidel 22 march last. although there have be many and sundry treatise write of virginia and the commodity thereof, whereat malicious man may take occasion to cavil, but godly man will find good cause to praise the almighty who wonder, be see in the deep through the which we have sail to the discovery of this good land. yet i have not think it amiss, since i be, to express some late accident beforehand to sum up the benefit of that country, partly because they daily increase by new discovery make to the glory. think it amiss, since i be, to express some late accident beforehand to sum up the benefit of that country, partly because they daily increase by new discovery, make to the glory of our most gracious king and ever renown to all posterity for the sound and support of this most royal and bless work of plantation to the great honour, wealth and happiness of his most famous kingdom. and partly because such be the customary daintiness of reader that they seldom take the pain to gather together all that have be write of any subject, that so they may take the whole business into their consideration, which be the only way to make a true judgement, but usual content themselves with one or two book set out. that, so they may take the whole business into their consideration, which be the only way to make a true judgement, but usual content themselves with one or two book set out occasional, and with reference to some former treatise, whereby they gain but a lame and parcell-knowledge and so oftentimes both prejudice themselves and the truth. the country call virginia, so name by the late virgin-queene elizabeth of bless memory be the rightful inheritance of his majesty as be first discover, at the cost and charge of that most prudent prince of famous memory, king henry the seven, his majesty great grandfather, the patent whereof still extant to be see, be grant to john cabot and diverse other of his subject who go thither with six sail. henry the seven, his majesty great grandfather, the patent whereof still extant to be see, be grant to john cabot and diverse other of his subject who go thither with six sail of ship and discover as far as from cape florida to newfoundland, all along the coast, and take possession thereof to the king use. about that time when ferdinando and isabel discover the western indies, by which title of first discovery the king of portugal and spain hold and enjoy their ample and rich kingdom in their indies, east and west, a coast where king edward the six after plant his fish to the newfoundland by public act in parliament and of which philip amadas and arthur barlow take again possession to the use of the king edward the six after plant his fish to the newfoundland by public act in parliament, and of which philip amadas and arthur barlow take again possession to the use of the late queen elizabeth, and after they sir richard greenfield, sir ralph lane and sir walter raleigh, at what time several colony be there place. and since his majesty most happy come to the crown, be a absolute king of three of the most populous kingdom, which charles the five be wont to term the shop or forge of man. find his subject to multiply by the bless peace they enjoy under his happy government. do, out of his high wisdom and princely care of the good of his subject, grant a most gracious patent to diverse. by the bless peace they enjoy under his happy government. do, out of his high wisdom and princely care of the good of his subject, grant a most gracious patent to diverse honourable person and other of his love subject, authorise they thereby to go on in the plantation of this his lawful and rightful kingdom of virginia, which by the blessing of almighty god be grow to good perfection. this spacious and fruitful country of virginia be, as be general know to all, natural rich and exceed well water, very temperate and healthful to the inhabitant, abound with as many natural blessing and replenish with as goodly wood and those full of deer and sundry other beast for man sustenance and the sea and river, thereof many. inhabitant abound with as many natural blessing and replenish with as goodly wood and those full of deer and sundry other beast for man sustenance, and the sea and river thereof many therein be exceed fair and navigable as full of excellent fish of diverse sort, and both water and land yield as great variety of foul as any country in the world be know to afford. the situation whereof be near the midst of the world, between the extremity of heat and cold, seem to partake of the benefit of both and thereby become capable of the rich commodity of most part of the earth. from whence arise a assurance that, by the assistance and skill of industry, those rich fur, cordage and other commodity which, with of the rich commodity of most part of the earth, from whence arise a assurance that by the assistance and skill of industry, those rich fur, cordage and other commodity which, with difficulty and danger be now draw from russia, will be have in virginia and the part adjoin with ease and safety. and the mast, plank and board, the pitch and tar, the pot-ash and soap-ash, the hemp and flax which now be fetch from norway, denmark, poland and germany will there be have in abundance. the iron which have so waste our english wood that itself in short time must decay together with they be to be have in virginia where waste of wood be a ease and benefit to the planter for all good condition. that itself, in short time, must decay together, with they be to be have in virginia, where waste of wood be a ease and benefit to the planter for all good condition answerable to the best iron of the world, whereof proof have be make the wine, fruit and salt of france and spain, the silk of persia and italy will be have, also in virginia, in no kind of worth inferior, where be whole wood of many mile together, of mulberry tree of the best kind, the proper food of the silkworm and a multitude of other natural commodity, of wood root and berry for excellent dye, of plant and other drug for physical service, of sweet wood oil and gum for pleasure and other use of. of other natural commodity, of wood root and berry for excellent dye of plant and other drug for physical service, of sweet wood oil and gum for pleasure and other use. of cotton-wool, silkegrasse and sugar cane will there be have in abundance with many other kind, and for corn, cattle and fish which be the substance of the food of man in no place better. the grain also of our own country, prosper there very well, but their maize, be the natural grain of virginia, do far exceed in pleasantness, strength, fertility and generality of use the wheat of england. the cattle which be transport thither be now grow near to fifteen hundred, do become much big of body than the breed from whence they come, the use the wheat of england. the cattle which be transport thither be now grow near to fifteen hundred, do become much big of body than the breed from whence they come, the horse also, through the benefit of the climate and nature of their feed, more beautiful and full of courage and such be the extraordinary fertility of that soil that the do of their deer a kind differ from we in england, yet no way inferior yield: two fawn at a fall or birth, and sometime three. and the fish along our coast be in plenty, of fish equal to those of newfoundland and in greatness and goodness, much superior, and twice in the year to be take in their go and return, which be not elsewhere. plenty of fish equal to those of newfoundland and, in greatness and goodness, much superior, and twice in the year to be take in their go and return which be not elsewhere find in such plenty and variety. so as there go this year from diverse part of this kingdom, near thirty sail thither, who be well return and rich fish. to conclude, but out of certain advertisement so often reiterate from thence, as well as by the constant relation of many hundred now yearly come and go, they avow that it be a country which nothing but ignorance can think ill of and which no man but of a corrupt mind and ill purpose can defame, which, as it paralel the most opulent and rich kingdom of nothing but ignorance can think ill of and which no man but of a corrupt mind and ill purpose can defame. which, as it paralel the most opulent and rich kingdom of the world by lie in the same latitude with they. so do it promise rich mine of the best and most desire metal with they, when the colony shall be of sufficient strength to open and defend they, and for the passage thither and trade there, it be free from all restraint by foreign prince, whereunto most of our other accustom trade be subject. there be neither danger in the way through the encounter of the enemy or pirate, nor meeting with rock or shoal, by reason of the fair and safe passage through the main. there be neither danger in the way through the encounter of the enemy or pirate, nor meeting with rock or shoal, by reason of the fair and safe passage through the main ocean, nor tediousness of journey which, by reason of better knowledge, then in former year, the fruit of time and observation be often make, and in few week, then former it be wont to be, in month which, with the blessing of god, produce in the last summer this effect that in the fleet of nine sail of ship transport, above seven hundred passenger out of england and ireland for the plantation, but one person in who room, another at sea be bear miscarry by the way, and for they, after arrival, there be convenient lodging. out of england and ireland for the plantation but one person in who room, another at sea be bear miscarry by the way, and for they after arrival there be convenient lodging now in building and careful attendance in guests-house. provide till those that arrive can provide for themselves. 3570 people send to virginia in the three last year, 42 sail of ship, 1200 mariner employ in the three last year of 1619. 1620. and 1621. there have be provide and send for virginia forty two sail of ship, three thousand five hundred and seventy man and woman for plantation with requisite provision beside store of cattle, and in those ship have be above twelve hundred mariner employ, 1500 to the summer land, 9 ship and 240 mariner. and woman for plantation with requisite provision beside store of cattle, and in those ship have be above twelve hundred mariner employ, 1500 to the summer land, 9 ship and 240 mariner employ there. have also be send in those year nine ship to the summer land with about nine hundred people to inhabit there, in which ship two hundred and forty mariner be employ, in which space have be grant fifty patent to particular person for plantation in virginia who with their associate have undertake therein to transport great multitude of people and cattle thither, which for the most part be since perform and the residue now in prepare, as by the several declaration of each year in their particular manifest and approve in our general and which for the most part be since perform and the residue now in prepare, as by the several declaration of each year in their particular manifest and approve in our general and public quarter-court. and for the full satisfaction of all desirous to understand the particularity of such proceed, have be by print, commend to the understanding of all. the letter write from the governor and treasurer in virginia in the begin of march last, which come hither in april, give assurance of overcome and bring to perfection in this year the iron-work, glasse-work, salt-work, the plentiful sow of all sort of english grain with the plough, have now clear, good quantity of ground, set of store of indian corn or maize, sufficient for ourselves and for truck. plentiful sow of all sort of english grain with the plough, have now clear, good quantity of ground, set of store of indian corn or maize, sufficient for ourselves and for truck, with the native restraint of the quantity of tobacco and amendment of it in the quality, learn by time and experience, the plant of vine and mulberry-tree near to their house, figg-tree, pomegranate, potato and cotton-wool seed, pocoon, indigo, sugarcane, mad woad, hemp, flax and silkegrasse, and for the erect of a fair inn in james-citie for the better entertainment of new comer whereto and to other public work every old planter there offer, free and liberal, to contribute. i write the word of their letter and how, in a late discovery, make a few month. and to other public work, every old planter there offer, free and liberal, to contribute. i write the word of their letter and how, in a late discovery make a few month before by some of they, to the southward, they have pass through great forest of pine fifteen or sixteen mile broad and above threescore mile long, very fit for mast for ship and for pitch and tar and of other sort of wood, fit for pot-ash and soap-ash, and come unto a most fruitful country, bless with abundance of corn reap twice a year, within the limit of virginia, where also they understand of a copper-myne, a essay whereof be send and upon trial here, find to be very rich and meet with a great deal. within the limit of virginia, where also they understand of a copper-myne, a essay whereof be send and upon trial here, find to be very rich and meet with a great deal of silkgrasse there grow, which monthly may be cut, of which kind and cotton-wool all the cambaya and bengala stuff be make in the east-indies and of which kind of silkegrasse be heretofore make a piece of give to queen elizabeth, mr hariot in his book of virginia 1585.. and how that in december last they have plant and cultivate in virginia vine of all sort as well, those natural grow as those other plant. send they from these part of europe, orange and lemon-tree, figge-tree, sugarcane, cotton-wool, cassavi rootes that make very good bread, plantanes. all sort as well. those natural grow as those other plant. send they from these part of europe orange and lemon-tree, figge-tree, sugarcane, cotton-wool, cassavi rootes that make very good bread, plantanes, potato and sundry other indian fruit and plant not former see in virginia, which at the time of their say letter begin to prosper very well, as also their indico-seede for the true cure whereof there be late cause, a treatise to be write. furthermore, they write that in a voyage make by lieutenant marmaduke, parkinson and other english gentleman up the river of patomack they see a china box at one of the king house where they be be demand where he have it make. answer that it be send he from a king that. patomack. they see a china box at one of the king house where they be be, demand where he have it, make answer that it be send he from a king that dwell in the west, over the great hill, some ten day journey, who country be near a great sea. he have that box from a people, as he say, that come thither in ship that wear clothes, crooked sword and somewhat like our man, dwell in house and be call acanack-china, and he offer our people that he will send his brother along with they to that king, which offer the governor purpose not to refuse and the rather, by reason of the continual, constant relation of all those savage in virginia of a sea and they to that king, which offer the governor purpose not to refuse, and the rather, by reason of the continual, constant relation of all those savage in virginia of a sea and the way to it west. they affirm that the head of all those seven goodly river, the least whereof be great than the river of thames and navigable above a hundred and fifty mile and not above six or eight mile one from another, which fall all into one great bay, have their rise out of a ridge of hill that run all along south and north, whereby they doubt not but to find a safe, easy and good passage to the south sea, part by water and part by land, esteem it not above a south and north, whereby they doubt not, but to find a safe, easy and good passage to the south sea, part by water and part by land, esteem it not above a hundred and fifty mile from the head of the fall where we be now plant, the discovery whereof will bring forth a most rich trade to cathay, china, japan and those other of the east indies, to the inestimable benefit of this kingdom. but for the further proof hereof and of the northwest passage, thither by sea, i refer the reader to the treaty annex at the end of this book, write by that learned and famous mathematician, mr henry briggs, which i have happy attain unto have. publish for the common good, moreover, the letter. annex at the end of this book, write by that learned and famous mathematician, mr henry briggs, which i have happy attain unto have publish for the common good. moreover, the letter of mr john berkley, sometime of beverstone castle in the county of gloucester, a gentleman of a honourable family, likewise certify that a more fit place for ironworke, whereof he be make master and overseer, then in virginia, both for wood, water mine and stone, be not to be find, and that by whitsuntide then next now pass, the company may rely upon good quantity of iron make by he which also by letter from mr george sandis, the three of march last, be confirm with this far description of the place, call the fall creek. quantity of iron make by he which also by letter from mr george sandis the three of march last be, confirm with this far description of the place. call the fall creek to be so fit for that purpose, as if nature have apply herself to the wish and direction of the workman, where also be great stone hardly see elsewhere in virginia lie on the place, as though they have be bring thither to advance the erection of those work, the letter of the french vignerous or vineman, procure out of france and send over into virginia. do likewise ascertain that no country in the world be more proper for vine, silk, rice, olive and other fruit than virginia be, and that it far excel their own. into virginia, do likewise ascertain that no country in the world be more proper for vine, silk, rice, olive and other fruit than virginia be, and that it far excel their own country of languedocke, the vine of diverse sort be in abundance, natural over all the country, and they have plant some cut of vine at michaelmas last, in their letter, affirm that these bare grape, already this spring, to their great wonder as be- a thing they suppose not hear of in any other country- a taste of wine make of the wild grape they last year send with hope to send a good quantity this next vintage, and that the mulberry-tree where they abide be in wonderful abundance and much excel both in goodness and they last year send with hope to send a good quantity this next vintage and that the mulberry-tree where they abide be in wonderful abundance and much excel both in goodness and greatness, those of their own country of languedocke, and that those silkworm they have prosper, exceed well and some silk they hope to send this year. there want nothing to set up that rich commodity but store of hand wherewith england do abound, of the fruit of which mulberry-tree as of a plum there plentiful grow, they will make wholesome drink for the colony and people there. the letter of mr porey verify also from the governor and council advertise of a late discovery by he and other make into the great bay northward reserve, the. and people there. the letter of mr porey verify also from the governor and council advertise of a late discovery by he and other. make into the great bay, northward, reserve the sound of the bottom thereof for a second voyage, where he leave, settle very happy, near a hundred english with hope of a good trade for fur there to be have from thence be bring by lieutenant perkinson in his voyage some of that kind of earth which be call terra lemnia, there to be have in great abundance, as good as that of turkey. by this, though it be, but in part, the reader may understand the great riches and blessing of this excellent country which even ordinary diligence and care must needs strange improve. turkey. by this though it be, but in part, the reader may understand the great riches and blessing of this excellent country, which even ordinary diligence and care must needs strange improve, but that all man may see the unpartial ingenuity of this discourse. we free confess that the country be not so good as the native. be bad who, barbarous savageness, need more cultivation than the ground itself. be more overspread with incivility and treachery, then that with brier for the land be till and use well by, we deceive not our expectation but rather exceed it far. be so thankful as to return a hundred for one. but the savage, though. never nation use so kind upon so small desert, have in stead of that harvest. exceed it far, be so thankful as to return a hundred for one. but the savage, though never nation use so kind upon so small desert, have, in stead of that harvest which our pain merit, return nothing but brier and thorn, prick even to death many of their benefactor. yet doubt we not, but that, as all wickedness be crafty to undo itself, so these also, through our side, have more wound themselves. then we, god almighty, make way for severity there where a fair gentleness will not take place, the occasion whereof thus i relate. from thence, the last may, there come letter from sir francis wyatt, governor in virginia, which do advertise that when, in november last, he arrive in virginia and enter upon his relate from thence. the last may there come letter from sir francis wyatt, governor in virginia, which do advertise that when in november last he arrive in virginia and enter upon his government he find the country settle in a peace as all man there think sure and unviolable. not only because it be solemn, ratify and swear and at the request of the native king stamp in brass and fix to one of his oak of note, but as be advantageous to both part, to the savage as the weak, under which they be safe, shelter and defend, to we as be the easy way than think to pursue and advance our project of building plant and effect their conversion by peaceable and fair mean. and such shelter and defend to we as be the easy way than think to pursue and advance our project of building plant and effect their conversion by peaceable and fair mean. and such be the conceit of firm peace and amity as that there be seldom or never a sword wear and a piece, seldom except for a deer or fowl, by which assurance of security, the plantation of particular adventurer and planter, be place, scatter and straggle as a choice vein of rich ground, invite they, and the further from neighbour hold, the better. the house general, set open to the savage, who be always friendly, entertain at the table of the english and common lodge in their bedchamber the old planter, as they think. now come to. general, set open to the savage who be always friendly, entertain at the table of the english and common, lodge in their bedchamber the old planter, as they think, now come to reap the benefit of their long travel, place with wonderful content upon their private dividend and the plant of particular hundred and colonies pursue with a hopeful alacrity. all our project, say he, in a fair way, and their familiarity with the native seem to open a fair gate for their conversion to christianity. the country be in this estate, a occasion be, minister, of send to opachankano, the king of these savage, about the middle of march last. what time the messenger return back with these word from he that he hold the peace. conclude. of send to opachankano, the king of these savage, about the middle of march last. what time the messenger return back with these word from he that he hold the peace, conclude so firm as the sky shall soon fall than it dissolve. yea, such be the treacherous dissimulation of that people who then have contrive our destruction, that even two day before the massacre, some of our man be guide through the wood by they in safety, and one browne who then, to learn the language, live among the warrascoyack, a province of that king, be in friendly manner send back by they to captain hamor, his master and many the like passage rather increase our former confidence than any wise in the world, minister the least. be in friendly manner, send back by they to captain hamor, his master and many the like passage rather increase our former confidence than any wise in the world, minister, the least suspicion of the breach of the peace or of what instant ensue. yea, they borrow our own boat to convey themselves across the river, on the bank of both side whereof all our plantation be to consult of the devilish murder that ensue and of our utter extirpation, which god of his mercy, by the mean of some of themselves convert to christianity. prevent and as well on the friday morning, the fatal day, the 22 of march, as also in the evening as in other day, before they come unarm into our house without bow. and as well on the friday morning, the fatal day, the 22 of march, as also in the evening as in other day before. they come unarm into our house without bow or arrow or other weapon, with dear turkey fish, fur and other provision to sell and truck with we for glass, bead and other trifle, yea in some place, sit down at breakfast with our people at their table who, immediate, with their own tool and weapon, either lay down or stand in their house. they base and barbarous murder not spare either age or sex, man, woman or child, so sudden in their cruel execution that few or none discern the weapon or blow that bring they to destruction, in which manner they also slay. or sex- man, woman or child- so sudden in their cruel execution that few or none discern the weapon or blow that bring they to destruction. in which manner they also slay many of our people, then, at their several work and husbandry in the field and without their house: some in plant corn and tobacco, some in garden, some in make brick, building saw and other kind of husbandry. they well know in what place and quarter each of our man be in regard of their daily familiarity, and resort to we for trade and other negotiation, which the more willing be by we continue and cherish for the desire we have of effect, that great masterpiece of work, their conversion, and by this mean that fatal other negotiation, which the more willing be by. we continue and cherish for the desire we have of effect. that great masterpiece of work, their conversion, and by this mean that fatal friday morning there, fall under the bloody and barbarous hand of that perfidious and inhuman people, contrary to all law of god and man, of nature and nation, three hundred forty seven man, woman and child, most by their own weapon. and not be content with take away life alone, they fall after again upon the dead, make as well as they can a fresh murder deface, drag and mangle the dead carcase into many piece and carry some part away in derision with base and brutish triumph. neither yet do these beast spare those among fresh murder, deface, drag and mangle the dead carcase into many piece and carry some part away in derision with base and brutish triumph. neither yet do these beast spare those among the rest, well know unto they, from who they have daily receive many benefit and favour. but spiteful also, massacre they without remorse or pity. be in this more fell than lion and dragon which, as history record, have be so far from hurt as they have both acknowledge and grateful requite their benefactor. such be the force of good deed though do to cruel beast as to make they put off the very nature of beast and to put on humanity upon they. but these miscreant, contrariwise, in this kind put not off only all. cruel beast as to make. they put off the very nature of beast and to put on humanity upon they. but these miscreant, contrariwise, in this kind put not off only all humanity but put on a worse and more than unnatural brutishness. one instance of it among too many shall serve for all that worthy religious gentleman, master george thorpe, esquire deputy of the college land sometime, one of his majesty pensioner, and in one of the principal place of command in virginia, do so true and earnest, affect their conversion and be so tender over they that whosoever under his authority have give they but the least displeasure or discontent. he punish they severe. he think nothing too dear for they and as be desirous to. over they, that whosoever under his authority have give they but the least displeasure or discontent. he punish they severe. he think nothing too dear for they and as be desirous to bind they unto he by his many courtesy. he never deny they any thing that they ask. he insomuch that when these savage complain unto he of the fierceness of our mastiff, most implacable and terrible unto they, know they, by instinct, it seem to be but treacherous and false-hearted friend to we better than ourselves. he to gratify they in all thing for the win of they, by degree cause some of they to be kill in their presence, to the great displeasure of the owner, and will have have all the rest, have he. the win of they by degree, cause some of they to be kill in their presence, to the great displeasure of the owner, and will have have all the rest. have he not be hinder to make they the gentle and the mild to they. he be not only too kind and beneficial to the common sort but also to their king, to who he oft resort and give many present which he know to be high please to he. and whereas this king before dwell only in a cottage, or rather a den or hogsty make with a few pole and stick and cover with mat, after their wild manner to civilize he, he first build he a fair house according to the english fashion in which make with a few pole and stick and cover with mat. after their wild manner to civilize he, he first build he a fair house according to the english fashion in which he take such joy, especial in his lock and key which he so admire as lock, and unlock his door a hundred time, adays, he think no device in all the world be comparable to it. thus insinuate himself to this king for his religious purpose, he confer after with he oft and intimate to he matter of our religion, and thus far the pagan confess, move by natural principle, that our god be a good god and better much than they, in that he have with so many good thing above they endow we he. pagan confess, move by natural principle that our god be a good god and better much than they, in that he have with so many good thing above they endow we. he tell he, if he will serve our god, he shall be partaker of all those good thing we have and of far great than sense or reason ever can imagine. he win upon he as he think in many thing, so as he give he fair hear and good answer and seem to be much please with his discourse and in his company, and both he and his people for the daily courtesy this good gentleman do to one or other of, they do profess such outward love and respect unto he as nothing can seem. both he and his people for the daily courtesy this good gentleman do to one or other of. they do profess such outward love and respect unto he as nothing can seem more but all be little regard after by this viperous brood, as the sequel show, for they not only wilful murder he, but cruel and felly, out of devilish malice, do so many barbarous despite and foul scorn after to his dead corpse as be unbefitting to be hear by any civil ear. one thing i can omit: that when this good gentleman, upon his fatal hour, be warn by his man who perceive some treachery, intend to they by these hellhound to look to himself and withal run away for fear of the mischief he. his fatal hour, be warn by his man who perceive some treachery, intend to they by these hellhound to look to himself and withal run away for fear of the mischief he strong apprehend and so save his own life. yet his master, out of the conscience of his own good meaning and fair desert ever towards they, be so void of all suspicion and so full of confidence that they have soon kill he than he can or will believe they mean any ill against he. thus the sin of these wicked infidel have make they unworthy of enjoy he and the eternal good that he most zealous always intend to they. and thus these miserable wretch, not he, have lose by it who, to the comfort, they unworthy of enjoy he and the eternal good that he, most zealous, always intend to. they, and thus these miserable wretch, not he- have lose by it who, to the comfort of we all, have, gain a crown of endless bliss and be assure, become a glorious martyr in which thrice-happy and bless state we leave he, but these miscreant who have thus despise god, great mercy, so free offer to they must needs in time therefore, be correct by his justice, so as those who by the way of mercy will not be draw unto he, shall some of they at length no doubt be, bring unto he by his way of judgement, to which leave they. i will knit again together now the thread of: unto he, shall some of they, at length no doubt, be bring unto he by his way of judgement, to which leave they. i will knit again together now the thread of my discourse and proceed to tell you that, at the time of this massacre, there be three or four of our ship in james-river and one in the next river, and daily more to come in, as three do within fourteen day after one of which they endeavour to have surprise, but in vain, as have also be their whole attempt, have any the least foreknowledge, be in those place where the massacre be commit, yet be the heart of the english, ever stupid and avert from believe any thing that may weaken their hope of. least foreknowledge, be in those place where the massacre be commit. yet be the heart of the english, ever stupid and avert from believe any thing that may weaken their hope of speedy win the savage to civility and religion. by kind usage and fair converse among they, he and the whole council write further that almighty god, they doubt not have his great work to do in this tragedy and will thereout draw honour and glory to his great name, safety and a more flourish estate to themselves and the whole plantation there, and the more speedy conversion of the child of those savage to himself, since he so miraculous preserve so many of the english. there be god. be praise about eleven, part of twelve still. more speedy conversion of the child of those savage to himself, since he so miraculous preserve. so many of the english there be god, be praise about eleven. part of twelve still remain who desire to draw those people to religion by the careless neglect of their own safety seem to have be the great cause of their own ensue destruction. yet it please god to use some of they as instrument to save many of their life. who soul they have former save, as at james-citie and other place and the pinnace trade in pamounkey river. all who life be save by a convert indian disclose the plot in the instant. whereof, though, our sin, say they make we unworthy to be instrument of so glorious a. river. all who life be save by a convert indian, disclose the plot in the instant. whereof, though, our sin, say they, make we unworthy to be instrument of so glorious a conversion in general. yet his infinite wisdom can nevertheless bring it to pass, with some more of they and with other province there, in his good time, and by such mean as we think most unlikely. for even in the delivery of we that now survive no man particular carefulness save any one person, but the mere goodness of himself, free and miraculous. preserve who it please he. the letter of mr george sandis, a worthy gentleman and treasurer there likewise, have advertise, as many other from many particular person of note and worth, beside the who it please. he the letter of mr george sandis, a worthy gentleman and treasurer there likewise have advertise, as many other from many particular person of note and worth. beside the relation of many return in the sea-flower, the ship that bring we this unwelcome news, have be hear at large in the public court that whilst all their affair be full of success and such intercourse of familiarity, as if the indian and themselves have be of one nation, those treacherous native, after five year peace, by a general combination, in one day plot to subvert their whole colony, and at one instant of time, though our several plantation be a hundred and forty mile up one river on both side. but before i go any, to subvert their whole colony, and at one instant of time though, our several plantation be a hundred and forty mile up one river, on both side. but before i go any further, for the better understanding of all thing, you shall know that these wild naked native live not in great number together, but disperse and in small company, and where most together, not above two hundred, and that very rare. in other place, fifty or forty or thereabouts, and many mile distant from one another, in such place among the wood, where they either find, or might easy make, some clear plot of ground which they employ whole in set of corn whereby to sustain their life. these small and scatter company, as i have say, find, or might easy make, some clear plot of ground which they employ whole in set of corn, whereby to sustain their life. these small and scatter company, as i have say, have warning give from one another in all their habitation, to meet at the day and hour appoint for our destruction at all. our several town and place seat upon the river. some be direct to go to one place, some to another, all to be do at the same day and time, which they do according. some enter their house under colour of truck and so take advantage, other draw our man abroad upon fair pretence, and the rest sudden fall upon those that be at their labour. they certify further that, beside master george, truck and so take advantage other, draw our man abroad upon fair pretence and the rest, sudden, fall upon those that be at their labour. they certify further that beside master george thorpe, before mention master john berkeley, captain nathanael powel and his wife, daughter of master william tracy and great with child, and captain maycock, all gentleman of birth, virtue and industry and of the council there, suffer under this their cruelty and treason, that the slaughter have be universal. if god have not put it into the heart of a indian- belong to one perry to disclose it- who live in the house of one pace be urge by another indian, his brother, who come the night before and lay with he to kill pace. so perry to disclose it, who live in the house of one pace, be urge by another indian, his brother, who come the night before and lay with he to kill pace. so command by their king as he declare, as he will kill perry. tell further that by such a hour in the morning a number will come from diverse place to finish the execution. who fail, not at the time perry indian, rise out of his bed and reveal it to pace that use he as a son and thus the rest of the colony that have warning, give they by this mean, be save, such be god, be thank for it, the good fruit of a infidel convert to christianity. for though, three hundred and more, that have warning, give they by this mean, be save. such be god, be thank for it, the good fruit of a infidel convert to christianity. for though three hundred and more of we die by many of these pagan infidel, yet thousand of we be save by the mean of one of they alone, which be make a christian. blessed be god for ever who mercy endure for ever. bless be god who mercy be above his justice and far above all his work, who wrought this deliverance whereby their soul escape, even as a bird, out of the snare of the fowler pace, upon this discovery, secure his house before day, row over the river to james-city, in that place, near three mile in breadth, and bird out of the snare of the fowler pace. upon this discovery, secure his house before day, row over the river to james-city, in that place near three mile in breadth, and give notice thereof to the governor, by which mean they be prevent there and at such other plantation as be possible for a timely intelligence to be give for where they see. we stand upon our guard at the sight of a piece they all run away in other place that can have no notice. some piece with munition the use whereof they know not be there, carry away and some few cartell also be destroy by they. and, as fame divulge, not without probable ground, their king have since cause the most part of the not be there carry away and some few cartell also be destroy by they. and as fame divulge, not without probable ground, their king have since cause the most part of the gunpowder by, he surprise, to be sow to draw therefrom the like increase as of his maize or corne in harvest. next, and that it be since discover that the last summer opachankano practise with a king of the eastern shore, no well-willer of his, to furnish he with store of poison, natural grow in his country for our destruction, which he absolute refuse though he send he great store of bead and other present to win he thereunto, which he with five or six of his great man offer to be ready to (@) against. though he send he great store of bead and other present to win he, thereunto which he with five or six of his great man, offer to be ready to (@) against he that the true cause of this surprise be most by the instigation of the devil enemy to their salvation and the daily fear that possess they that in time we, by our grow continual upon they, will dispossess they of this country as they have be former of the west indies by the spaniard produce this bloody act that never grief and shame possess any people more than themselves to be thus butcher by so naked and cowardly, a people who dare not stand the presentment of a staff in manner of a piece, nor possess any people more than themselves to be thus butcher by so naked and cowardly a people who dare not stand the presentment of a staff in manner of a piece, nor a uncharged piece in the hand of a woman from which they fly, as so many hare, much fast than from their torment. devil, who they worship for fear, though they acknowledge they love he not. thus have you see the particular of this massacre out of letter from thence write, wherein treachery and cruelty have do their worst to we, or rather to themselves, for who understanding be so shallow as not to perceive that this must needs be for the good of the plantation after and the loss of this blood to make the themselves for who understanding be so shallow as not to perceive that this must needs be for the good of the plantation after and the loss of this blood to make the body more healthful, as by these reason may be manifest. first, because betray of innocency never rest unpunished, and therefore agesilaus: when his enemy upon who oath of be faithful, he rest, have deceive he, he send. they thanks for that. by their perjury, they have make god his friend and their enemy. second, because our hand, which before be tie with gentleness and fair usage, be now set at liberty by the treacherous violence of the savage. not unty the knot, but cut it so that we who hitherto have have possession of no more. fair usage be now set at liberty by the treacherous violence of the savage. not unty the knot, but cut it so that we who hitherto have have possession of no more ground than their waste and our purchase, at a valuable consideration to their own contentment gain, may now, by right of war and law of nation, invade the country and destroy. they who seek to destroy we, whereby we shall enjoy their cultivate place, turn the laborious mattocke into the victorious sword wherein there be more, both ease, benefit and glory, and possess the fruit of other labour. now their clear ground, in all their village, which be situate in the fruitful place of the land, shall be inhabit by we, whereas heretofore the grub of fruit of other labour. now their clear ground in all their village, which be situate in the fruitful place of the land, shall be inhabit by we, whereas heretofore the grub of wood be the great labour. three, because those commodity which the indian enjoy as much, or rather more than we, shall, now also be entire possess by we, the dear and other beast will be in safety and infinite increase, which heretofore, not only in the general hunt of the king, whereat four or five hundred deer be usual slay, but by each particular indian be destroy at all time of the year, without any difference of male, dam or young. the like may be, say, of our own swine and goat, whereof they have use. indian be destroy at all time of the year, without any difference of male, dam or young. the like may be, say, of our own swine and goat, whereof they have use to kill eight in ten more than the english have do. there will be also a great increase of wild turkey and other weighty fowl for the indian. never put difference of destroy the hen but kill they, whether in season or not, whether in breed time or sit on their egg or have new hatch, it be all one to they, whereby, as also by the orderly use of their fish wear, no know country in the world will so plentiful abound in victual four, because the way of conquer they be much more easy. also by the orderly use of their fish wear. no know country in the world will so plentiful abound in victual four, because the way of conquer they be much more easy then of civilise they, by fair mean for they be a rude, barbarous and naked people scatter in small company, which be help to victory but hindrance to civility. beside that, a conquest may be of many and at once, but civility be in particular and slow the effect of long time and great industry. moreover, victory of they may be gain many way: by force, by surprise, by famine in burn their corn, by destroy and burn their boat, canoe and house, by break their fish wear, by assail they in their hunt whereby they by force, by surprise, by famine, in burn their corn. by destroy and burn their boat, canoe and house. by break their fish wear. by assail they in their hunt, whereby they get the great part of their sustenance in winter. by pursue and chase they with our horse and bloodhound to draw after they and mastiff to tear they, which take this naked, tan, deform, savage for no other than wild beast, and be so fierce and fell upon they that they fear they worse than their old devil which they worship. suppose they to be a new and worse kind of devil than their own. by these and sundry other way as by drive they when they fly upon their enemy who be round about they? be a new and worse kind of devil than their own. by these and sundry other way as by drive they when they fly upon their enemy who be round about they, and by animate and abet their enemy against they, may their ruin or subjection be soon effect. so the spaniard make great use for his own turn of the quarrel and enmity that be among the indian as thorough understand and follow that maxim of the politician: divide and make division and take kingdom. for thus he get two of the great kingdom of the west indies, peru and mexico, by the prince division and the people difference. after the death of guainacapa, king of peru, his son, attabalippa and gascar, fall to war about the. the west indies, peru and mexico by the prince division and the people difference. after the death of guainacapa, king of peru, his son, attabalippa and gascar, fall to war about the kingdom, and each of they strive to make the spaniard to his friend, francis pizzarro, manage those, their division, only to his own end. easy strip they both of that rich kingdom and become master of peru. and so likewise ferdinando cortes vanquish king motezuma and gain the kingdom of mexico from he, by the aid and furtherance of the neighbour people of the province of tascala, be deadly enemy to the mexican, for which service they. of tascala be free by the spaniard from all. tribute to this time in virginia, the many diverse prince. province of tascala be deadly enemy to the mexican, for which service they of tascala be free by the spaniard from all tribute to this time in virginia, the many diverse prince and people there be at this day, opposite in infinite faction one unto another, and many of they bear a mortal hatred to these, our barbarous savage, that have be likely as false and perfidious heretofore to they as unto we of late. so, as the quarrel and the cause of they and the different humour of these people be well understand, it will be a easy matter to overthrow those that now be or may be our enemy hereafter by aid and set on their enemy against they and by these faction and difference of. be a easy matter to overthrow those that now be or may be our enemy hereafter, by aid and set on their enemy against they. and by these faction and difference of petty prince, the roman take their great advantage to overcome this island of great britain, of which tacitus, faye and justin have the like say of the cause of vanquish the grecian city. five, because the indian, who before be use as friend may now most just be compel to servitude and drudgery and supply the room of man, that labour whereby even the mean of the plantation may employ themselves more entire in their art and occupation, which be more generous while savage, perform their inferior work of dig in mine and the like of. mean of the plantation, may employ themselves more entire in their art and occupation, which be more generous while savage perform their inferior work of dig in mine and the like of who also some may be send for the service of the summer land six. this will for ever hereafter make we more cautelous and circumspect as never to be deceive more by any other treachery, but will serve for a great instruction to all posterity there, to teach they that trust be the mother of deceit and to learn they that of the italian, he that trust not be not deceive. and make they know that kindness be misspend upon rude nature so long as they continue rude, as also that savage and pagan be above. he that trust not be, not deceive, and make they know that kindness be misspend upon rude nature so long as they continue rude as also that savage and pagan be above all other for matter of justice ever to be suspect. thus, upon this anvil shall we now beat out to ourselves a armour of proof which shall for ever after defend we from barbarous incursion and from great danger that otherwise may happen. and so we may true say, according to the french proverb, ill luck be good for something. last we have this benefit more to our comfort, because all good man do now take much more care of we then before, since the fault be on their side, not on we who have use. benefit more to our comfort, because all good man do now take much more care of we then before, since the fault be on their side, not on we who have use so fair a carriage, even to our own destruction. especial, his majesty, most gracious, tender and paternal care be manifest herein who, by his royal bounty and goodness, have continue his many favour unto we with a new, large and princely supply of munition and arm out of his majesty own store in the tower, be gracious bestow for the safety and advancement of the plantation, as also his royal favour be ample extend in a large supply of man and other necessary throughout the whole kingdom, which be very short to be send to virginia. the plantation, as also his royal favour, be ample, extend in a large supply of man and other necessary throughout the whole kingdom, which be very short to be send to virginia. neither must we omit the honourable city of london who, to show their zeal at this time, as they have always do upon all honourable occasion to their endless praise, be now set forth one hundred person at their own charge for the advancement of the plantation, in the furtherance of which action, as the whole grave senate of alderman have show much piety and wisdom. so in particular the right honourable sir edward barkham knight, the now lord mayor, have demonstrate a most worthy mind beside many worthy person of birth and quality and diverse. and wisdom. so in particular the right honourable sir edward barkham knight, the now lord mayor, have demonstrate a most worthy mind beside many worthy person of birth and quality, and diverse other at their own cost. be now prepare for virginia. neither be any man to be deject because of some such disaster as these that may seem to thwart the business. what grow state? be there ever in the world which have not the like rome grow by opposition and rise upon the back of her enemy mark. but the spaniard, who be in the same continent with virginia and have now perfect his work, mark and tell i if he have not have more counterbuff. far then we as out of their own history at the same continent with virginia and have now perfect his work. mark and tell i if he have not have more counterbuff. far then we, as out of their own history at large may be prove. columbus, upon his return from the west indies into spain, have leave his people with the indian in peace and promise of fair usage towards they. yet at his come back again, he find no one man alive of they, but all by the native treacherous slay. after this again, when the spanish colony be increase in great number, the indian, from who the spaniard for truck stuff use to have all their corn general, conspire together to plant no corn at all, intend thereby to farnish. they themselves live in the indian, from who the spaniard for truck stuff use to have all their corn, general, conspire together to plant no corn at all, intend thereby to farnish. they themselves live in the mean time upon cassavi, a root to make bread, only then know to themselves this plot of they by the spaniard oversight that foolish, depend upon stranger for their bread, take such effect and bring they to such misery by the rage of famine that they spare no unclean, no loathsome beast, no, not the poisonous and hideous serpent, but eat they up, also devour one death to save they from another, and by this mean the whole colony well-near, surfeit, sicken and die miserable after again, upon fresh and great supply, new make a infinite. devour one death to save they from another, and by this mean the whole colony well-near, surfeit, sicken and die miserable. after again, upon fresh and great supply, new make a infinite company of. they, by their incontinency, die of the indian disease that have now get a french name, which, at first, as be a strange and unknown malady, be deadly upon whosoever it light beside, before they know the cause and remedy. very many lose diverse part of their body, foot and hand principal, by a little vermin less than a flea and skip, like it call, nigua, which get between the skin and the flesh before they be aware, and there breed and multiply, make swell and putrefaction, to the decay and loss of their like it call nigua, which get between the skin and the flesh before they be aware, and there breed and multiply, make swell and putrefaction to the decay and loss of their bodily member. what shall i tell you? that the plantation, diverse time be near undo by the (@) faction and malice of the commander, one unto another. columbus, to who they be, behold for all, with his brother, be send home from the west indies into spain, bind with chain and some other great commander kill and murder one another. pizzarro be kill by almagros son and he vasco behead, which vasco be take by blasco, and this blasco be likewise take by pizzarroes brother. thus, by their own spiteful and avaritious quarrel, do they well-near. almagros son and he vasco behead, which vasco be take by blasco, and this blasco be likewise take by pizzarroes brother. thus, by their own spiteful and avaritious quarrel do they well-near shake the main pillar of that plantation. these and many other calamity and mischief too long to relate now happen unto they more than ever do to we, and at one time, their plantation be even at the last gasp, all their colony be resolve desperate to leave it. have not two ship unexpected come in with new supply. yet we see, for all these misery, that they have attain to their end at last, honour, power and wealth, in so much as that country which, when they be dishearten with disaster, they begin to be. these misery that they have attain to their end at last, honour, power and wealth in so much as that country which, when they be dishearten with disaster, they begin to be so weary of that they be about to forsake it all in short time after see all storm blow over and fair weather shine upon they, they be so in love with their great fortune that they grow so jealous of they as make. they shut they up from the sight of any but themselves, and then they petition their king by a inviolable decree, to annex and unite the west indies, inseparable for ever to the crown of spain which, for their better security and satisfaction, be according, perform and ratify, as it be to. decree to annex and unite the west indies, inseparable for ever, to the crown of spain, which, for their better security and satisfaction, be according, perform and ratify. as it be to be see in h^^^^^^ history of the west indies, and whereas before few can be hire to go to inhabit there, now with great suit, they must obtain it. thus have they, in time, by industry, patience and constancy, effect, this great work of they notwithstanding, to increase their difficulty also they be to deal with a most populous and numerous nation, which they overcome at last. so as ouiedo, in his three book of the first part of his west indie history, say, that of a million of indian, at least that be in hispaniola. overcome at last. so as ouiedo in his three book of the first part of his west indie history say, that of a million of indian at least that be in hispaniola there be not in little more than forty year space after the first beginning of the plantation, five hundred of they and all their child live. for the indian that live there after be bring out of the continent into that island or out of one island to be plant in another on the other side, the native in virginia be nothing populous but thin and scatter nation, as be know to all here. by the way, to make a little digression since i have mention ouiedo, who live above twenty two year in the west, thin and scatter nation, as be know to all here. by the way, to make a little digression, since i have mention ouiedo, who live above twenty two year in the west indies, i will acquaint you with his observation and judgement of the nature and disposition of the indian there, that you may compare and see in what and how far it agree with that of the native of virginia. they be, say he, by nature slothful and idle, vicious, melancholy, slovenly, of bad condition, liar, of small memory, of no constancy or trust. in another place he say the indian be, by nature of all people, the most lie and most inconstant in the world, sottish and sudden, never look what danger may happen afterward less. another place. he say the indian be, by nature of all people, the most lie and most inconstant in the world, sottish and sudden, never look what danger may happen afterward. less capable than child of six or seven year old, and less apt and ingenious. this be the general disposition of most of they, though there be some, say he, that be wise and subtle, and indeed it shall seem so when they can overreach and go beyond the spaniard, so much to put that trick of starve they, as aforesaid upon they to their so great and almost total destruction. but to come again to that which i first intend, since the spaniard, as we see in his plantation, have go through far more hazard and so great and almost total destruction. but to come again to that which i first intend, since the spaniard, as we see in his plantation, have go through far more hazard and great difficulty than ever we have have. we therefore, in look to what be past upon great reason, ought likewise not to be deter but so much the rather invite to proceed with constancy and courage. and if, beside, we look, as most man do, after the riches of a country, to invite we on, ask those that have be there and have travel far and near, and they will tell you that no country in the world do natural abound with more commodity than virginia, do the climate be know to be more temperate and far and near, and they will tell you that no country in the world do natural abound with more commodity than virginia. do the climate be know to be more temperate and the soil more rich than that of the west indies be. neither do it want mine of all sort. no, not of the rich, as be know to some now live and shall be manifest when fit time shall serve. and yet to think that gold and silver mine be, in a country otherwise most rich and fruitful, the great wealth of a plantation be but a popular error, as be that opinion. likewise, that the gold and silver be the great wealth of the west indies now, at this present time, true it be indeed. be but a popular error, as be that opinion. likewise, that the gold and silver be the great wealth of the west indies now, at this present time. true, it be indeed that in the first conquest the spaniard get great and mighty treasure from the indian which they, in long space, have heap up together, and in those time the indian show they entire and plentiful rich mine which by length of time, as be well know, and publish to the world by those that have be there, be waste and exhaust, since, so as now, the charge of get those metal be grow most excessive, beside the consume and spoil many man of their life which be deprive of they by the vapour that come out. now the charge of get those metal be grow most excessive, beside the consume and spoil many man of their life which be deprive of they by the vapour that come out of the gold and silver mine which be most pestilent and deadly, as diverse author, aver, among other, a late geographer, speak of the west indies and of those mine there. say so as all thing consider by these mine, what by the life of many man lose in they, and what with the great charge otherwise in get they the clear gain to the adventurer from these metal, the king part defray be but small to they, nothing near so much i be sure as be imagine, and be it not for other rich commodity. the adventurer from these metal, the king part defray be but small to they nothing near so much, i be sure as be. imagine, and be it not for other rich commodity there that enable and enrich the adventurer, those of the contractation house be never able to subsist by this, for the great part of their gain and profit, i say, consist not in these mine but in their other commodity, partly native and partly translate from other part of the world and plant in the west indies, as in their mighty wealth of sugar- the sugar cane be transport first from the canary- and in ginger and some other commodity derive from the east indies, thither in their cochanile, their indigo, their cotton, their infinite store. the sugar cane be transport first from the canary and in. ginger and some other commodity derive from the east indies, thither in their cochanile, their indigo, their cotton, their infinite store of hide and skin, their quicksilver and allom wood and brasill-wood etc. and their many other die paint, petararana, tobacco, gum, balm oil, medecinall and perfume, their sarsaparillia and many other physical drug, for which learned physician and skilful simpler be send to take a survey and make a exquisite draught of all the plant in colour. these, i say, and other the like commodity be the west indies, indeed, unto the adventurer by which they be enable to enrich themselves and to sustain the mighty charge of draw out the gold and silver to the commodity be the west indies, indeed, unto the adventurer by which they be enable to enrich themselves and to sustain the mighty charge of draw out the gold and silver to the great and clear revenue of their king. i have many thing of importance to say more, but i will detain the reader no long now. to conclude, then see that virginia be most abundant, fruitful, and that this massacre must rather be beneficial to the plantation, then impair it. let all man take courage and put to their help hand, since now the time be most seasonable and advantageous for the reap of those benefit which the plantation have long promise. and for their own good, let they do it speedy. that so by take the be most seasonable and advantageous for the reap of those benefit which the plantation have long promise. and for their own good, let they do it speedy that so, by take the priority of time, they may have also the priority of place in choose the best seat of the country which now, by vanquish of the indian, be like to offer a more ample and fair choice of fruitful habitation than hitherto. our gentleness and fair comportment to the savage can attain unto, wherein, no doubt, but all the favour that may be shall be show to adventurer and planter, and for old adventurer there be due unto they and their heir, according to the order of the company, for each twelve pound, ten shilling former pay. show to adventurer and planter, and for old adventurer there be due unto they and their heir, according to the order of the company, for each twelve pound ten shilling former pay into the treasury. one hundred acre of land upon a first division and as much upon a second, the first be plant, and whosoever transport himself or any other at his charge into virginia, shall for himself and each person so transport before midsummer 1625.. have to he and his heir for ever, fifty acre of land upon a first division and as much more upon a second, the first fifty be cultivate or manure. if such person continue there three year, either at once or several time, or die after he be ship for that. more upon a second, the first fifty be cultivate or manure if such person continue there three year, either at once or several time, or die after he be ship for that voyage last. it be to be wish that every good patriot will take these thing serious into his thought and consider how deep the prosecution of this noble enterprise concern the honour of his majesty and the whole nation, the propagation of christian religion, the enlargement, strength and safety of his majesty dominion, the rich augment of his revenue, the employment of his subject idle at home, the increase of man, mariner and ship and the raise of such necessary commodity, for the importation of which from foreign country so great and incredible sum, be continual. idle at home. the increase of man, mariner and ship and the raise of such necessary commodity, for the importation of which from foreign country so great and incredible sum, be continual issue and expend. some may help with their purse, some with their person, some with their favour, some with their counsel, especial among other. let, minister, in their public and private prayer, commend these plantation to the blessing of almighty god, to who be all honour and glory for ever and ever. amen. here follow be set down a true list of the name of all those that be massacre by the treachery of the savage in virginia the 22 march last, to the end that their lawful heir may take speedy order for the inherit. of all those that be massacre by the treachery of the savage in virginia the 22 march last, to the end that their lawful heir may take speedy order for the inherit of their land and estate there, for which the honourable company of virginia be ready to do they all right and favour. at captain berckleys plantation seat at the fall creek, some 66. mile from james-citie in virginia. iohn berkley, esquire, thomas brasington, john sawyer, roger david, francis gowsh, bartholomew, giles john dowler, laurence dowler, lewis williams, richard boscough, thomas holland, john hunt, robert horner, mason philip barnes, william swandal, robert williams, his wife and child, giles bradshaw, his wife and child, john owlet and his son, thomas wood and collins, his man, joseph fitch, apothecary. horner, mason, philip barnes, william swandal, robert williams, his wife and child, giles bradshaw, his wife and child, john owlet and his son, thomas wood and collins, his man, joseph fitch, apothecary to doctor pot at master thomas sheffeilds plantation, some three mile from the fall creek. master th sheffeild and rachel his wife, john reeve, william tyler, a boy, samuel reeve, john ellen, robert tyler, a boy, matthew judeth, howard, thomas poole, methusalem, thomas taylor, william tyler at henrico island, about two mile from sheffeilds plantation: atkins, weston, philip shatford, william perigo, owen jones, one of capt berkleys, people slay of the college people about two mile from henrico-citie: samuel stringer, george sultan, william basset, john perry, edward ember moor, thomas xerles, thomas freeman, john allen, thomas. of capt berkleys people slay of the college. people about two mile from henrico-citie: samuel stringer, george sultan, william basset, john perry, edward ember moor, thomas xerles, thomas freeman, john allen, thomas cook, john clements, james faulkoner, christopher henly, william jordan, robert davis, thomas hobson, william baily, at apo-mattucke river. at master abraham pierce, his plantation some five mile off the college people, william io waterhowse, john barker, a boy, robert yeoman. at charles-citie and about the precinct of capt smith company, roger royal, thomas jones, robert maruel, edward heydon, henry bushel, at other plantation next adjoin, richard prat and his brother, henry milward, his wife, his child and his sister, richard, a boy, goodwife redhead at mr william farrars house, master john england and his man john. adjoin, richard prat and his brother, henry milward, his wife, his child and his sister, richard, a boy, goodwife, redhead, at mr william farrars house. master john england and his man, john bel, henrick peterson and alice, his wife and william, her son. thomas his man, james woodshaw, maidservant mary and elizabeth. at berkley-hundred, some five mile from charles-citie, capt george thorpe, esq. one of his majesty pensioner, john rowles, richard rowles, his wife and child, giles wilkins, giles bradway, richard fereby, thomas thorpe, robert jordan, edward painter at westover, about a mile from berkley-hundred, and first at cap fr west plantation, james english, richard dash at master john west plantation. christopher turner, david owen at capt nathanael west. michael aleworth, john wright, a lieutenant, gibs his dividend. first at cap fr west plantation. james english, richard dash at master john west plantation. christopher turner, david owen at capt nathanael west. michael aleworth, john wright, a lieutenant, gibs his dividend. iohn paly. thomas ratcliffe, michael booker, john higglet, nathanael, earl john gibbes, william parker, richard wainham, benomy reyman, thomas gay, james vpfall, daniel mr dombelowe, man at mr richard owen house. richard owen, stephen dubo, francis a irishman, thomas paine, one old maid call blind margaret. william reeve at master owen macar house owen. macar. garret farrel, richard yeaw, one boy at master macocks dividend. capt samuel macock, esquire, edward lister, thomas browne, john downes at flowerdieu hundred. sir george yeardleys plantation. iohn philips, thomas nuson, john braford, robert taylor, samuel jarret, elizabeth bennet at the. dividend capt. samuel macock, esquire, edward lister, thomas browne, john downes at flowerdieu hundred, sir george yeardleys, plantation iohn philips, thomas nuson, john braford, robert taylor, samuel jarret, elizabeth bennet, at the other side of the river opposite to flowerdieu-hundred, master hobson and his wife, richard stork, john slaughter, thomas philips, richard campion, anne greene at mr swinhowe, his house, mistress swinhow and thomas and george shinhow, her son, richard moss, john larkin, william blyth, thomas grindal at mr william bikars house, william bykar, math hawthorn and his wife, edward peirce, nicholas howsdon, at weynoack of sir george yeardley, his people, nathanael elie, john flores, henry gape, buckingham. william pusset, william walker, john grace, james boate, john suersby, thomas euans, thomas ap-richard, henry haynes, john blewet, henry rice. sir george yeardley, his people, nathanael elie, john flores, henry gape, buckingham. william pusset, william walker, john grace, james boate, john suersby, thomas euans, thomas ap-richard, henry haynes, john blewet, henry rice hurt, jonas alport, thomas stephens, samuel goodwin, john snow and his boy, margery blewet at powle-brooke. capt nath, paul esq and his wife dauphin to mr tracy, mistress bray, adam rayners, wife b^^bara burges, william head, thomas woolcher, william meakins, robert peter, jordan, nathanael leydon, peter goodale at southampton-hundred. robert goffe and his wife william larkum, john davies, william mountfort at martin brandon. lieutenant sanders, ensign shirley. john taylor and his wife 2 boy matthew a polander at captain spilmans house. iohn basingthwayte. walter shawe at ensign spence, his house. william richmond, john fowler, alexander bale. sanders, ensign shirley. john taylor and his wife 2 boy matthew. a polander. at captain spilmans house, iohn basingthwayte. walter shawe, at ensign spence, his house. william richmond, john fowler, alexander bale. william fierfax, the tinker person slay, at martins-hundred, some seven mile from james-citie, lieutenant rich kean, master tho boise and mistress boise, his wife and a suck child 4 of his man, a maid 2 child nathanael jefferies, wife margaret davies, richard staples, his wife and child 2 maid 6 man and boy walter davies and his brother christopher guillam. thomas combar. 3.. servant master john boise, his wife, a maid 4 manservant laurence wats, his wife 2 manservant timothy moise, his man, henry bromage, his wife, his daughter, his man, edward how, his wife, his. master john boise, his wife, a maid. 4 manservant. laurence wats, his wife, 2 manservant. timothy moise, his man, henry bromage, his wife, his daughter. his man. edward how, his wife, his child. a child of john jackson, 4 manservant. josua dary, his wife, a man. ralphe digginson, his wife, richard cholfer, george jones, cicely cook, his wife, david john bennet, john mason, william pawmet, thomas bat, peter lighborrow, james thorley, robert walden, thomas toll, john butler, edward rogers, maximilian russel, henry, a welshman, at mr thomas pierce, his house over against mulberry island. master tho peirce, his wife and child, john hopkins. john salmon, a french boy, at mr edward bennet plantation master th brewood, his wife, his child. 2 servant. thomas ferris, george cole, robert grace. peirce, his wife and child, john hopkins, john salmon, a french boy at mr edward bennet plantation. master th brewood, his wife, his child. 2 servant, thomas ferris, george cole, robert grace, john griffin, ensign harrison, john costard, david barry, thomas sheppard, henry price, robert edward jolly, richard alice jones, thomas cook, philip worth, matthew a maid, francis winder, thomas couly, richard woodward, humphrey cropen. thomas bacon, watkins, richard lewis, edward towse, remember. michael bullocke, richard chandler, henry moor, nicholas hunt, john corderoy, richard cockwell, john howard, mistress harrison, marry dawk, anne english, rebecca master prowse, hugh john edward, mistress chamberlain parnel, a maid, humphrey sherbrooke. john wilkins, john burton, mr john pountis, his man, john scotchmore, edward turner, edward brewster, lieutenant peirce, his man, thomas holland, capt. hugh, john edward, mistress, chamberlain, parnel, a maid, humphrey sherbrooke, john wilkins, john burton, mr john pountis, his man, john scotchmore, edward turner, edward brewster, lieutenant peirce, his man, thomas holland, capt, whittaker, man at master walter, his house, master edw walter, his wife, a child, a maid, a boy. the whole number be 347.. a treatise of the northwest passage to the south sea through the continent of virginia and by fretum hudson. the noble plantation of virginia have some very excellent prerogative above many other famous kingdom, namely the temperature of the air, the fruitfulness of the soil and the commodiousness of situation. the air be healthful and free both from immoderate heat and from extreme cold, so that both the inhabitant and their cattle do. fruitfulness of the soil and the commodiousness of situation. the air be healthful and free both from immoderate heat and from extreme cold, so that both the inhabitant and their cattle do prosper, exceed in stature and strength. and all plant bring from any other remote climate do there, grow and fructify in as good or better manner then in the soil from whence they come, which, though it do manifest, prove the fruitfulness of the soil, yield all kind of grain or plant, commit unto it wi^h a rich and plentiful increase. yet can the fatness of the earth alone produce such excellent effect, unless the temperature of the air be likewise so favourable that those tender sprout which the earth do abundant, bring forth may be? fatness of the earth alone produce such excellent effect, unless the temperature of the air be likewise so favourable that those tender sprout which the earth do abundant bring forth may be cherish with moderate heat and seasonable moisture, and free both from scorch drought and nip frost. these blessing be so much the more to be esteem because they be bestow upon a place situate so convenient and at so good a distance both from europe and the west indies that for the mutual commerce betwixt these great and most rich part of the habitable world, there can be devise any place more convenient for the succour and refresh of those that trade from hence thither, whether they be of our own nation or of our neighbour. world. there can be devise any place more convenient for the succour and refresh of those that trade from hence thither, whether they be of our own nation or of our neighbour and friend. the multitude of great and navigable river and of safe and spacious harbour as it be, invite all nation to entertain mutual friendship and to participate of those blessing which god, out of the abundance of his rich treasure, have so gracious bestow, some upon these part of europe and other, no less desire, upon those poor people which may still have remain in their old, barbarous ignorance, without knowledge of their own misery or of god infinite goodness and mercy. if it have not please god, thus gracious both to draw, we thither. remain in their old, barbarous ignorance, without knowledge of their own misery or of god, infinite goodness and mercy. if it have not please god, thus gracious, both to draw we thither with desire of such wealth as those fruitful country afford, and also to grant we so easy, certain and safe a mean to go unto they, which passage be, in my opinion, make much more secure and easy, by the commodious harbour and refresh which virginia do reach out unto we. the coast of florida to the west be not so harbourous, and of new england to the east, somewhat more out of the way among so many flat and small land not so safe. neither be the commodiousness of virginia situation only in respect of. new england to the east, somewhat more out of the way among so many flat and small land, not so safe, neither be the commodiousness of virginia situation only in respect of this west atlantic ocean, but also in respect of the indian ocean, which we common call the south sea, which lie on the west and north west side of virginia, on the other side of the mountain, beyond our fals, and open a free and fair passage not only to china, japan and the moluccae, but also to new spain, peru, chila and those rich country of not as yet full discover for the sea wherein master hudson do winter, which be first discover by he and be therefore now call fretum hudson do stretch so. rich country of not as yet full discover for the sea wherein master hudson do winter, which be first discover by he and be therefore now call fretum. hudson, do stretch so far towards the west that it lie as far westward as the cape of florida, so that from the fall above henrico city, if we shape our journey towards the northwest, follow the river towards the head, we shall undoubted come to the mountain which, as they send diverse great river southward into our bay of chesepiock, so likewise do they send other from their further side northwestward into that bay where hudson do winter. for so we see in our own country from the ridge of mountain continue from derbishire into scotland, do issue many. their further side northwestward into that bay where hudson do winter. for so we see in our own country from the ridge of mountain continue from derbishire into scotland. do issue many great river on both side into the east german ocean and into the western irish sea in like sort from the alps of switzerland and the grizons do run the danubie eastward into pontus euxinus, the rhine into the north german ocean, the rhosne west into the mediterrane sea and the po south into the adriatic sea. this bay where hudson do winter stretch itself southward into 49. degree and can be in probability so far distant from the fall as 200. league. part of the way lie by the river side towards the mountain from. itself southward into 49. degree and can be in probability so far distant from the fall as 200. league part of the way lie by the river side towards the mountain from whence it spring, and the other part on the other side can want river likewise, which will conduct we all the way and i hope, carry we and our provision a good part of it beside that bay. it be not unlikely that the western sea in some other creek or river come much near than that place, for the place where sir thomas button do winter lie more westerly than master hudson bay by 190. league in the same sea, do extend itself very near as far towards the west as the cape of california. button. do winter lie more westerly than master hudson bay by 190. league in the same sea. do extend itself very near, as far towards the west as the cape of california, which be now find to be a island, stretch itself from 22. degree to 42. and lie almost direct north and south, as may appear in a map of that island which i have see here in london, bring out of holland, where the sea upon the northwest part may very probable come much near than some do imagine, who give too much credit to our usual globe and map, do dream of a large continent extend itself far westward to the imagine straight of anian, where be seat, as they fable, the large kingdom of. to our usual globe and map, do dream of a large continent extend itself far westward to the imagine straight of anian, where be seat, as they fable, the large kingdom of cebola and quivira have great and populous city of civil people who house be, say, to be five story high and to have some pillar of turguess. which relation be cunning, set down by some upon set purpose to put we out of the right way and to discourage such as otherwise may be desirous to search a passage, by the way aforesaid, into those sea. gerardus mercator, a very industrious and excellent geographer, be abuse by a map send unto he of four meeting about the north pole, which now be find to be all. those sea, gerardus mercator, a very industrious and excellent geographer, be abuse by a map send unto he of four meeting about the north pole, which now be find to be all turn into a main icy sea. one demonstration of the crafty falsehood of these usual map be this: that cape mendocino be set in they west, northwest, distant from the south cape of california about seventeen hundred league, whereas francis gaul that be employ in those discovery by the viseroy of new spain do in hugo linscotten, his book set down their distance to be only five hundred league. beside this, in the place where sir thomas button do winter in 57 degree of latitude, the constant great tide every twelve hour and the increase of be only five hundred league beside this, in the place where sir thomas button do winter in 57 degree of latitude. the constant great tide every twelve hour and the increase of those tide whensoever any strong western wind do blow, do strong persuade we that the main western ocean be not far from thence, which be much confirm unto they the summer follow when sail direct north from that place. where they winter about the latitude of 60. degree, they be cross by a strong currant run sometime eastward, sometime westward, so that if we find either hudson bay or any sea more near unto the west, we may assure ourselves that from thence we may with great ease pass to any part of the east indies. find either hudson bay or any sea more near unto the west. we may assure ourselves that from thence we may with great ease pass to any part of the east indies and that as the world be very much. behold to that famous columbus for that he first discover unto we, the west indies, and to the portugal for the find out the ordinary and as yet the best way that be know, to the east indies by cape bona-speranza, so may they and all the world be in this. behold to we in open, a new and large passage, both much near safe and far more wholesome and temperate, through the continent of virginia and by fretum hudson to all those rich country border upon the. a new and large passage, both much near safe and far more wholesome and temperate, through the continent of virginia and by fretum hudson to all those rich country border upon the south sea in the east and west indies. and this hope that the south sea may easy, from virginia, be discover over land, be much confirm by the constant report of the savage, not only of virginia but also of florida and canada, which dwell so remote one from another and all agree in the report of a large sea to the westward, where they describe great ship not unlike to we with other circumstance do, give we very great probability, if not full assurance, that our endeavour this way shall, by god blessing, have a they describe great ship, not unlike to we with other circumstance, do give we very great probability, if not full assurance, that our endeavour this way shall, by god blessing, have a prosperous and happy success to the increase of his kingdom and glory among these poor, ignorant heathen people, the public good of all the christian world, the never-dying honour of our most gracious sovereign, the inestimable benefit of our nation and the admirable and speedy increase and advancement of that most noble and hopeful plantation of virginia, for the good success whereof all good man, with i i doubt not- will pour out their prayer to almighty god. h? b a memorial of religious charity exercise on virginia to the glory of god and good example. man with i, i doubt not- will pour out their prayer to almighty god. h b a memorial of religious charity exercise on virginia, to the glory of god and good example of man, these three last year: 1619.. 1620.. 1621.