a short relation make by the lord delawarre to the lord and other of the counsel of touch, his unexpected return home and afterward deliver to the general assembly of the say company at a court hold the twenty five of june 1611.. publish by authority of the say counsel, my lord etc. be now by accident return from my charge, at contrary either to my own desire or other man expectation, who spare not to censure i in point of duty and to discourse and question the reason, though they apprehend not the true cause of my return. i be force, out of willingness to satisfy every man, to deliver unto your lordship and the rest of this assembly, brief but true in what state i have. of my return. i be force out of willingness to satisfy every man, to deliver unto your lordship and the rest of this assembly, brief but true. in what state i have live ever since my arrival to the colony? what have be the just occasion of my sudden departure? thence and in what term i have leave the same, the rather, because i perceive that since my come into england, such a coldness and irresolution be breed in many of the adventurer that some of they seek to withdraw those payment which they have subscribe towards the charge of the plantation and by which that action must be support and maintain, make this my return the colour of their needless backwardness and unjust protraction, which that you towards the charge of the plantation and by which that action must be support and maintain. make this, my return, the colour of their needless backwardness and unjust protraction, which that you may the better understand. i must inform your lordship that present after my arrival in james town, i be welcome by a hot and violent ague which hold i a time till by the advice of my physician, doctor laurence, bohun by blood. let i be recover, as in my first letter by sir thomas gate, i have inform you that disease have not long leave i till. within three week after i have get a little strength, i begin to be distemper with other grievous sickness which successive and several, assail i for beside a long leave i till, within three week after i have get a little strength, i begin to be distemper with other grievous sickness which, successive and several, assail i for beside, a relapse into the former disease which, with much more violence, hold i more than a month and bring i to great weakness. the flux surprise i and keep i many day. then the cramp assault my weak body with strong pain, and afterward the gout with which i have heretofore be sometime trouble, afflict i in such sort that make my body, through weakness, unable to stir or to use any manner of exercise. draw upon i the disease, call the scurvy which, though in other it be a sickness of slothfulness, yet be in i. unable to stir or to use any manner of exercise, draw upon i the disease, call the scurvy which, though in other it be a sickness of slothfulness, yet be in i a effect of weakness which never leave i till i be upon the point to leave the world. these several malady and calamity, i be the more desirous to particularize unto your lordship, although they be too notorious to the whole colony, lest any man shall misdeem that under the general name and common excuse of sickness, i go about to cloak either sloth or fear or any other base apprehension unworthy the high and honourable charge which you have entrust to my fidelity. in these extremity, i resolve to consult my friend who find nature or fear or any other base apprehension, unworthy the high and honourable charge which you have entrust to my fidelity in these extremity, i resolve to consult my friend who find nature spend in i and my body almost consume. my pain likewise, daily increase. give. i advise to prefer a hopeful recovery before a assure ruin which must necessary have ensue. have i live but twenty day long in virginia, want at that instant both food and physic fit to remedy such extraordinary disease and restore that strength so desperate decay. whereupon, after a long consultation hold, i resolve by general consent and persuasion to ship myself for mevis, a island in the west indies famous for wholesome bath there to try what help the heavenly providence. consultation hold, i resolve, by general consent and persuasion, to ship myself for mevis, a island in the west indies famous for wholesome bath there, to try what help the heavenly providence will afford, i by the benefit of the hot bath. but god, who guide all thing according to his good will and pleasure, so provide that, after we have sail a hundred league, we meet with southerly wind which force i to change my purpose, my body be altogether unable to endure the tediousness of a long voyage, and so stern my course for the western island, which i no soon recover than i find help for my health and my sickness assuage by mean of fresh diet, and especial of orange and lemon, a undoubted the western island, which i no soon recover than i find, help for my health and my sickness assuage by mean of fresh diet and especial of orange and lemon, a undoubted remedy and medicine for that disease which last and so long have afflict i, which ease as soon as i find. i resolve, although my body remain still feeble and weak, to return back to my charge in virginia again, but i be advise not to hazard myself before i have perfect recover my strength, which by counsel i be persuade to seek in the natural air of my country. and so i come for england, in which accident, i doubt not, but man of reason and of judgement will imagine, there will more danger and the natural air of my country. and so i come for england, in which accident, i doubt not, but man of reason and of judgement will imagine, there will more danger and prejudice have happen by my death there than i hope can do by my return. in the next place i be to give account in what estate i leave the colony for government in my absence. it may please your lordship, therefore, to understand that upon my departure thence i make choice of captain george pearcie, a gentleman of honour and resolution and of no small experience in that place, to remain deputy governor until the come of the martial sir thomas dale, who commission be likewise to be determine upon the arrival of sir thomas. no small experience in that place to remain deputy governor until the come of the martial sir thomas dale, who commission be likewise to be determine upon the arrival of sir thomas gate, according to the intent and order of your lordship and the council here the number of man i leave there be upward of two hundred, the most in health and provide of at least ten month, victual in their storehouse, which be daily, issue unto they beside other help in the country, late find out by captain argoll, by trade with petty king in those part who for a small return of a piece of iron, copper etc. have consent to truck great quantity of corn and willing embrace the intercourse of traffic, show unto. in those part who for a small return of a piece of iron, copper etc. have consent to truck great quantity of corn and willing embrace the intercourse of traffic show unto our people certain sign of amity and affection. and for the better strengthen and secure of the colony in the time of my weakness there, i take order for the build of three several fort, two of which be seat near point comfort, to which adjoin a large circuit of ground open and fit for corn. the three fort be at the fall upon a island environ, also with corn ground. these be not all man, for i want the commodity of boat have but two and one barge in all the country which have be a island environ, also with corn ground. these be not all man, for i want the commodity of boat have but two and one barge in all the country which have be cause that our fish have be in some sort hinder for want of those provision which easy will be remedy when we can gain sufficient man to be employ about those business which in virginia i find not. but since meet with sir thomas gate at the cow near portsmouth, to who i give a particular account of all my proceed and of the present estate of the colony as i leave it, i understand those want be supply in his fleet the country be wonderful, fertile and very rich and make good whatsoever heretofore have present estate of the colony as i leave it. i understand those want be supply in his fleet. the country be wonderful, fertile and very rich and make good whatsoever. heretofore have be report of it. the cattle already there be much increase and thrive, exceed with the pasture of that country. the cow all this last winter though the ground be cover most with snow and the season sharp, live without other feed. then the grass they find with which they prosper well and many of they ready to fall with calf milk, be a great nourishment and refresh to our people, serve also in occasion as well for physic as for food, so that it be no way to be doubt, but when it shall please. great nourishment and refresh to our people, serve also in occasion as well for physic as for food. so that it be no way to be doubt, but when it shall please god, that sir thomas dale and sir thomas gate shall arrive in virginia with their extraordinary supply of one hundred cow and two hundred swine, beside store of all manner of other provision for the sustenance and maintenance of the colony, there will appear that success in the action as shall give no man cause of distrust that have already adventure, but encourage every good mind to further so worthy a work as will redound, both to the glory of god, to the credit of our nation and to the comfort of all those that have good mind to further so worthy a work as will redound, both to the glory of god, to the credit of our nation and to the comfort of all those that have be instrument in the further of it. the last discovery during my continual sickness be by captain argoll, who have find a trade with patamack, a king as great as powhatan, who still remain our enemy, though not able to do we hurt. this be in a goodly river, call patomack, upon the border, whereof there be grow the goodly tree for mast that may be find elsewhere in the world. hemp, better then english, grow wild in abundance. mine of antimony and lead there be. also find, without our bay to the northward, a excellent may be find elsewhere in the world. hemp, better then english, grow wild in abundance. mine of antimony and lead there be also find, without our bay, to the northward, a excellent fish bank for cod and ling, as good as can be eat and of a kind that will keep a whole year in ship hold with little care. a trial whereof i now have bring over with i other island there be upon our coast that do promise rich merchandise and will further exceed the establish of the plantation by supply of many help and will speedy afford a return of many worthy commodity. i have leave much ground in part manure to receive. corn have cause it the last winter to be sow for root. and will speedy afford a return of many worthy commodity. i have leave much ground in part manure to receive. corn have cause it the last winter to be sow for root with which our people be great relieve. there be many vine plant in diverse place and do prosper well. there be no want of any thing if the action can be uphold with constancy and resolution. last concern myself and my course. though the world may imagine that this country and climate will, by that which i have, suffer beyond any other of that plantation ill agree with the state of my body, yet i be so far from shrink or give over this honourable enterprise as that i be willing and ready to lay all plantation ill agree with the state of my body, yet i be so far from shrink or give over this honourable enterprise as that, i be willing and ready to lay all i be worth upon the adventure of the action- rather than so honourable a work shall fail, and to return with all the convenient expedition. i may beseech your lordship and the rest, not only to excuse my former want happen by the almighty hand, but to second my resolution with your friendly endeavour that both the state may receive. honour yourselves, profit and i future comfort by be employ, though, but as a weak instrument in so great a action, and thus have plain, true and brief deliver the cause of my return with the i future comfort by be employ, though, but as a weak instrument in so great a action, and thus have plain, true and brief deliver the cause of my return. with the state of our affair as we now stand, i hope every worthy and indifferent hearer will, by compare my present resolution of return with the necessity of my come home rest, satisfy with this true and short declaration.