good news from virginia, ecclesiastes 11.1. cast thy bread upon the water, for after many day thou shall find it. be bold, my hearer, to contemn riches and frame yourselves to walk worthy of god, for none other be worthy of god but those that light. esteem of riches. nakedness be the riches of nature. virtue be the only thing that make we rich and honourable in the eye of wise man. poverty be a thing which most man fear and covetous man can endure to behold. yet poverty with a content mind be great riches. he true. be the only poor man, not that have little, but which continual desire more. riches as they be esteem have no limit, but still cry still more. neither be any. he true be the only poor man, not that have little but which continual desire more, riches as they be, esteem have no limit but still cry still more. neither be any man absolute rich, but in comparison of a poor man, of one i mean that have less than he, for if he make diligent inquiry he may find diverse rich than himself. if riches of gold and the like have be such as the world do esteem they, it be not likely that jesus christ will have take so poor a state upon he. when we esteem they at the best they be but a heavy burden to some, a idol to other and profitable to few. wherefore solomon have before explain the marvelous vanity of when we esteem they at the best, they be but a heavy burden to some, a idol to other and profitable to few. wherefore solomon have before explain the marvelous vanity of riches and how they be wont to be abuse as well of covetous as of prodigal man. in the first six verse of this chapter, teach we how we may use they well, and god may make the use of they. bless unto we. in the second chapter, he have say: i have gather unto i silver and gold and the chief treasure of king and province, and i be great and increase above all that be before i in jerusalem. then i look and behold all be vanity and vexation of the spirit in the king and province and i be great and increase above all that be before i in jerusalem. then i look and behold all be vanity and vexation of the spirit in the five chapter. he that love silver shall not be satisfy with silver, and he that love riches shall be without the fruit of it. and what good come to the owner thereof. but the behold thereof with their eye, and he add, the satiety of the rich will not suffer. he to sleep again. there be a evil sickness that i have see under the sun: riches reserve to the owner thereof for their evil. now, in the begin of this chapter, he have set down a remedy to both these evil, whereby our riches may the sun riches reserve to the owner thereof for their evil. now, in the begin of this chapter, he have set down a remedy to both these evil, whereby our riches may be make constant unto we. we may take pleasure and profit by they and our posterity, through many descent, may enjoy they. after we cast thy bread, say he upon the water why? for after many day, thou shall find it the sentence be rhetorical, full of figure and needs some. explain bread in scripture. be usual. take for all kind of meat and drink, as may appear gen 18.5 and in diverse other place. but here i take it. it be more general. put for all kind of alm of what nature soever, not only drink, as may appear, gen 18.5, and in diverse other place. but here i take it it be more general put for all kind of alm of what nature soever, not only for meat and drink, money or the like, but also for any kind of thing whereby we may relieve the necessity of our neighbour. water also be here metaphorical put for all those man who stand in need of the alm of our liberality, whether they be such as can but glad will requite we, or else such as be able forget to be thankful, so that the plain meaning of the word be this: give liberal thy alm to all sort of man that may stand in need of thy help. hide not thy eye. thankful, so that the plain meaning of the word be this: give liberal, thy alm to all sort of man that may stand in need of thy help. hide not thy eye at the miserable state of the afflict. neither stop thy ear at the cry of the poor, though they be not able to recompense thy welldoing. reproach not thy enemy when he be punish, but rather overcome his evil deed with thy goodness. neither suffer any to return empty hand from thou, who god shall offer to thy liberality, for, though thou can not present, expect a plentiful reward of thy well-doing, though the person to who thou have cast thy alm be not able to requite thou or forgetful of good turn. yet be assure. present expect a plentiful reward of thy well-doing, though the person to who thou have cast thy alm be not able to requite thou or forgetful of good turn. yet be assure of it that god behold thy charity and will, at his appoint time, requite thou. even in this world, if it be good for thou, thou shall taste of his bounty. but in the world to come he have reserve for thou a most glorious crown of bless immortality. this be the soul and substance of this short sentence. the word natural divide themselves into two principal part: a commandment to be liberal and charitable and a promise of reward which hereafter we shall find the commandment also contain in it five point touch the doctrine. into two principal part: a commandment to be liberal and charitable and a promise of reward which hereafter we shall find the commandment also contain in it five point touch the doctrine of liberality. 1- the duty to be perform. cast thy bread, be liberal to all. 2. the manner of bestow our alm by cast it away. 3- what be to be. give bread all thing needful, yea, and of the best kind. 4. who may be liberal? even those that have it? thy bread, it must be thy own. 5. to who we must be liberal? to all. yea to the water. first. we will brief speak of these five point of this commandment as they lie in order, and then direct: come unto the promise. be liberal to all yea to the water. first we will brief speak of these five point of this commandment as they lie in order, and then direct come unto the promise more particular, the enjoin: duty: be liberality, which sometime be term alm, sometime more large, be use for all kind of good work and very often be signify by the name of charity and brotherly love, all which be in sense and signification one shall, in the name of they be, use all as one. liberality be the true practice of christian humanity and brotherly courtesy one towards another, a virtue command by god and commend by the example of the best which make we accept of god and desire of man. faith give comfort to brotherly courtesy one towards another, a virtue command by god and commend by the example of the best which make we accept of god and desire of man. faith, give comfort to my soul and minister peace to my conscience. hope, teach i not to be hasty but to wait patient. the appoint time of god, but the practice of love maintain my hope and assure i that my faith be effectual and, moreover, be beneficial unto other yea, profitable to all. 1. cor 13.. now abide faith, hope and love, even these three, but the great of these be love. wherefore have god make man great and fill their coffer with his treasure, but that they shall, as faithful steward of god, store liberal, provide for the. great of these be love. wherefore have god make man great and fill their coffer with his treasure, but that they shall, as faithful steward of god, store liberal, provide for the necessity of his saint. the rich man in the world have no right by nature to the thing he do possess, for naked he come into the world and he must return naked out of the same again. why then have god make thou rich and commend that to thy liberality, which be not thy own, but that thou shall be bountiful to those who he have make poor? what goodness or excellency do god see in thou more than in the poor, reasonable creature before thou? yet be that he shall make thou rich and who he have make poor. what goodness or excellency do god see in thou more than in the poor, reasonable creature before thou? yet be that he shall make thou rich and he poor. do it not befall to thou as to the fool, yea, very the condition of man, in this case eccles 3.19, and the condition of beast, be all one. as one die, so die the other, all go to one place and all be of the dust, and all shall return to the dust. but that which nature have not distinguish, the wisdom and bounty of god have, by a property of call, alter and lend his treasure to the rich man of the world, have show to they a example of his liberality. wisdom and bounty of god have by a property of call, alter and lend his treasure to the rich man of the world, have, show to they a example of his liberality to this end that they may be openhanded to other, distribute as faithful steward of his gift, according to the necessity of the saint, wherefore our saviour christ proclaim matth 24.45. who be a faithful servant and wise who his master have, make ruler over his household to give they meat in season. bless be that servant who his master, when he come, shall find. so do galath 6. saint paul, exhort we to do good to all, but special to the household of faith, and write to timothy 1. tim 6.17, to charge they that. find, so do galath 6. saint paul exhort we to do good to all, but special to the household of faith, and write to timothy: 1. tim 6.17 to charge they that be rich in this world that they do good and be rich in good work, ready to distribute and communicate. titus 2. he show titus also that the end of our redemption be that we may be zealous of good work, and therefore will he to affirm titus 3, that they which have believe in god may be careful to show forth good work, etc. but alas, the practice of this age be far otherwise. for those that have wealth, either abuse they to the satisfy of their prodigal lust in whore dice or drink till. etc. but alas, the practice of this age be far otherwise. for those that have wealth, either abuse they to the satisfy of their prodigal lust in whore dice or drink till all or the most be spend, or else, as other, use they only to look upon they or that it may be. say they, have they few or none. there be that, use they aright to the glory of god and relief of his child. god give commandment that there shall not be a beggar in israel. but how many idle person have we in the street of our city, in the highway and corner of our path, which day and night call upon the passer by and yet remain unprovided? for how many hungry, naked? in the street of our city, in the highway and corner of our path, which, day and night, call upon the passer by and yet remain unprovided. for how many hungry, naked, fatherless, widow, poor man and oppress perish for want of that which god have lend to these rich thief, for no better than thief. be they keep up that which god give they to disperse to holy and good use. but what say solomon prou, 28.27? he that hide his eye from the poor shall have many curse. what shall we judge then of those man who be rich in substance and poor in good work? if paul may be, hear titus 3. they have not yet believe christ. die for they. 1. john 3, 17.. those man who be rich in substance and poor in good work. if paul may be, hear titus 3. they have not yet believe christ. die for they. 1. john 3: 17. if saint john may judge, they have no love of god in they. for whosoever say he have this world good and see his brother have need and shut up his compassion from he, how dwell the love of god in he. sure christ that shall judge every man according to his work when he shall call they to render a account of their stewardship, will pronounce a heavy sentence against they. mat^h 25, 30. cast those unprofitable servant into utter darkness. there shall be weep and gnash of tooth. go too now. james 5.1 you. stewardship will pronounce a heavy sentence against they. mat^h 25, 30, cast those unprofitable servant into utter darkness. there shall be weep and gnash of tooth. go too now, james 5.1. you rich, miserable man, weep and howl for the misery that shall come upon you. remember the churlishness of nabal 1., sam 25.. and forget not the torment tongue of. make haste either to repent betimes luke 16.. or make account to hear the dreadful sentence of the great judge, matth 25.. go you, curse etc. for you have be uncharitable. but you, my brother in who heart the love of god, abide, show the bowel of your compassion to your fellow servant as need require. remember the affliction of joseph prou 1^ ^ and be assure. in who heart the love of god, abide, show the bowel of your compassion to your fellow servant as need require. remember the affliction of joseph prou 1^ ^ and be assure of this, that he that have mercy upon the poor, dare unto the lord, etc. you will help your friend because he love you and be the companion of your estate. nature teach we to commiserate the distress of our brother, because we be of the same flesh and have our parent common. how can we then withhold the hand of our relief from those that stand in need of our help? we be all fellow-servant of one lord and master, jesus christ. we have all one common father, god, the maker of heaven and earth. those that stand in need of our help. we be all fellow-servant of one lord and master, jesus christ. we have all one common father, god, the maker of heaven and earth. we be all member of one mystical body, most unseparable. unite to our head, jesus christ, by the power of the holy spirit. how then, can we see our fellow-servant, our dear brother yea, the member of our own body, to pass by? we, hungry and naked, unfed, unclothe. take heed, i beseech you, that lazarus starve not at your door. nor david messenger return empty. 1 king 17.. if elijah come to sojourn with you, thrust he not out of door. thou know not how soon god may alter the time and restore thy estate. return empty. 1 king 17. if elijah come to sojourn with you, thrust he not out of door. thou know not how soon god may alter the time and restore thy estate. the church of macedonia be commend. 2. cor 8. because, though they be in want themselves, yet they supply the extreme want of other church * *. 1. cor 16.1. yea, if the saint at jerusalem want, or the church a far off, lay up the first day of every week somewhat to send to their relief, and so you do, may gather comfort to yourselves that you shall hear that comfortable sentence: come you bless, of my father, receive the kingdom, prepare for you, for you have be liberal, etc. i may say much more. to yourselves that you shall hear that comfortable sentence: come you bless, of my father, receive the kingdom, prepare for you, for you have be liberal, etc. i may say much more in the commendation of liberality, but the time require less. i come now with haste unto the second point of the commandment, the second manner. how cast thy bread, etc. what have god give we good to cast they away. eccles 3.6, yea, very for solomon say: there be a time to seek and a time to lose, a time to keep and a time to cast away. which time of lose and cast away? the scripture here note. but by this word of cast away be mean no violent, reject or negligent lose of some. time to cast away. which time of lose, and cast away, the scripture here note. but by this word of cast away be mean no violent reject or negligent lose of some thing that we hate or do not great esteem, but a liberal give away of such thing as we do possess. which may appear by these reason. first, by the nature of the original word (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), which most usual signify to send out, and so it be use by moses, gen 7.7, where he say that noah send out the raven and afterward the dove. twice he use this word continual: (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), and and so have both pagninus and m^rcerus expound it. second, it may appear by the raven and afterward the dove. twice he use this word continual: (@), (@), (@), (@), (@), and and so have both pagninus and m^rcerus expound it. second, it may appear by the agreement of the text with the verse: follow for the doctrine, handle be touch liberality allegorical. compare to the seed of bread, for so bread may be here. understand which husbandman cast not away but sow as well in moist as in dry ground, and so do interpret they now as husbandman. do not cast away their seed, which they fling into the ground for hatred or neglect, but under hope of god blessing even so, liberal man, exercise the work of charity. do not cast away their alm as one that cast a bone to. for hatred or neglect, but under hope of god blessing. even so, liberal man, exercise the work of charity. do not cast away their alm as one that cast a bone to a dog or fling dead flower from he, etc. but free, bestow the alm of god without pride, vainglory or disdain, yea, without hope of any restitution or any other recompense, beside the acceptance of god and the reward which god shall give unto he in this life, but especial in the great day of his harvest. and with this do agree that say of solomon: there be that scatter and be more increase, prou 17.24- so that the spirit of god teach we, by this word of cast, how we may scatter our good deed. of solomon, there be that scatter and be more increase- prou 17.24- so that the spirit of god teach we by this word of cast, how we may scatter our good deed and bestow our alm as that they may be accept of god and profitable unto we. as many ask and receive not, james 4. because they ask amiss. so the most that cast away find not because they be illiberal in their liberality or because they give amiss. let we then learn from hence to cast away our bread free. free we have receive our good from god. let we free give. so shall we become follower of god and our liberality draw towards the perfection. require of we the commandment of christ be. matth 5.48. our good from god. let we free give. so shall we become follower of god and our liberality draw towards the perfection require of we the commandment of christ be matth 5.48, that we shall be perfect as our heavenly father. be perfect now than god liberality be perfect, let we also be perfect in our good deed. this be a point very needful for we all to consider, for god require liberality from we all, and very few among the diverse multitude of giver give aright. it shall be count a high point of wisdom in we first to inform ourselves thorough by what mean our charity may become perfect and acceptable in the sight of god, before we reach out our hand to give our great in, we first to inform ourselves thorough by what mean our charity may become perfect and acceptable in the sight of god, before we reach out our hand to give our great master christ, the mouth of god to man handle the doctrine of liberality in his sermon on the mount, matth 6.1. have teach we many rule touch the right manner of give alm, which we may refer to these five. point: first, that we give in faith, for without faith it be unpossible to please god, heb 1.6. therefore, without faith our alm can please god, the sum of which faith be this: first that god will accept of we and our alm for his son jesus christ sake, for no work of any man can please god, the sum of which faith be this: first, that god will accept of we and our alm for his son jesus christ sake, for no work of any man can please god before the man himself be approve of he, and then all our good deed shall be accept of he. second, that we be not hasty in expect a present recompense of reward but to wait, patient upon god by faith, for the good success of our alm. james 5, 7. so, husbandman that cast their seed into the ground, stay until the time of harvest, depend upon god for the fruitful increase of their labour. 1. cor. 3. so paul do plant and apollo do water. but even both these do wait upon god. time of harvest, depend upon god for the fruitful increase of their labour. 1. cor. 3.. so paul do plant and apollo do water. but even both these do wait upon god for the blessing of their ministry. this be the cause why heretofore, much of our alm bestow upon the affair of virginia have be so cast away that they can never be find again. hitherto, for many of we have not be reconcile to god, nor approve of he. some of our adventurer in london have be most miserable, covetous man sell over to usury, extortion and oppression. many of the man send hither have be murderer, thief, adulterer, idle person and what not beside all, which person god hate even from his very soul. how. usury, extortion and oppression. many of the man send hither have be murderer, thief, adulterer, idle person and what not, beside all which person god hate even from his very soul. how then can their alm, or any thing else which they do, be, please unto god? such man prayer be abominable in the sight of god? how much more their alm. the second rule in give be that we give in love, which whosoever lack can give aright and say, saint paul 1. (@) though i feed the poor with all my good and have not love it, profit i nothing. the sum of which love, be that out of mere pity, compassion and fellow-feeling of our neighbour want we cast our bread to he not for. not love it, profit i nothing. the sum of which love, be that out of mere pity, compassion and fellow-feeling of our neighbour, want we cast our bread to he, not for constraint of law and custom of parishioner, neither for any sinister respect of praise or vainglory. wherefore the same paul say, rom 12.8: he that distribute, let he do it with simplicity. and our saviour christ command matth 6.3, that when thou d^est thy alm, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand do. three: we must give our alm bountiful and with a cheerful mind. 1. cor ^ ^. but as every one wish in his heart, so let he give not grudge or of necessity for god, love, a cheerful giver he. with a cheerful mind. 1. cor ^ ^. but as every one wish in his heart, so let he give, not grudge or of necessity, for god, love a cheerful giver. he that sow spare shall reap also spare. and he that sow liberal shall reap also liberal. yet notwithstanding this bountifulness, have two proper limit beyond which it be not to pass. first, we must be bountiful only according to ability, for if we give all at one time we may leave ourselves naked and be disenable for give any more hereafter, deut 15.4. therefore, those papist that give away all and turn beg friar be to be blame, luk 3.11 for god, that have say there shall be poor always with you, forbid in the same. those papist that give away all and turn beg, friar be to be, blame, luk 3.11 for god, that have say there shall be poor always with you. forbid in the same place that there shall be any beggar in israel. and the rule of john baptist be that he that have two coat shall not give away both of they, whereby he may be leave naked but he must give one away and reserve the other for himself. the second limit of our bounty, be that we give more or less according to the necessity of the saint, and this saint paul teach rom 12.18. the four rule of right give arise from hence which, be that we give our alm with discretion, first that we communicate. of the saint, and this saint paul teach rom 12.18. the four rule of right give arise from hence which, be that we give our alm with discretion. first, that we communicate such thing as the need of our neighbour require: the thirsty man must have drink, the hungry and naked meat and apparel, the imprison for debt, money and the like. (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). second, we must not defer the time of our relief, lest that we give too late when the case of our neighbour be past. help the physician come too late when the patient be dead. prou. 25.11. but a word: speak in season, be like apple of gold and picture of silver. while thou may then do good, thou know not. late, when the patient be dead. prou 25.11. but a word: speak in season. be like apple of gold and picture of silver. while thou may then do good, thou know not then what may befall afterward. eccles, 11.6. in the morning sow thy seed, and in the after noon let not thy hand rest, for thou know not whether shall prosper this or that. sure, if there be ever any opportunity give of set forward this plantation, the season be now most fit. strike then while the iron be hot. do this good work while you may, before it be too late. three: we must choose such a place as may be void of vainglory and hypocrisy. our left hand may not know what our right hand. you may, before it be too late. three: we must choose such a place as may be void of vainglory and hypocrisy. our left hand may not know what our right hand do, matth 6. honour may be open, give for the encouragement of other, but alm deed must be give in secret. then thy father that see in secret shall reward thou open. the last rule of give be that we give in justice, which be that we cut not large thong out of another man, leather, that we give not other man good but such as be our own and those true get. the text say that the bread must be thou, even thy own, isa 58.7. not another man. the true feast be to break. such as be our own and those true get the text say that the bread must be thou, even thy own, isa 58.7. not another man. the true feast be to break thy own bread to the hungry, to bring the poor that wander into thy house. three, what be to be give. the next point to be handle be wherein we be to be liberal, what we be to give solomon have shut up all under the name of bread, whereby, as i say before, be mean all thing wherein we may relieve the necessity of our neighbour, for if a man shall cast his drink, apparel, gold and the like upon the water, he shall after many day find they. but solomon include all these alm. of our neighbour, for if a man shall cast his drink, apparel, gold and the like upon the water, he shall after many day find they. but solomon include all these alm under the name of bread, because he will enforce this doctrine under one allegory of sow and therefore do suit his phrase with word of most significancy again: bread be the staff of good nourishment and the most usual kind of alm which we give. this article, then, of this commandment, be that if our neighbour do stand in need of our help in any thing wherein we may help they, we be not to withhold our hand from they, but to cast our alm liberal unto they, and this must needs be the meaning of any thing wherein we may help they, we be not to withhold our hand from they, but to cast our alm, liberal, unto they, and this must needs be the meaning of the holy ghost, rom 12.13, for paul teach we to distribute according to the necessity of the saint. but the saint need many thing very often, beside bread, yea, beside food and raiment, wherefore our alm must needs be cast out according to the several necessity of those that want the want of man be diverse, some be of the mind, some of the body and some be of the outward good and thus have the divine divide. they, the distress of the mind, be most grievous and needs the best relief, but of they all, body and some be of the outward good and thus have the divine divide. they, the distress of the mind, be most grievous and needs the best relief, but of they all, ignorance of spiritual matter be most common, most dangerous. the bread that must relieve this prou 10, be the mouth of wisdom which be liberal in instruction, which be as fine silver, which shall be fruitful in understanding, which do know what be acceptable, which be a tree of life and which feed many. this be the alm which paul go to cast away in macedon and liberal distribute in mars, his street in athens. and this be the alm which may be most profitable unto this barbarous country of virginia, where the name of god in macedon and liberal, distribute in mars, his street in athens, and this be the alm which may be most profitable unto this barbarous country of virginia, where the name of god have be yet scarce. hear of the want of the body be many but not so dangerous, and those be principal: hunger, thirst, sickness and wound, according to which case our alm must be bestow. the sentence of the great judge shall be according to the tenor of this matth 25.. when i be a hungry, you feed i. when i be a thirst, you give i drink. when i be sick, you visit i. as for the help of wound man, our saviour christ, have give we a notable instance and encouragement to be merciful. you give. i drink. when i be sick, you visit i. as for the help of wound man, our saviour christ have, give we a notable instance and encouragement to be merciful towards they. in the case of the wound jew who, when neither the priest nor the levite that pass by, will relieve luk 10.30, a samaritan most liberal provide for. even so, let we do the want of our neighbour. outward state be most and every where common. first, we must free give to the poor as clothes to the naked, liberal glean to the stranger, fatherless and widow, justice in judgement to the oppress, etc. second, we must free lend, whereby we may be oftentimes as beneficial to our neighbour as by give mat 5.41. the stranger, fatherless and widow, justice in judgement to the oppress, etc. second, we must free lend, whereby we may be oftentimes as beneficial to our neighbour as by give- mat 5.41, concern which our saviour christ say from he that will borrow of thou, turn not away thy face, and the commandment of god be, thou shall open thy hand to thy poor brother and lend he suffiicient for his need which he have, deut 15.8. three, we must free forgive and remit the due debt which our neighbour do owe unto we, if it so fall out that god bring he into decay and extreme poverty, exod 22.26. so the pledge or pawn which our neighbour leave with we, if it belong to his necessary use. so fall out that god bring he into decay and extreme poverty. exod 22.26. so the pledge or pawn which our neighbour leave with, we, if it belong to his necessary use as his raiment or the like, we be to restore it to he again before the sun go down. and this be the exhortation of nehemiah to the hard heart ruler of the jew, nehem 5.11, that oppress their brother with usury and the like, and thus many way. may we cast away our bread and for all these kind of alm bread be here to be take. wherefore see there be so many way to exercise our liberality. let we not think it sufficient to be bountiful in one kind of good work and hard. here to be take. wherefore see there be so many way to exercise our liberality? let we not think it sufficient to be bountiful in one kind of good work and hard heart in other, but that our liberality may be profitable to we. let we give in all as the present need require. some man will give alm at their gate of the scrap of their table, but will not part with one penny of money to any charitable deed. other will be ready to spend their voice in the instruction and reproof of their neighbour, or it may be to speak a good word for he, but will part with none of their own good to help they and some man will be only liberal in. neighbour, or it may be to speak a good word for he, but will part with none of their own good to help they and some man will be only liberal in building of church, hospital and the like, which indeed be good work, yet be they neither meritorious nor the most principal. for many time the gift of a piece of bread or a cup of cold water be more needful. solomon put breed the chief alm. and christ at the day of judgement will not condemn man for want of building, but of other more needful alm and less chargeable. but if the church of rome will maintain the merit of their abbey, matth 25.. nunnery temple, let they hear a great school man of their. more needful, alm, and less chargeable, but if the church of rome will maintain the merit of their abbey matth 25. nunnery temple, let they hear a great school man of their own, thomas aquinas, who reckon up the several work of charity belong to the body. aquinas. 2.2 quae 32. ar. 2. have either forget or neglect such building. he have shut they up. all in this one verse. the meaning whereof, be that true liberality consist in visit the sick, give drink to the thirsty, meat to the hungry, in redeem the captive and imprison in cover the naked, in gather or call home poor, travel stranger to his house and in burial of the dead. but in all these he have make no mention of. imprison, in cover the naked in gather or call home poor, travel stranger to his house and in burial of the dead, but in all these he have make no mention of those building. wherefore, let we learn not only to spend god alm but to be such provident steward or provider for the servant of god as that we may be liberal in all kind to give they meat, drink and other of god good in necessity, according to the several necessity of they. the four point, in order to be consider, be: 4: 4 who who may proper give alm, which may easy be determine if we consider the diverse kind of good work which we have now late rehearse for he that be not able who, who may proper give alm, which may easy be determine if we consider the diverse kind of good work which we have now late rehearse, for he that be not able to be liberal in one kind may be fit for another, which may be note in the alm of peter and john, enter into the temple, act 3.1 when they restore the lame cripple to his health. to who they say in this manner: silver and gould have i none, but such as i have, that give i thou. whence we may conclude that every one may be a giver of alm. for he that have not the riches of wealth and can give much, let he give a little according to the measure of his. every one may be a giver of alm, for he that have not the riches of wealth and can give much, let he give a little according to the measure of his ability. wherefore our saviour christ commend the liberality of the poor widow, mark 12.41 which cast into the treasury, but two mite which be all that she have. those also that have not money and good to help their neighbour, let they lend the help of their bodily labour, of their calling, or the virtue of their soul and body unto they, and this be peter alm and these who poverty, age or subjection unto the hard government of other have make unfit for these two. let they exercise their liberality in pray for the relief. be peter, alm and these who poverty, age or subjection unto the hard government of other have, make unfit for these two. let they exercise their liberality in pray for the relief of those that want, which be the proper call of almsman and hospital child: yea, it be the duty of we all, this be the doctrine, and i beseech god to stir up your mind to the practice of liberality in all thing, towards all man, and remember the poor estate of the ignorant inhabitant of virginia. cast forth your alm, my brother of england, and extend your liberality on these charitable work which god have call you to perform. let not the servant of superstition that think to merit by their good work as they england and extend your liberality on these charitable work which god have call you to perform. let not the servant of superstition that think to merit. by their good work, as they term they, go beyond we in well do neither. let they be able to open their mouth against we and to condemn the religion of our protestation for want of charitable deed. it may be some man will say: the work be great, i be not able to relieve it. i answer: the work be such and such. order be now. take that those that can give much may be liberal in a little. those that can help in money by reason of their poverty may venture their person hither and here not only serve god. that can give much may be liberal in a little. those that can help in money by reason of their poverty may venture their person hither and here. not only serve god, but help also these poor indian and build a sure foundation for themselves. but if you can do neither of these, then send your earnest prayer to god for the prosperity of this work. the first point in order and last article of this commandment remain now to be handle, which be concern the person, to who we be to be liberal, 5, 5 to who that be, to all man in general who stand in need of our relief and help. for if corn be cast upon the water or very watery ground, it can to who that be? to all man in general who stand in need of our relief and help. for if corn be cast upon the water or very watery ground, it can prosper or bring forth increase. so if good work be bestow on unthankful or unable person, we be not to expect a recompense of reward from they, from whence we may gather a argument from the less to the great, that, if we be to be liberal to such as can or will not requite we, or to such as will not deserve our kindness, how much more to they that may deserve our good will or will make conscience, if they can, to be thankful unto we in the best manner so than if we. kindness, how much more to they that may deserve our good will or will make conscience, if they can, to be thankful unto we in the best manner so than if we must be liberal both to good man and bad, to thankful and unthankful to our enemy and friend. it follow that we must be charitable to all man, galath 6.10. and this be the rule of s paul: do good to all, but special to the household of faith. though the child of god be chief to be respect. yet be we not to withhold our alm from any one if they need our help. the rule of christ be answerable. give he that ask matth 5.52, and from he that will borrow of thou turn. withhold our alm from any one if they need our help. the rule of christ be answerable. give he that ask, matth 5.52, and from he that will borrow of thou turn not away. do good to they that hate you and pray for they which hurt you and persecute you. and so paul expound this rule of christ: if thy enemy hunger, rom 12.20- feed he. if he thirst, give he drink. if then, we must feed and clothe our enemy and persecutor, how much more our friend and helper. it remain, then, that we must do good to all. from hence, we may take just occasion to blame the uncharitable disposition of hard heart rich man and wealthy parish, which suffer multitude of poor man and must do good to all. from hence we may take just occasion to blame the uncharitable disposition of hard heart rich man and wealthy parish, which suffer multitude of poor man and woman to perish in their quarter for want of their relief. the commandment of god be that there shall be no beggar in israel. but look into the street of our city and pass from they into all the quarter of england, and you shall find neither court nor country, city or village without the importunate craving of those that cry give, give. from hence it be that so many base thief and petty robber lurk in every corner until the common tree of execution hang they up. from hence it be that so many poor hence it be that so many base thief and petty robber lurk in every corner until the common tree of execution hang they up from. hence it be that so many poor man child want the charity of other to see they bring up in learning and some honest vocation be better, if they have never be bear then to live in such misorder as most of they do repent. therefore, betimes you able, miser. lest the woe of saint james fall upon you, james 5.1, lest god hear the cry and curse of the poor and heap misery without measure upon such miserable man. and now let i turn your eye, my brother of england, to behold the water of virginia, where you may behold a fit. and heap misery without measure upon such miserable man. and now let i turn your eye, my brother of england, to behold the water of virginia, where you may behold a fit subject for the exercise of your liberality, person enough on who you may cast away your bread, and yet not without hope, after many day, to find it. yea, i will not fear to affirm unto you that those man who god have make able any way to be helpful to this plantation and make know unto they the necessity of our want, be find in conscience, by virtue of this precept, to lay their help hand to it, either with their purse, person or prayer so far forth as god have make they fit for. find in conscience, by virtue of this precept, to lay their help hand to it, either with their purse, person or prayer so far forth as god have make they fit for it. for it be evident that our wise god have bestow no gift upon any man for their private use, but for the good of other man who god shall offer to their liberality. wherefore, since god have open the door of virginia to our country of england, we be to think that god have, as it be by word of mouth, call we in to bestow our several charity on they, and that this may the better appear. we have many reason to encourage we to be liberal mind and openhanded towards they. first if in to bestow our several charity on they, and that this may the better appear. we have many reason to encourage we to be liberal mind and openhanded towards they. first, if we consider the almost miraculous beginning and continuance of this plantation, we must needs confess that god have open this passage unto we and lead we by the hand unto this work. for the mariner that be send hither first to discover this bay of chaesapeac find it only by the mere direction of god providence. for i hear one of they confess that even then, when they be enter within the mouth of the bay, they deem the place they seek for to have be many degree further. the find be not so strange, but even then, when they be enter within the mouth of the bay, they deem the place they seek for to have be many degree further. the find be not so strange, but the continuance and uphold of it have be most wonderful. i may fit compare it to the growth of a infant which have be afflict from his birth with some grievous sickness that many time no hope of life have remain. and yet it live still again. if there be nothing else to encourage we, yet this one thing may stir we up to go on cheerful with it: that the devil be a capital enemy against it and continual seek which way to hinder the prosperity and good proceed of it. yea have heretofore so. go on, cheerful with it. that the devil be a capital enemy against it and continual seek which way to hinder the prosperity and good proceed of it. yea have heretofore so far prevail by his instrument the covetous heart of many back slide adventurer at home and also by his servant here. some strive for superiority, other by murmur, mutiny and plain treason, and other by fornication, profaneness, idleness and such monstrous sin that he have almost thrust we out of this kingdom and have indeed quit this land of we. if god have not, then, as one awake out of sleep, stand up and send. we mean of great help when we need most and expect least relief. the save of those two, honourable knight, sir. then, as one awake out of sleep, stand up and send, we mean of great help when we need most and expect least relief. the save of those two honourable knight, sir thomas gate and sir george somers, with captain newport and the rest of the adventurer in the sea venture, as also their happy deliverance out of those unhabited and unfrequented because fear land of the barmudaes can proceed from none other but the singular providence of god. if this worthy governor, sir thomas gate, have be hinder but one week long, it may be fear that the famine which have by that time devour the most of our countryman here will have consume the rest and when he consider that his weak mean be not able. fear that the famine which have by that time devour the most of our countryman here will have consume the rest. and when he consider that his weak mean be not able to restore or sustain the burden of such woeful distress, have ship the few remain for england and have forsake with hannibal sigh the first build james-towne. upon the sudden news meet he of the come in of that honourable lord war with a fresh, whereupon he present return to the town he have so late forsake. since when this english colony have take better root and as a spread herb who top have be often crop off, renew her growth and spread herself more glorious then before. so this plantation which the devil have so better root and as a spread herb who top have be, often crop off, renew her growth and spread herself more glorious then before. so this plantation, which the devil have so often tread down, be, by the miraculous blessing of god, revive and daily grow to more happy and more hopeful success. i have shut up many thing in few word and have allege this only to prove unto we that the finger of god have be the only true worker here, that god first show we the place god first call we. hither and here god, by his special providence have maintain we, wherefore, by he, let we be encourage to lay our help hand to this good work. yea, god work with all the strength. here, god, by his special providence, have maintain we, wherefore, by he, let we be encourage to lay our help hand to this good work. yea, god, work with all the strength of our ability. second, let the miserable condition of these naked slave of the devil move you to compassion towards they. they acknowledge that there be a great good god, but know he not have the eye of their understanding as yet blind, wherefore they serve the devil for fear after a most base manner, sacrifice. sometime, as i have here hear their own child to he, i have send one image of their god to the counsel in england, which be paint upon one side of a toadstool much like unto a deform monster. their child to he. i have send one image of their god to the counsel in england, which be paint upon one side of a toadstool, much like unto a deform monster. their priest, who the call quiokosough, be no other but such as our english witch be. they live naked in body, as if their shame of their sin deserve no cover. their name be as naked as their body. they esteem it a virtue to lie, deceive and steal, as their master, the devil, teach they. much more may be say of their miserable condition, but i refer the particular narration of these thing to some other season. if this be their life, what think you shall become of they after death? but to be partaker with but i refer the particular narration of these thing to some other season. if this be their life, what think you shall become of they after death? but to be partaker with the devil and his angel in hell for evermore. wherefore my brother put on the bowel of compassion and let the lamentable estate of these miserable people enter in your consideration. one god create we. they have reasonable soul and intellectual faculty as well as we. we all have adam for our common parent, yea, by nature, the condition of we both be all one, the servant of sin and slave of the devil. oh, remember, i beseech you, what be the state of england before the gospel be preach in our country. how much better. one, the servant of sin and slave of the devil. oh, remember, i beseech you, what be the state of england before the gospel be preach in our country? how much better be we then and concern our soul health than these now be. let the word of the lord sound out that it may be hear in these part, and let your faith, which be towards god, spread itself abroad and show forth the charitable fruit of it in these barren part of the world. and let he know that he which have convert a sinner from go a stray out of his way shall save a soul from death and hide a multitude of sin. but if any of we shall misdoubt that this barbarous people sinner from go a stray out of his way shall save a soul from death and hide a multitude of sin. but if any of we shall misdoubt that this barbarous people be uncapable of such heavenly mystery, let such man know that they be far mistake in the nature of these man. for beside the promise of god, which be without respect of person, make as well to unwise man after the flesh as to the wise, etc. let we not think that these man be so simple as some have suppose. they for they be of body, lusty, strong and very nimble. they be a very understanding generation, quick of apprehension, sudden in their dispatch, subtle in their deal, exquisite in their invention and industrious in be of body, lusty, strong and very nimble. they be a very understanding generation, quick of apprehension, sudden in their dispatch, subtle in their deal, exquisite in their invention and industrious in their labour. i suppose the world have no better marksman with their bow and arrow than they be. they will kill bird, fly, fish, swim and beast run. they shoot also with marvelous strength. they shoot one of our man be unarm quite through the body and nail both his arm to his body with one arrow. one of their child, also about the age of 12. or 13. year, kill a bird with his arrow. in my sight, the service of their god be answerable to their life, be perform with great fear and attention. age of 12. or 13. year, kill a bird with his arrow. in my sight, the service of their god, be answerable to their life, be perform with great fear and attention. and many strange dumb show use in the same stretch forth their limb and strain their body, much like to the counterfeit woman in england who fain themselves, bewitch or possess of some evil spirit. they stand in great awe of their quiokosough or priest, which be a generation of viper, even of satan own brood. the manner of their life be much like to the popish hermit of our age, for they live alone in the wood in house, sequester from the common course of man. neither may any man be suffer to come into. to the popish hermit of our age, for they live alone in the wood in house, sequester from the common course of man. neither may any man be suffer to come into their house or to speak with they. but when this priest do call he, he take no care for his victual, for all such kind of thing, both bread and water etc. be bring unto a place near unto his cottage and there be leave which he fetch for his proper need. if they will have rain or have lose any thing, they have their recourse to he who coniur for they and many time prevail. if they be sick, he be their physician. if they be wound he suck they at his command they make. their recourse to he who coniur for they and many time prevail. if they be sick, he be their physician. if they be wound, he suck they at his command. they make war and peace. neither do they any thing of moment without he. i will not be tedious in these strange narration. when i have more perfect enter into their secret, you shall know all final there be a civil government among they which they strict observe and show thereby that the law of nature dwell in they. for they have a rude kind of commonwealth and rough government wherein they both honour and obey their king, parent and governor, both great and less. they observe the limit of their own possession and encroach not upon their commonwealth and rough government wherein they both honour and obey their king, parent and governor, both great and less. they observe the limit of their own possession and encroach not upon their neighbour. dwelling murder be a capital crime, scarce hear of among they, adultery be most severe punish, and so be their other offence. these unnurtured ground of reason in they may serve to encourage we, to instruct they in the knowledge of the true god, the rewarder of all righteousness. not doubt but that he that be powerful to save we by his word when we be nothing, will be merciful also to these son of adam in his appoint time, in who there be remain so many footstep of god image wherefore you, wealthy man. when we be nothing, will be merciful also to these son of adam in his appoint time, in who there be remain so many footstep of god image, wherefore you, wealthy man of this world, who belly god, have, fill with his hide treasure. trust not in uncertain riches, neither cast your eye upon they for riches. take she to her wing as a eagle and fly into heaven. prov ^3 ^. but be rich in good work, ready to distribute or communicate. 1. tim ^. how shameful do the most of you, either miserable detain or wicked, misspend god good, whereof he make you his steward, the covetous person seek to hide his talon from the good of other and himself honour it as his god which. or wicked. misspend god good, whereof he make you his steward. the covetous person seek to hide his talon from the good of other and himself. honour it as his god which shall be his servant. the prodigal man of our land make haste to fling away god treasure as a grievous burden which they desire to be ease of. some make no scruple at it to spend yearly a hundred pound, two, three, five hundred and much more about dog, hawk and hound and such sport, which will not give five hundred penny to the relief of god. poor member. other will not care to lose two or three thousand pound in a night at card and dice and yet suffer, poor lazarus, to perish in their relief of god. poor member, other will not care to lose two or three thousand pound in a night at card and dice and yet suffer poor lazarus to perish in their street for want of their charitable alm yea. diverse will high garden at great rent and build stately house for their whore, which have no compassion on the fatherless and widow. how much better be it for these man to remember the affliction of joseph, to extend the bowel of their compassion to the poor the fatherless afflict and the like, then to misspend that which they must give a straight account of at the day of judgement. be not these miserable people here better than hawk hound, whore and the like o you that spend. that which they must give a straight account of at the day of judgement. be not these miserable people here better than hawk, hound, whore and the like o you that spend so much on they think it no dishonour to your person, no impoverish to your state to bestow somewhat to the raise up of christ kingdom and maintenance of so holy and heavenly a action as this. be god of his goodness that have. give you ability to perform it. make you willing to help it forward with the best of your power, for after many day thou shall find it. hitherto have we speak of the commandment, and the several branch of the same now follow the reason of this commandment, which the holy ghost after many day, thou shall find it. hitherto have we speak of the commandment and the several branch of the same. now follow the reason of this commandment, which the holy ghost use here to stir we up unto liberality which be take from the reward which we shall have of our well-doing. for after many day, thou shall find it, the some of which reason be that, though god do not present reward our well do, but do defer the requital of it for many day. yet thy good work shall not perish, but god, at the appoint time, shall abundant recompense thy liberality. out of this reason we may gather two notable conclusion. touch the reward of liberality first. we may conclude from hence that god at the appoint time shall abundant recompense thy liberality. out of this reason we may gather two notable conclusion. touch the reward of liberality first. we may conclude from hence that god do not always give a present reward to the good work he do, for the most part, defer his reward many day, sometime, many year, yea, sometime, even till death itself, when he will never cease to reward. we, according to our work, with unspeakable joy of bless immortality and the wisdom of god, do thus defer his reward for most singular reason. for if god shall present reward good work, who then will not be a prodigal giver? who then will be a faithful giver? for when a man be certain of present gain, he if god shall present reward good work, who then will not be a prodigal giver? who then will be a faithful giver? for when a man be certain of present gain, he will not spare to give abundant because he see a exceed profit ready to be put into his hand. for so do. and this will stir up the most covetous wretch in the world to be liberal gape out of mere covetousness after a overplus of reward, wherefore god have make the time and condition of his reward doubtful. that we may not be covetous of the benefit, but that he may exercise our faith and teach we, with patience of hope, to expect the appoint time of his reward, the principal point of perfect charity. covetous of the benefit, but that he may exercise our faith and teach we, with patience of hope, to expect the appoint time of his reward. the principal point of perfect charity be that we give in faith. who true nature be to depend upon god for the good success of our alm, heb 11.1. for faith be the ground of thing that be hope for and the evidence of thing that be not see. now, if we shall have the reward of good work in the view of our eye and ready as it be to be put into our hand, what place will then be leave for practice of faith? who object be unseen, who hope be of afterward? wherefore s paul advise timothy to charge. to be put into our hand. what place will then be leave for practice of faith? who object be unseen, who hope be of afterward? wherefore s paul advise timothy to charge they that be rich in this world to be rich in good work. 1. tim, 6. not for any present reward which they be to have, but only for the benefit to come. lay up, say he, in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come that they may obtain eternal life. the message which god send to cornelius by his angel be worthy to be note of. we act 10.4. thy prayer, say the angel to he, and thy alm be, come up into remembrance before god. cornelius, be a man that angel be worthy to be note of. we act 10.4. thy prayer, say the angel to he, and thy alm be come up into remembrance before god. cornelius be a man that have give much alm to the poor, which god do not present reward for. he do seem rather to have forget his liberality, wherefore now he say that his alm be come up into remembrance. the meaning whereof must needs be that, though god do seem to neglect his liberality yet, he have not forget his alm but now mean to reward they. 2. king 4.10. the shunamite woman that provide a chamber table, stool and candlestick for elisha, acts 9.36. and tabytha, which be dorcas that be so full of good work and alm deed. king. 4.10, the shunamite woman that provide a chamber table stool and candlestick for elisha acts 9.36 and tabytha, which be dorcas that be so full of good work and alm deed, which she do be, both at the first view rather punish for their good work. then present reward for the first lose, she only son. the second fall sick and untimely, die but mark the end. god forget not to requite they, even in this world for the shunamite, have her son restore to her alive by the prayer of elisha and dorcas, by the ministry of s peter, be raise again to life. by this that have be say, it may easy appear that god do, out of his infinite wisdom, defer the time and the ministry of s peter be raise again to life. by this that have be say, it may easy appear that god do, out of his infinite wisdom, defer the time and prolong many day, for the most part, the reward of our alm and liberality, from whence we may learn that it be the property of true charity to neglect the present reward, 1. cor 13.. for love, the mother of liberality, be not covetous but be bountiful. it believe all thing, it hope all thing and faith the ground and first pedigree of right give. do not make haste, isa 28.16, but repose itself upon the expectation of hope. wherefore, in communicate our good and distribute our alm, let we have no covetous eye aim at give. do not make haste, isa 28.16, but repose itself upon the expectation of hope. wherefore in communicate our good and distribute our alm, let we have no covetous eye aim at the present profit, but let we depend with faith upon the future blessing which shall come in due season. for if we will thorough consider the thing as it be, we shall find that all the reward of our well do come not from any merit or desert of we, but only from the mere mercy of god. what man can say that the good which he possess be his own? or what have we that we have not receive? when we have make the most and best of ourselves, we be but the steward of. good which he possess be his own, or what have we that we have not receive? when we have make the most and best of ourselves, we be but the steward of god good and the almner of his purse. why then shall we look to be pay extraordinary for the give of that which be not our own, but which we be command by our master to bestow? we have more need to pray with david, psal 130. ^ o lord, if thou be extreme to mark what be do amiss, who may abide it? and to confess that when we have do all that we can, we be but unprofitable servant. luke 17.20. it follow then that all the good which we do receive come not. and to confess that when we have do all that we can, we be but unprofitable servant. luke 17.20. it follow, then, that all the good which we do receive come not from our desert, but only from the riches of god. bounty which reward we, according to our work, do without any desert of we whatsoever. wherefore the eye of liberality do not look after the reward of the work, but they search how to do the work, how to give the alm, so as that they may be please to god and of he accept, and by he, if he see it, good reward. let then your liberal mind, you, honourable and charitable adventurer of virginia, be stir up to cast your alm on the water. accept and by he, if he see it, good reward. let then your liberal mind, you honourable and charitable adventurer of virginia, be stir up to cast your alm on the water of virginia, without hope of present profit. the base affection of the usurer will not look for the overplus of increase until the covenant time of his loan be expire. the husbandman cast his seed into the earth. wait upon god until harvest for a fruitful crop. very he that believe, do not make haste, be not over hasty with god. god will not yet reward you that he may make you more famous in the world, that the world may see your zeal and bear witness to the patience of your faith, not to greedy. yet reward you that he may make you more famous in the world, that the world may see your zeal and bear witness to the patience of your faith, not to greedy haste of covetous desire. the work be honourable and, now more than ever, sustain by most honourable man. o let we not then be weary of well-doing. forty year be expire before israel can plant in canaan, and yet god have call they by the word of his mouth, have lead they himself by a high hand. yet may you bold look for a short time of reward. the return which you have from the east indies, though they be, exceed rich, yet be the adventure doubtful, the expense chargeable and the expectation of return of. short time of reward. the return which you have from the east indies, though they be, exceed rich, yet be the adventure doubtful, the expense chargeable and the expectation of return of three year continuance. let i advise you to be as liberal in adventure hither, and i dare affirm that by god assistance, your profitable return shall be of more certainty and much short expectation. remember, i beseech you, how many life be lose, how many year be spend, what discouragement, what great loss the adventurer of spain and portugal suffer and underwent before they can be settle in the west indies or receive any profitable return from thence. and now, behold what rich load, what profitable return be yearly ship from thence shall our nation hitherto? can be settle in the west indies or receive any profitable return from thence. and now behold what rich load, what profitable return be yearly ship from thence. shall our nation, hitherto famous for noble attempt and the honourable finish of what they have undertake, be now tax for inconstancy and blame by the enemy of our protestation for uncharitableness? yea, shall we be a scorn among prince and a laugh stock among our neighbour nation for base. leave what we honourable begin, yea, for begin a discovery. who riches other man shall gather so soon as we have forsake it. awake you true heart. english man, you servant of jesus christ, remember that the plantation be god and the reward your country. wherefore aim not at your as we have. forsake it. awake you true heart. english man, you, servant of jesus christ, remember that the plantation be god and the reward your country. wherefore, aim not at your present private gain, but let the glory of god, who kingdom you now plant, and good of your country, who wealth you seek so far, prevail with you. that you respect not a present return of gain for this year or two, but that you will more liberal supply for a little space. this your christian work, which you so charitable begin. as for those spirit of slander who the devil have stir up to speak evil of this good land and to weaken the hand of our brother lest they shall go forward and pull. those spirit of slander who the devil have stir up to speak evil of this good land and to weaken the hand of our brother, lest they shall go forward and pull satan out of his dominion. let they take heed lest the punishment of shammua and his nine companion, the faithless searcher of the land of canaan, do befall they, and that they never live to taste of the commodity of this good land. but lest i may seem to exhort you to a unprofitable liberality or to argue god of forgetfulness to those that serve he faithful. hear now what a comfortable promise of reward god have make unto we in these word, which, be that after many day we shall find if god shall have. serve he faithful. hear now what a comfortable promise of reward god have make unto we in these word, which be that after many day we shall find, if god shall have command we to cast away without find. some discouragement there may have be to our weak nature, but since god have assure, promise we that we shall find in the end who will not obey the command, who will not be liberal. god have be always find true in his word, most faithful in his promise, genes 12.. if god do promise abraham that his seed shall inherit the land of canaan, abraham posterity shall, after many day in the appoint time, be plant peaceable in the land of canaan. if god promise solomon wisdom and his seed shall inherit the land of canaan. abraham posterity shall, after many day in the appoint time, be plant peaceable in the land of canaan. if god promise solomon wisdom and riches, ^ king 1. solomon shall be wise and rich than any prince of the earth if god promise that he will give his only son that whosoever believe in he shall not perish but have life everlasting. john 3: his son, jesus christ, shall be bear into the world at the appoint time and undergo the weight of god wrath for redemption of believer. shall god then faithful perform all his promise in so great matter and be unfaithful in lesser matter. oh, let no such base conceit of the almighty enter into our mind. believer. shall god then faithful perform all his promise in so great matter and be unfaithful in lesser matter? oh, let no such base conceit of the almighty enter into our mind as to think that he that spare not his own son- rom 8.32- to perform his promise to we will be so unmindful of we in so small a thing. the promise of god be many, prou 10.24- and most bountiful there. be that scatter, say solomon, and be more increase. and in the next verse he add: the liberal person shall have plenty. or as the hebrew text: be the soul of blessing shall be make fat, and he that water shall also have rain. most comfortable be the promise of liberalitis set down by or as the hebrew text be, the soul of blessing shall be make fat, and he that water shall also have rain. most comfortable be the promise of liberalitis set down by isaiah, chap 58.8. and if thou be liberal, thy light shall break forth as the morning and thy health shall grow speedy. thy righteousness shall go before thou and the glory of the lord shall embrace thou. what can be say more to encourage? we prou 19: 1^. yet, solomon add, he that have mercy on the poor, dare unto the lord, and the lord will recompense he what he have. give wherefore what be with liberality. give be not cast away, but lend unto the lord, unto he that be able to repay, we psalm^^^. lord will recompense, he what he have give, wherefore what be with liberality. give be not cast away, but lend unto the lord, unto he that be able to repay we psalm^^^ ^^. for both the heaven and the earth be he and who be also willing to recompense it, for he have promise so to do and confirm his word and promise by the sacrament, his seal. we do willing lend to a good creditor, especial if we have his bond with his hand and seal, to pay we what shall we trust man and distrust god? o far be it from we. my brother, let no such distrust possess our uncharitable mind. if we desire any more promise, let we observe what counsel christ give unto. distrust god. o far be it from we, my brother. let no such distrust possess our uncharitable mind. if we desire any more promise, let we observe what counsel christ give unto the pharisee luke^^^ ^^^. give alm of those thing which you have, and behold, all thing shall be clean unto you, which be as much as if he shall say: give alm, be liberal, for in so do your good shall be sanctify unto you and you shall attain to a holy and pure use of your good. the scripture be plain in this point. i will now come, therefore, to give you a view in brief, of those commodity and reward that we shall find here after not many but a few day. first, our point. i will now come, therefore, to give you a view in brief of those commodity and reward that we shall find here after not many, but a few day. first, our liberality, ground on faith and practise in love, will be a mean to help our soul forward in their passage to heaven, for they be the highway and tread path wherein we must walk to everlasting life. therefore, the more any man abound in good work, the more comfortable shall be his passage. second, they be such necessary fruit of faith that faith can go without they, for where no good work be, there be no faith. and where true save say be, there will be show good work. yea, we can hold true faith from. go without they. for where no good work be there, be no faith. and where true save say, be there will be, show good work. yea, we can hold true faith from do good. read for the proof of this, the epistle of saint james and the first epistle of saint john. beside the place which we have heretofore allege three: liberality be a notable mean against covetousness. for where true charity dwell, there be no room leave for covetousness to harbour in two contrary can be both at once in one subject. god and the devil will not dwell together. neither can covetousness and liberality be link together in one breast. thus shall the lord abundant reward our soul for our liberality, and many way more beside. devil will not dwell together, neither can covetousness and liberality be link together in one breast. thus shall the lord abundant reward our soul for our liberality, and many way more beside, if we be true charitable. but the bounty of god will have, we to taste of some temporal blessing beside, and after a few day, if we be cheerful giver, return a plentiful reward home unto we, wherefore that i may content the long mind of every man, i think it fit in the last place to recite a few commodity which in short time we may find here in virginia, for the charity bestow in this plantation, the whole continent of virginia, situate within the degree of 34. and 47. be a place beautify by time we may find here in virginia, for the charity bestow in this plantation. the whole continent of virginia, situate within the degree of 34. and 47.. be a place beautify by god with all the ornament of nature and enrich with his earthly treasure that part of it which we already possess, beginning at the bay of chaesapheac and stretch itself in northerly latitude to the degree of 39 and 40. be interline with seven most goodly river, the least whereof be equal to our river of thames, and all these river be so near join as 14. or 16. mile as that there be not very much distance of dry ground between either of they and those several main land. be every where water with many join as 14. or 16. mile, as that there be not very much distance of dry ground between either of they and those several main land. be every where water, with many vein or creek of water which sundry way do overthwart the land and make it almost navigable from one river to the other, the commodity whereof to those that shall inhabit this land be infinite in respect of the speedy and easy transportance of good from one river to the other. i can better manifest it unto you, but in advise you to consider whither the water or land have be more beneficial to the low-countries. but here we shall have the commodity both of water and land more ready, with less charge and labour than whither the water or land have be more beneficial to the low-countries. but here we shall have the commodity both of water and land more ready, with less charge and labour, than have be bestow by they. in turn, land into water, the river which we inhabit common call powhatan river, ebb and flow 140. mile into the main, at the mouth whereof be the two fort of henrico and charles, 42. mile upward be the fi^st and mother christian town seat, call james-towne, and 70. mile beyond that, upward, be the new town of henrico, build and so name in the memory of the noble prince henry of last and bless memory. ten miles-beyond this town be a place call the fall, because the river have there. build and so name in the memory of the noble prince henry of last and bless memory. ten miles-beyond this town be a place call the fall, because the river have there a great descent fall down between many mineral rock, which be there twelve mile, far beyond this place, be there a crystal rock wherewith the indian do head many of their arrow, three day journey from thence. be there a rock or stony hill find which be in the top cover, all over with a perfect and most rich silver oar. our man that go to discover those part have but two iron pickax with they and those so ill temper that the point of they turn again and bow at every stroke so that we go to discover those part have but two iron pickax with they and those so ill temper that the point of they turn again and bow at every stroke so that we can not search the entrails of that place. yet some trial be make of that oar with good success and argument of much horpe. six day journey beyond this, my. a great ridge of high hill do run along the main land, not far from who the indian report. a great sea do run which we common call a south sea, but in respect of our habitation be a west sea, for there the sun set from. we the high ground be much like unto the mould of france. clay and sand be proportionable, mix together. of our habitation be a west sea, for there the sun set from. we the high ground, be much like unto the mould of france. clay and sand be proportionable, mix together at the top, but if we dig any depth, as we have do for our brick, we find it to be red clay full of glister, spangle, there be many rocky place in all quarter, and more than probable likeliehood of rich mine of all sort. though i know all yet it be not convenient at this time that i shall utter all. neither have we have mean to search for any thing as we ought, through present want of man and former want of provision for the belly. as for iron, steele, antimonium and they. have. we have mean to search for any thing as we ought through present want of man and former want of provision for the belly as for iron, steele, antimonium, and they have rather offer themselves to our eye and hand. then be seek for of we the air of the country, especial about henrico and upward, be very temperate and agree well with our body. the extremity of summer be not so hot as spain, nor the cold of winter so sharp as the frost of england. the spring and harvest be the two long season and most pleasant. the summer and winter be both, but short. the winter be for the most part dry and fair, but the summer water, often with many great and sudden. season and most pleasant. the summer and winter be both but short, the winter be for the most part dry and fair, but the summer water, often with many great and sudden shower of rain, whereby the cold of winter be warm and the heat of summer cool. many have die with we heretofore through their own filthiness and want of bodily comfort for sick man, but now very few be sick among we, not above three person. among all the inhabitant of h^nrico, i will to god our soul be no sick than our body and that other of god blessing be as general and common as the bodily health. i have see it by experience, and dare bold affirm it, that sickness do more rage in. and that other of god blessing be as general and common as the bodily health. i have see it by experience, and dare bold affirm it, that sickness do more rage in england quarterly, then here yearly. i doubt that hereafter when our hospital or guesthouse be build up, you hear of many more cut off by the sword of justice, unless the better people be send over then perish by the disease of the country. the natural people of the land be general, such as you hear of before, a people to be fear of those that come upon they without defensive armour but otherwise fainthearted if they see their arrow can pierce and easy to be subdue. shirt of male or quilt, cotton coat. be the. those that come upon they without defensive armour but otherwise fainthearted if they see their arrow can pierce and easy to be. subdue shirt of male or quilt cotton coat be the best defence against they. there be but one or two of their petty king that for fear of we have desire our friendship, and those keep good quarter with we, be very pleasant among we and if occasion be serviceable unto we. our elder friend be pipsco and choapoke, who be our overtwhart neighbour at james-towne and have be friendly to we in our great want. the other be the werewance of chescheak who but late trade with we peaceable if we be once the master of their country and they stand in fear of we. great want the other be the werewance of chescheak who but late trade with we peaceable, if we be once the master of their country and they stand in fear of we which may, with few hand employ about nothing else, be in short time bring to pass. it be a easy matter to make they willing to forsake the devil, to embrace the faith of jesus christ and to be baptize beside you can easy judge how much they will be available to we in our discovery of the country, in our building and plant and quiet provision for ourselves, when we may peaceable pass from place to place without need of arm or guard the mean for our people to live and subsist here of themselves. and quiet provision for ourselves, when we may peaceable pass from place to place without need of arm or guard. the mean for our people to live and subsist here of themselves be many and most certain, both for beast, bird, fish and herb. the beast of the country be for the most part wild as lion, bear, wolf and dear fox, black and read rakown, bever, possown, squerrels, wild-cat who skin be of great price, and muske-rat which yield musk as the musk-cat do. there be two kind of beast among these, most strange. one of they be the female possown, which will let forth her young out of her belly and take they up into her belly again at her pleasure, without hurt to herself neither. of. they be the female possown which will let forth her young out of her belly and take they up into her belly again at her pleasure, without hurt to herself. neither think this to be a traveller tale, but the very truth, for nature have frame her fit for that service. my eye have be witness unto it, and we have send of they and their young one into england. the other strange condition creature be the fly squirrel which, through the help of certain broad flap of skin grow on each side of her foreleg, will fly from tree to three, 20. or 30. pace at one flight, and more if she have the benefit of a small breath of wind. beside these, since our come, foreleg will fly from tree to three 20. or 30. pace at one flight, and more if she have the benefit of a small breath of wind. beside these, since our come hither we have bring both kine, goat and hog which prosper well and will multiply exceed if they may be provide for this country. beside be replenish with bird of all sort, which have be the best sustenance of flesh which our man have have since they come also eagel and hawk of all sort, among who be ausprech, fish hawk and the cormorant, the wood be every whereful of wild turkey which abound and will run as swift as a greyhound in winter. our field be full of crane, heron, pigeon, partridge and blackbird. the the wood be every whereful of wild turkey, which abound and will run as swift as a greyhound in winter. our field be full of crane, heron, pigeon, partridge and blackbird. the river and creek be over, spread every where with water foul of the great and least sort as swan, flock of goose and brant, duck and mallard, sheldrake, dyvers, etc. beside many other kind of rare and delectable bird who name and nature i can yet recite, but we want the mean to take they. the river abound with fish, both small and great. the sea fish come into our river in march and continue until the end of september. great skull of herring come in first, shad of a great bigness and rock-fish follow they. the sea fish come into our river in march and continue until the end of september. great skull of herring come in first, shad of a great bigness and rock-fish follow they, trout, base flounder and other dainty fish come in before the other be go. then come multitude of great sturgeon, whereof we catch many and shall do more, but that we want good net answerable to the breadth and depth of our river. beside our channel be so foul in the bottom with great log and tree that we often break our net upon they, i can reckon, nor give proper name to the diu^rs kind of fresh fish in our river. i have catch with my angle pike, carp, eel, perch of six, several kind. they, i can reckon, nor give proper name to the diu^rs kind of fresh fish in our river. i have catch with my angle pike, carp, eel, perch of six, several kind crea-fish and the torope or little turtle, beside many small kind. wherefore, since god have fill the element of earth, air and water with his creature, good for our food and nourishment, let not the fear of starve hereafter or of any great want dishearten your valiant mind from come to a place of so great plenty. if the country be we and mean for the take of they, which short i hope shall be bring to pass, then all these shall be we. we have they now, but we be fain to fight for they. for the take of they, which, short i hope, shall be bring to pass, then all these shall be we. we have they now, but we be fain to fight for they than shall we have they without that trouble. fear not, then, to want food, but only provide mean to get it. here we have store of wildfowl in england, but what be they? better for they that can come by. they want mean to catch they even. such be and have be our case heretofore. but these be not all. the commodity which we may find here, for the earth will yield much more fruit to our industrious labour, as have be prove by the corn and other thing which we have plant this last year. may find here for the earth will yield much more fruit to our industrious labour, as have be prove by the corn and other thing which we have plant this last year. i have make proof of it with the help of three more. be a stranger to that business and have not a body enure to such labour and set so much corn in the idle hour of one week as will suffice, i for bread, one quarter of a year, and one commodity be beside in this corn, that from the time of set unto the time of gather, five month will abundant suffice. for we set corn from the begin of march until the end of may and reap or gather in julie, august and unto the time of gather. five month will abundant suffice, for we set corn from the begin of march until the end of may and reap or gather in julie, august and september. our english seed thrive very well here, as pease, onion, turnip, cabbage, coleflower, carrot, time, parseley, hyssop, marjoram and many other whereof i have taste and eat. what shall i name unto you? the diverse sort of tree, sweet wood and physical plant, the diverse kind of oak and walnut-tree, the pine, pitch-tree, soape-ash tree, sassafras, cedar ash, maple, cyprus and many more which i daily see and admire at the beauty and riches which god have bestow upon this people that yet know not how to use they. wherefore you right, wise and noble. which i daily see and admire at the beauty and riches which god have bestow upon this people that yet know not how to use they. wherefore you, right, wise and noble adventurer of virginia, who heart god, have stir up to build he a temple, to make he a house, to conquer a kingdom. for he here be not discourage with those many lamentable assault that the devil have make against we. he now rage most because he know his kingdom be to have a short end. go forward bold and remember that you fight under the banner of jesus christ, that you plant his kingdom who have already break the serpent head. god may defer his temporal reward for a season, but be assure that in under the banner of jesus christ that you plant his kingdom, who have already break the serpent head. god may defer his temporal reward for a season, but be assure that in the end you shall find riches and honour in this world and bless immortality in the world to come. and you, my brother, my fellow labourer, send up your earnest prayer to god for his church in virginia, that, since his harvest here be great but the labourer few, he will thrust forth labourer into his harvest. and pray also for i that the ministration of his gospel may be powerful and effectual by i to the salvation of many and advancement of the kingdom of jesus christ to who, with the father and the holy, ministration of his gospel may be powerful and effectual by i to the salvation of many and advancement of the kingdom of jesus christ to who, with the father and the holy spirit, be all honour and glory for evermore. amen. (@), (@), (@), (@), (@).