williams will, wellwishing williams will and testament, which to the ballad-singer he have send, to be disperse to all good people kind that will do well and bear a honest mind to the tune of: then let we to virginia go. i wish for no man riches, yet will i be more wealthy. and those that be both sick and lame i, will they be more healthy. i wish to be content with that which god do send i, and take his blessing in good part of all that he do lend i. i wish all cruel landlord will not be stony heart that to their tenant, which be poor, some rent, be back impart. then sure their heir will prosper and not so soon consume it as some, with dice and drab and drink and indian-weede perfume it. i wish all christian people in peace to live together and not for trifle go to law or wag of a feather the lawyer they make rich unto their own undo, as too too many in this land do, wring their hand with woo. i wish all shopkeepers will use true weight and measure and not with slight and rot ware. get such a deal of treasure with yea and nay and true and very dear brother i can sell under that price if it be unto my mother. i wish artificer and handy-crafty tradesman will make no slight and rot ware in which they so deceive man, their stuff be naught and rot and will not hold the wear. i wish that quacksalver and mountebank so busy that kill so many with their drug and live in corner privy they have some better skill and not so many murder those private fault they do commit the earth do quick smother. i wish that farmer rich that hord corn in corner and those that buy the bread of life and hide it in their garner it may from they be take who make such scarce of plenty ere it do rot as some have do and give to poor that be empty will baker all be honest. and collier. sell true measure. nor shrink their sack to wrong the poor. it will do they much pleasure. will souter. use good leather and tailor, leave their steal. the needy sort shall better live if all use honest deal. i wish all tapster eke their liquor not to spill it, nor yet to bombast up their jugge and pot with froth to fill it. you need not call for drink if you have money plenty. he will fill your brain and belly full, but soon your pocket empty. i wish all ostler eke to leave their double deal. nor use to grease their horse tooth, nor yet their oat be steal. they will cheat you to your face. strew oat on the peck bottom. the second part. to the same tune. will drunkard leave such drink and gallant leave their roar? will desperate dick forbear to stab and lecher leave their whore? if there be no pickpocket nor theeve in corner lurk, the hangman may go hang himself or starve for want of work. i doubt some money-monger that use great extortion which make dice of poor man bone. they shall have dives portion. i wish that jailer eke of country and of city will not use prisoner poor like dog, but take of they some pity. i wish all man be honest and all do love true deal, nor run in debt, good mind to cheat, nor any bent to steal. will there no cheat be, no cog, nor no lie will there be. no deceit at all in sell or in buy will some receive no bribe nor double fee. be take some client on the sure side will not have heart so ache and termer may keep home. be rule by honest neighbour, as many which be wise have do, and save their coin and labour. i wish no strife nor jar. twixt marry couple happen and then each thing will prosper well, their child well will batten. all thing will well increase by god, almighty power in discord. do not spend your day nor on each other low. likewise, i wish all parent their child well to nourish and in god word to train they up which like to vine will flourish and child have a care to please. your parent. true, then long you shall enjoy the land and have all thing most due. i wish true amity amongst neighbour may be common and that no honest mind man be match with a bad woman, nor that a honest wife do with a mad man. marry be so yok there be naught but strife and all thing seem to vary. i wish all wicked traitor and such like bloody fellow that do their king and country hate be hang on the gallow. i wish that peace and plenty may in our kingdom flourish and that the gospel, heavenly light we may embrace and nourish and all wish happiness unto my king. i render that long among we. he may reign in glory and in splendour. our gracious queen, god bless, and royal progeny. long let they live and after death, place they in heaven most high. i wish the clergy well, the noble and the gentry, the layman and the commons, all, poor man, i will not exempt. you, lord, send we charity, let we our life be mend and give thou thanks for all thy gift thou still to we art. send thus now my testament. i full have conclude and wish you well to use these line which here you have: peruse: this be my legacy which unto all be. give the lord, preserve you every one and send your soul to heaven. woe ^^ms.