good news from new-england. the good ship call the fortune which, in the month of novemb 1621.. bless be god, bring we a new supply of 35.. person be not long depart our coast ere. the great people of nanohigganset, which be report to be many thousand strong, begin to breath forth many threat against we, notwithstanding their desire, and obtain peace with we in the forego summer. insomuch as the common talk of our neighbour indian on all side be, of the preparation they make to come against we. in reason a man will think they shall have now more cause to fear we than before our supply come. but though none of they be present yet understand by other that they neither bring arm nor other. they shall have now more cause to fear we than before our supply come. but though none of they be present yet understand by other that they neither bring arm nor other provision with they but whole rely on we. be occasion they to sleight and brave we with so many threat as they do at length, come one of they to we, who be send by conanacus, their chief, sachim or king, accompany with one tokamahamon, a friendly indian. this messenger inquire for our interpreter who, not be at home, seem rather to be glad than sorry, and leave for he a bundle of new arrow lap in a rattle snake skin, desire to depart with all expedition but our governor not know what to make of. than sorry and leave for he a bundle of new arrow lap in a rattle snake skin. desire to depart with all expedition but our governor not know what to make of this strange carriage and compare it with that we have former hear commit he to the custody of captain standish. hope now to know some certainty of that we so often hear, either by his own relation to we or to at his return. desire myself have special familiarity with the other forenamed indian to see if i can learn any thing from he who answer be spare to this effect that he can not certain tell but think they be enemy to we. that night captain standish give i and another charge of he and who answer be spare to this effect that he can not certain tell but think they be enemy to we. that night, captain standish, give i and another charge of he and give we order to use he kind and that he shall not want any thing he desire, and to take all occasion to talk and inquire of the reason of those report we hear, and withal to signify that upon his true relation he shall be sure of his own freedom. at first fear so possess he that he can scarce say any thing, but in the end become more familiar and tell we that the messenger which his master send in summer to treat of peace, at his return persuade he rather to war and but in the end become more familiar and tell we that the messenger which his master send in summer to treat of peace, at his return persuade he rather to war and to the end he may provoke he thereunto, as appear to he by our report, detain many of the thing be send he by our governor, scorn the meanness of they, both in respect of what himself have former send and also of the greatness of his own person, so that he much blame the former messenger. say that upon the knowledge of this his false carriage, it will cost he his life. but assure we that upon his relation of our speech then with he to his master, he will be friend with we of his false carriage. it will cost he his life, but assure we that upon his relation of our speech then with he to his master, he will be friend with we. of this we inform the governor and his assistant and captain standish, who, after consultation, consider he howsoever, but in the state of a messenger, and it be as well against the law of arm among they as we in europe to lay violent hand on any such, set he at liberty. the governor give he order to certify his master that he have hear of his large and many threaten at which he be much offend. dare he in those respect to the utmost if he will not be reconcile to live peaceable as other his of his large and many threaten at which he be much offend. dare he, in those respect, to the utmost, if he will not be, reconcile to live peaceable as other? his neighbour manifest withal, as ever, his desire of peace but his fearless resolution: if he can not, so live among they. after which he cause meat to be offer he, but he refuse to eat, make all speed to return and give many thanks for his liberty but request the other indian again to return. the weather be violent. he use many word to persuade he to stay long but can not. whereupon he leave, he and say he be with his friend and will not take a journey in such extremity. after this, when return, persuade he to stay long, but can not. whereupon he leave, he and say he be with his friend and will not take a journey in such extremity. after this, when return and the arrow be deliver and the manner of the messenger carriage relate, he signify to the governor that to send the rattle snake skin in that manner import enmity and that it be no better than a challenge. hereupon, after some deliberation, the governor stuff the skin with powder and shot and send it back. return. no less. defiance to conanacus, assure he, if he have ship now present, thereby to send his man to nanohigganset, the place of his abode. they shall not need to come so far by land to we yet withal. if he have ship now present, thereby to send his man to nanohigganset, the place of his abode. they shall not need to come so far by land to we yet withal show that they shall never come unwelcome or unlooked for. this message be send by a indian and deliver in such sort as it be no small terror to this savage king, insomuch as he will not once touch the powder and shot or suffer it to stay in his house or country. whereupon the messenger refuse it. another take it up and have be post from place to place a long time at length, come whole back again in the mean time. know our own weakness, notwithstanding our high word and lofty look towards they be post from place to place a long time at length, come whole back again in the mean time, know our own weakness, notwithstanding our high word and lofty look towards they, and still lie open to all casualty, have as yet under god no other defence than our arm. we think it most needful to impale our town, which, with all expedition we accomplish in the month of february and some few day take in the top of the hill under which our town be seat, make four bulwark or ietty, without the ordinary circuit of the pale, from whence we can defend the whole town in three, whereof be gate and the four in time to be this be. do, captain standish, divide our strength into. of the pale from whence we can defend the whole town in three, whereof be gate and the four in time to be. this be, do captain standish, divide our strength into four squadron or company. appoint who he think most fit to have command of each and, at a general muster or train, appoint each his place, give each his company, give they charge upon every alarm to resort to their leader to their appoint place and, in his absence, to be command and direct by they that do according to his order. each draw his company to his appoint place for defence and there together discharge their musket, after which they bring their new commander to their house, where again they grace they with their shot. his company to his appoint place for defence and there together discharge their musket, after which they bring their new commander to their house, where again they grace, they with their shot, and so depart. fear also, lest the enemy, at any time, shall take any advantage by fire, our house captain standish, appoint a certain company that, whensoever they see or hear fire to be cry in the town, shall only betake themselves to their arm and shall enclose the house or place so endanger and stand aloof on their guard with their back towards the fire, to prevent treachery, if any be in that kind intend. if the fire be in any of the house of this guard, they be then free from it, but not. the fire to prevent treachery, if any be in that kind intend. if the fire be in any of the house of this guard, they be then free from it, but not otherwise without special command. long before this time we promise the people of massachuset, in the begin of march, to come unto they and trade for their fur, which be then come. we begin to make preparation for that voyage. in the mean time, a indian call hobbamock, who still live in the town, tell we that he fear the massachusets, or massachuseucks, for they so call the people of that place be join in confederacy with the nanohigganneuck, or people of nanohigganset, and that they therefore will take this opportunity to cut off captain standish. they so call the people of that place, be join in confederacy with the nanohigganneuck, or people of nanohigganset, and that they therefore will take this opportunity to cut off captain standish and his company abroad. but howsoever, in the mean time, it be to be fear that the nanohigganeuk will assault the town at home, give many reason for his jealousy, as also that be in the confederacy who, we shall find, will use many persuasion to draw we from our shallop to the indian house for their better advantage. to confirm this his jealousy, he tell we of many secret passage that pass between he and other, have their meeting ordinary abroad in the wood, but if at home, howsoever he be, exclude from their secrecy. he tell we of many secret passage that pass between he and other. have their meeting ordinary abroad in the wood, but if at home, howsoever he be, exclude from their secrecy, say it be the manner of the indian when they mean plain to deal open, but in this his practice. there be no show of honesty hereupon. the governor, together with his assistant and captain standish, call together such as by they be think most meet for advice in so weighty a business who, after consideration hereof, come to this resolution that, as hitherto upon all occasion between they and we, we have ever manifest undaunted courage and resolution. so it will not now stand with our safety to mew up ourselves in our new-enclosed town. upon all occasion, between they and we, we have ever manifest undaunted courage and resolution. so it will not now stand with our safety to mew up ourselves in our new-enclosed town, partly because our store be almost empty and therefore must seek out for our daily food, without which we can not long subsist, but especial for that. thereby they will see we dismay and be encourage to prosecute their malicious purpose with more eagerness than ever they intend, whereas, on the contrary, by the blessing of god, our fearless carriage may be a mean to discourage and weaken their proceed and therefore think best to proceed in our trade voyage. make this use of that we hear to go the better provide and use the more. to discourage and weaken their proceed and therefore think best to proceed in our trade voyage. make this use of that we hear to go the better, provide and use the more carefulness both at home and abroad. leave the event to the dispose of the almighty who, providence as it have hitherto, be over we for good. so we have now no cause, save our sin, to despair of his mercy in our preservation and continuance, where we desire rather to be instrument of good to the heathen about we than to give they the least measure of just offence. all thing be now in readiness. the forename captain with ten man, accompany with and hobbamock, set forward for the massachusets. but we have no soon turn. least measure of just offence. all thing be now in readiness. the forename captain, with ten man accompany with, and hobbamock, set forward for the massachusets. but we have no soon turn the point of the harbour, call the gurnet nose where be becalm. we let fall our grapnel to set thing to right and prepare to row. but there come a indian of tisquantum family, run to certain of our people that be from home with all eagerness, have his face wound and the blood still fresh on the same call to they to repair home. oft look behind he as if some other have he in chase. say that at namaschet, a town some fifteen mile from we, there be many of the nanohigganset massassowat, our. home. oft look behind he as if some other have he in chase. say that at namaschet, a town some fifteen mile from we, there be many of the nanohigganset massassowat, our suppose friend and conbatant, our fear enemy, with many other, with a resolution to take advantage on the present opportunity to assault the town in the captain absence, affirm that he receive the wound in his face for speak in our behalf and by sleight escape, look oft backward as if he suspect they to be at hand. this he affirm again to the governor, whereupon he give command that three piece of ordnance shall be make ready and discharge to the end, that if we be not out of hear we may return thereat, which governor, whereupon he give command that three piece of ordnance shall be make ready and discharge to the end, that if we be not out of hear we may return thereat, which we no soon hear. but we repair homeward with all convenient speed, arm ourselves and make all in readiness to fight. when we enter the harbour, we see the town likewise on their guard whither we haste with all convenient speed. the news be make know unto we. hobbamock say flat that it be false allure we of massassowats faithfulness, howsoever he presume, he will never have undertake any such act without his privity himself be a pinse, that be one of his chief champion or man of valour. it be the manner among they not. will never have undertake any such act without his privity himself be a pinse that be one of his chief champion or man of valour. it be the manner among they not to undertake such enterprise without the advice and furtherance of man of that rank. to this the governor answer: he shall be sorry that any just and necessary occasion of war shall arise between he and any the savage but especial massassowat. not that he fear he more than the rest, but because his love more exceed towards he than any. whereunto hobbamock reply: there be no cause wherefore he shall distrust he and therefore shall do well to continue his affection. but to the end thing may be, make more manifest the governor cause: hobbamock. there be no cause wherefore he shall distrust he and therefore shall do well to continue his affection. but to the end thing may be make more manifest. the governor cause hobbamock to send his wife with all privacy to puckanokick, the chief place of massassowats residence. pretend other occasion there to inform herself, and so we, of the right state of thing when she come thither and see all thing quiet and that no such matter be or have be intend. tell massassowat what have happen at plymouth by they call patuxet, which when he understand he be much offend at the carriage of return. many thanks to the governor for his good thought of he and assure he that according to their first article of peace. understand he be much offend at the carriage of return. many thanks to the governor for his good thought of he and assure he that according to their first article of peace, he will send word and give warning when any such business be towards. thus, by degree, we begin to discover who end be only to make himself great in the eye of this countryman by mean of his nearness and favour, with we not care who fall. so he stand in the general, his course be to persuade they. he can lead we to peace or war at his pleasure, and will oft threaten the indian, send they word in a private manner. we be intend short to kill they that thereby he may get gift. peace or war at his pleasure and will oft threaten the indian, send they word in a private manner: we be intend short to kill they, that thereby he may get gift to himself to work their peace, insomuch as they have he in great esteem than many of their sachims yea. they themselves seek to he, who promise they peace in respect of we yea, and protection also, so as they will resort to he, so that, whereas diverse be wont to rely on massassowat for protection and resort to his abode, now they begin to leave he and seek after. now, though, he can not make good these, his large promise, especial because of the continue peace between massassowat and we. he therefore raise this false. to leave he and seek after. now, though he can not make good these, his large promise, especial because of the continue peace between massassowat and we. he therefore raise this false alarm, hope, while thing be hot in the heat of blood, to provoke we to march into his country against he, whereby he hope to kindle such a flame, as will not easy be quench. and hope, if that block be once remove, there be no other between he and honour, which he love as his life and prefer before his peace. for these and the like abuse the governor sharp reprove he. yet be he so necessary and profitable a instrument, as at that time. we can not miss he, but when we understand his, and the like, abuse the governor sharp, reprove he. yet be he so necessary and profitable a instrument as at that time we can not miss he. but when we understand his deal, we certify all the indian of our ignorance and innocence therein, assure they till they begin with we. they shall have no cause to fear and if any hereafter shall raise any such report, they shall punish they as liar and seeker of their and our disturbance, which give the indian good satisfaction on all side. after this we proceed in our voyage to the massachusets where we have good store of trade and bless be god. return in safety, though drive from before our town in great danger and extremity of weather at our to the massachusets where we have good store of trade and bless be god. return in safety though drive from before our town in great danger and extremity of weather. at our return we find massassowat at the plantation who make his seem just apology for all former matter of accusation. be much offend and enrage against who the governor pacify as much as he can for the present, but not long after his departure he send a messenger to the governor, entreat he to give way to the death of who have so much abuse he. but the governor answer, although he have deserve to die both in respect of he and we. yet for our sake he desire he will spare he and the rather because he, but the governor answer, although he have deserve to die both in respect of he and we. yet for our sake he desire he will spare he and the rather, because without he he know not well how to understand himself or any other, the indian. with this answer, the messenger return, but come again not long after, accompany with diverse other demand. he from massassowat, their master as be one of his subject, who by our first article of peace we can not retain yet because he will not willing do it without the governors approbation, offer he many bever skin for his consent thereto say that, according to their manner, their sachim have send his own knife and they therewith to cut off his head. governors approbation, offer he many bever skin for his consent thereto say that, according to their manner, their sachim have send his own knife and they therewith to cut off his head and hand and bring they to he, to which the governor answer it be not the manner of the english to sell man life at a price, but when they have deserve just to die, to give they their reward and therefore refuse their beaver as a gift but send for who, though he know their intent yet offer not to fly but come and accuse hobbamock as the author and worker of his overthrow. yield himself to the governor to be send or not, according as he think, meet. but at the instant when our and accuse hobbamock as the author and worker of his overthrow, yield himself to the governor to be send or not, according as he think, meet. but at the instant when our governor be ready to deliver he into the hand of his executioner, a boat be see at sea to cross before our town and fall behind a head-land not far off, whereupon have hear many rumour of the french and not know whether there be any combination between the savage and they. the governor tell the indian he will first know what boat that be ere. he will deliver he into their custody but be mad with rage and impatient at delay. they depart in great heat. here let i not omit one notable though wicked. be ere he will deliver he into their custody, but be mad with rage and impatient at delay. they depart in great heat. here let i not omit one notable, though wicked practise of this: who, to the end, he may possess his countryman with the great fear of we and so consequent of himself. tell they, we have the plague bury in our store-house, which, at our pleasure, we can send forth to what place or people we will, and destroy they therewith, though we stir not from home. be upon the forenamed brabble send for by the governor to this place where hobbamock be and some other of we, the ground be, break in the midst of the house whereunder certain barrel of powder be bury. for by the governor to this place, where hobbamock be and some other of we, the ground be break in the midst of the house, whereunder certain barrel of powder be bury, though unknown to he. hobbamock, ask he what it mean, to who he ready answer that be the place wherein the plague be bury, whereof he former tell he and other. after this, hobbamock ask one of our people whether such a thing be and whether we have such command of it, who answer no, but the god of the english have it in store and can send it at his pleasure to the destruction of he and our enemy. this be, as i take it, about the end of may 1622.. at which time our store and can send it at his pleasure to the destruction of he and our enemy. this be, as i take it, about the end of may 1622.. at which time our store of victual be whole spend have live long before with a bare and short allowance. the reason be that supply of man, before mention, which come so unprovided, not land so much as a barrel of bread or meal for their whole company, but contrariwise receive from we for their ship store homeward. neither be the setter forth thereof altogether to be blame therein, but rather certain among ourselves who be too prodigal in their writing and report of that plenty we enjoy. but that i may return this boat prove to be a shallop. therein, but rather certain among ourselves who be too prodigal in their writing and report of that plenty we enjoy. but that i may return. this boat prove to be a shallop that belong to a fish ship call the sparrow, set forth by master thomas weston, late merchant and citizen of london, which bring six or seven passenger at his charge that shall before have be land at our plantation, who also bring no more provision for the present than serve the boat gang for their return to the ship, which make her voyage at a place call damarin cove, near munhiggen, some forty league from we, north-east-ward about, which place there fish above thirty sail of ship and whither myself be employ by our governor with a place call damarin cove, near munhiggen, some forty league from we north-east-ward, about which place there fish above thirty sail of ship and whither myself be employ by our governor with order to take up such victual as the ship can spare. where i find kind entertainment and good respect, with a willingness to supply our want, but be not able to spare that quantity i require by reason of the necessity of some among themselves who they supply before my come, will not take any bill for the same but do what they can free wish their store have be such as they may in great measure have, express their own love and supply our necessity, for which they sorrow, provoke one another to the utmost. free wish their store have be, such as they may in great measure have express their own love and supply our necessity, for which they sorrow, provoke one another to the utmost of their ability which, although it be not much among so many people as be at the plantation, yet through the provident and discreet care of the governor, recover and preserve strength till our own crop on the ground be ready. have dispatch there, i return home with all speed convenient, where i find the state of the colony much weak than when i leave it. for till now we be never without some bread, the want whereof much abate the strength and flesh of some and swell other. but here it may be say if leave it for till now we be never without some bread, the want whereof much abate the strength and flesh of some and swell other. but here it may be say, if the country abound with fish and fowl in such measure as be report, how can man undergo such measure of hardness except through their own negligence? i answer: every thing must be expect in its proper season. no man, as one say, will go into a orchard in the winter to gather cherry. so he that look for fowl there in the summer will be deceive in his expectation. the time they continue in plenty with we be from the begin of october to the end of march, but these extremity befall we in may and be deceive in his expectation. the time they continue in plenty with we be from the begin of october to the end of march, but these extremity befall we in may and june. i confess that as the foul decrease, so fish increase and indeed their exceed abundance be a great cause of increase. our want for though our bay and creek be full of and other fish, yet for want of fit and strong sayne and other net, they for the most part break thorough and carry all away before they and though the sea be full of cod, yet we have neither tackle nor harseis for our shallop, and indeed have we not be in a place where diverse sort of shellfish be that may be. be full of cod, yet we have neither tackle nor harseis for our shallop. and indeed, have we not be in a place where diverse sort of shellfish, be that may be, take with the hand? we must have perish, unless god have raise some unknown or extraordinary mean for our preservation in the time of these streit, indeed, before my go to munhiggen, the indian begin again to cast forth many insult speech, glory in our weakness and give out how easy it will be ere long to cut we off. now also, massassowat seem to frown on we and neither come or send to we. as former, these thing occasion further thought of fortification, and whereas we have a hill, call the mount, enclose within our to frown on we and neither come or send to we, as former, these thing occasion. further thought of fortification, and whereas we have a hill, call the mount, enclose within our pale, under which our town be seat, we resolve to erect a fort thereon, from whence a few may easy secure the town from any assault the indian can make, while the rest may be employ as occasion serve this work be begin with great eagerness and with the approbation of all man, hope that this be once finish and a continual guard there keep. it will utter discourage the savage from have any hope or thought of rise against we, and though it take the great part of our strength from dress our corn yet keep, it will utter discourage the savage from have any hope or thought of rise against we, and though it take the great part of our strength from dress our corn yet, life be continue. we hope god will raise some mean in stead thereof for our further preservation. in the end of june or beginning of july come into our harbour two ship of master weston aforesaid, the one call the charity, the other the swan. have in they some fifty or sixty man, send over at his own charge to plant for he these we receive into our town, afford they whatsoever courtesy our mean condition can afford there the charity be the big ship leave. they have many passenger which she be to land in. we receive into our town, afford they whatsoever courtesy. our mean condition can afford there the charity. be the big ship leave. they have many passenger which she be to land in virginia. in the mean time, the body of they refresh themselves at plymouth while some, most fit, seek out a place for they. that little store of corn we have be exceed waste by the unjust and dishonest walk of these stranger who, though they will sometime seem to help we in our labour about our corn, yet spare not day and night to steal the same. it be then eatable and pleasant to taste, though green and unprofitable, and though they receive much kindness, set light both by it, and we not spare to require. steal the same. it be then eatable and pleasant to taste, though green and unprofitable, and though they receive much kindness set light both by it and we not spare to require the love we show they with secret backbite, revile, etc. the chief of they be forestale and make against we before they come as after, appear nevertheless for their master sake, who former have deserve well from we, we continue to do they whatsoever good or furtherance. we can attribute these thing to the want of conscience and discretion, expect each day when god in his providence will disburden we of they sorrow that their overseer be not of more ability and fitness for their place and much fear. what will be the issue of such in his providence will disburden we of they sorrow that their overseer be not of more ability and fitness for their place and much fear what will be the issue of such raw and unconscionable beginning at length. their coaster return have find, in their judgement, a place fit for plantation within the bay of the massachusets, at a place call by the indian wichaguscusset, to which place the body of they go with all convenient speed, leave still with we such as be sick and lame, by the governors permission though on their part undeserved, who, our surgeon, by the help of god, recover gratis for they and they fetch home as occasion serve. they have not be long from we ere the indian fill our ear. who our surgeon, by the help of god, recover gratis for they and they fetch home as occasion serve. they have not be long from we ere the indian fill our ear with clamour against they for steal their corn and other abuse conceive by they, at which we grieve the more because the same man in my own hear have be earnest in persuade captain standish before their come to solicit our goruernour to send some of his man to plant by. they allege many reason how it may be commodious for we, but we know no mean to redress those abuse, save reproof and advise they to better walk. as occasion serve, in the end of august come other two ship into our harbour. the one know, no mean to redress those abuse, save reproof and advise they to better walk as occasion serve. in the end of august come other two ship into our harbour. the one, as i take it, be, call the discovery, captain jones, have the command thereof. the other be that ship of mr weston, call the sparrow, which have now make her voyage of fish and be consort with the other. be both bind for virginia of captain jones. we furnish ourselves of such provision as we most need and he can best spare who, as he use we kind, so make we pay large for the thing we have and have not the almighty in his all-ordering providence, direct he to we, it will have go worse. he use we kind, so make we pay large for the thing we have and have not. the almighty in his all-ordering providence, direct he to we. it will have go worse with we than ever it have be or after. be for as we have now, but small store of corn for the year follow. so for want of supply we be wear out of all manner of trucking-stuffe. nor have any mean leave to help ourselves by trade. but through god, good mercy towards we, he have wherewith and do supply our want on that kind competent in the end of september or beginning of october, mr weston, big ship call the charity, return for england and leave their colony sufficient victual as some of most. that kind competent in the end of september or beginning of october, mr weston, big ship call the charity return for england and leave their colony sufficient victual, as some of most credit among they report. the lesser call the swan remain with his colony for their further help, at which time they desire to join in partnership with we to trade for corn, to which our govenour and his assistant agree upon such equal condition as be draw and confirm between they and we the chief place aim at be to the southward of cape cod, and the more because who peace before this time be wrought with massassowat, undertake to discover unto we that suppose and still hope passage within the shoal. both colony be thus. cod, and the more because who peace before this time be wrought with massassowat, undertake to discover unto we that suppose and still hope passage within the shoal. both colony be thus agree and their company fit and join together. we resolve to set forward but be oft cross in our purpose. as first, master richard greene, brother in law to master weston, who from he have a charge in the oversight and government of his colony, die sudden at our plantation, to who we give burial, befit his place in the best manner we can afterwards have further order to proceed by letter from their other governor at the massachusets. twice, captain standish set forth with they but be drive in again by cross and violent wind. afterwards have further order to proceed by letter from their other governor at the massachusets. twice captain standish set forth with they but be drive in again by cross and violent wind, himself the second time be sick of a violent fever by reason whereof our own want be like to be now great than former, partly because we be enforce to neglect our corn and spend much time in fortification, but especial because such havoc be make of that little we have through the unjust and dishonest carriage of those people. before mention at our first entertainment of they, our governor in his own person supply the captain place and in the month of november again set forth have for his interpreter and pilot who affirm he. first entertainment of they, our governor in his own person, supply the captain place and, in the month of november, again set forth, have for his interpreter and pilot, who affirm: he have twice pass within the shoal of cape cod, both with english and french. nevertheless, they go so far with he as the master of the ship, see no hope of passage but be, as he think, in danger, bear up and, according to tisquantum direction, make for a harbour not far from they, at a place call manamoycke, which they find and sound it with their shallop, find the channel though, but narrow and crooked, where at length they harbour the ship. here they perceive that the tide set in and out with more violence. it with their shallop, find the channel, though, but narrow and crooked, where at length they harbour the ship. here they perceive that the tide set in and out with more violence at some other place more southerly, which they have not see nor can discover by reason of the violence of the season, all the time of their abode there. some judge the entrance thereof may be beyond the shoal, but there be no certainty thereof as yet. know that night the governor, accompany with other, have for his interpreter go ashore at first. the inhabitant play lest in sight, because none of our people have ever be there before but understand the end of their come at length. come to. they welcome our governor according to. inhabitant play lest in sight, because none of our people have ever be there before but understand the end of their come at length. come to they, welcome our governor according to their savage manner, refresh they very well with store of venison and other victual which they bring they in great abundance, promise to trade with they with a seem gladness of the occasion. yet their joy be mix with much jealousy, as appear by their after practice, for at first they be loath. their dwelling shall be know. but when they see our governors resolution to stay on the shore all night, they bring he to their house, have first, convey all their stuff to a remote place not far from the same, which one of resolution to stay on the shore all night. they bring he to their house, have first convey all their stuff to a remote place not far from the same, which one of our man walk forth occasional espy, whereupon, on the sudden, neither it nor they can be find, and so many time after, upon conceive occasion, they will be all go bag and baggage. but be afterward by tisquantum mean better persuade. they leave their jealousy and trade with they where they get eight hogshead of corn and bean though the people be but few. this give our governor and the company good encouragement. be still confident in the passage, and the inhabitant affirm they have see ship of good burden pass within the shoal aforesaid. but this give our governor and the company good encouragement, be still confident in the passage. and the inhabitant affirm: they have see ship of good burden pass within the shoal aforesaid, but here though they have determine to make a second assay. yet god have otherways dispose who strike with sickness, in so much as he there die, which cross their southward trade, and the more because the master sufficiency be much doubt and the season very tempestuous and not fit to go upon discovery, have no guide to direct they from thence they depart, and the wind be fair for the massachusets go thither, and the rather because the savage, upon our motion, have plant much corn for we, which they promise not long before that time. the wind be fair for the massachusets go thither and the, rather because the savage, upon our motion, have plant much corn for we, which they promise. not long before that time, when they come thither they find a great sickness to be among the indian, not unlike the plague, if not the same. they renew their complaint to our governor against that other plantation seat by they for their injurious walk. but indeed the trade, both for fur and corn, be overthrow in that place. they give as much for a quart of corn as we use to do for a beaver skin, so that little good can be there do. from thence they return into the bottom of the bay of cape cod, to a place we use to do for a beaver skin so that little good can be there do. from thence they return into the bottom of the bay of cape cod, to a place call nauset where the sachim use the governor very kind and where they buy eight or ten hogshead of corn and bean. also at a place call mattachy where they have like kind entertainment and corn also during the time of their trade. in these place there be so great and violent storm as the ship be much endanger and our shallop cast away so that they have now no mean to carry the corn aboard that they have buy. the ship ride by their report well near two league from the same her own boat. so that they have now no mean to carry the corn aboard that they have. buy the ship, ride by their report. well, near two league from the same her own boat, be small and so leak, have no carpenter with they as they dare scarce fetch wood or water in she. hereupon, the governor cause the corn to be make in a round stack and buy mat and cut sedge to cover it and give charge to the indian not to meddle with it, promise he that dwell next to it, a reward if he will keep vermin also from it, which he undertake, and the sachim promise to make good. in the mean time, according to the governors request, the sachim send man to seek the will keep vermin also from it, which he undertake, and the sachim promise to make good. in the mean time, according to the governors request the sachim send man to seek the shallop which they find bury almost in sand at a high-water mark. have many thing remain in she but unserviceable for the present, whereof the governor give the sachim special charge that it shall not be further break promise ere long to fetch both it and the corn, assure they. if neither be diminish, he will take it as a sign of their honest and true friendship which they so much make show of. but if they be, they shall certain smart for their unjust and dishonest deal and further make good whatsoever they have so. and true friendship which they so much make show of. but if they be, they shall certain smart for their unjust and dishonest deal and further make good whatsoever they have. so take so he do likewise at mattachy and take leave of they be resolve to leave the ship and take his journey home by land with our own company. send word to the ship that they shall take their first opportunity to go for plymouth, where he determine, by the permission of god, to meet they and have. procure a guide, it be no less than fifty mile to our plantation. set forward, receive all respect that can be from the indian in his journey and come safe home, though weary and surbate whither some three. less than fifty mile to our plantation, set forward, receive all respect that can be from the indian in his journey and come safe home, though weary and surbate whither. some three day after the ship also come the corn be divide which they have, get master weston company go to their own plantation. it be further agree that they shall return with all convenient speed and bring their carpenter that they may fetch the rest of the corn and save the shallop. at their return, captain standish be recover and in health, take another shallop and go with they to the corn which they find in safety. as they leave it also they mend the other shallop and get all their corn aboard the ship. this be and go with they to the corn which they find in safety as they leave it. also, they mend the other shallop and get all their corn aboard the ship. this be in january, as i take it. it be very cold and stormy, insomuch as the harbour be none of the best. they be constrain to cut both the shallop from the ship stern and so lose they both a second time. but the storm be over and seek out, they find they both not have receive any great hurt while they be at nauset, have occasion to lie on the shore, lay their shallop in a creek not far from they, a indian come into the same and steal certain bead, cisser and other trifle out. have occasion to lie on the shore, lay their shallop in a creek. not far from they, a indian come into the same and steal certain bead, cisser and other trifle out of the same which, when the captain miss he take certain of his company with he and go to the sachim, tell he what have happen and require the same again, or the party that steal they who be know to certain of the indian, or else he will revenge it on they before his departure and so take leave for that night be late, refuse whatsoever kindness they offer. on the morrow the sachim come to their rendezvous, accompany with many man in a stately manner who salute the captain in this wise, he thrust. late, refuse whatsoever kindness they offer. on the morrow the sachim come to their rendezvous, accompany with many man in a stately manner, who salute the captain in this wise: he thrust out his tongue that one may see the root thereof, and therewith lick his hand from the wrist to the finger end withal bow the knee, strive to imitate the english gesture, be instruct therein former by his man, do the like, but in so rude and savage a manner as our man can scarce for bear to break out in open laughter. after salutation, he deliver the bead and other thing to the captain, say he have much beat the party for do it. cause the woman to make bread and bring they according to. salutation. he deliver the bead and other thing to the captain, say he have much beat the party for do it cause the woman to make bread and bring they according to their desire. seem to be very sorry for the fact but glad to be reconcile. so they depart and come home in safety where the corn be equal divide as before. after this the governor go to two other inland town with another company and buy corn likewise of they, the one be call namasket, the other manomet. that from namasket be bring home partly by indian woman but a great sickness arise among they. our own man be enforce to fetch home the rest. that at manomet the governor leave in the sachime custody. this partly by indian woman, but a great sickness arise among they, our own man be enforce to fetch home the rest that at manomet the governor leave in the sachime custody. this town lie from we south well near twenty mile and stand upon a fresh river which run into the bay of nanohigganset and can be less than sixty mile from thence. it will bear a boat of eight or ten ton to this place, hither the dutch or french, or both, use to come it be from hence to the bay of cape cod, about eight mile, out of which bay it flow into a creek some six mile, almost direct towards the town. the head of the river and this creek be not far distant. about eight mile, out of which bay it flow into a creek some six mile, almost direct towards the town. the head of the river and this creek be not far distant. this river yield thus high oyster, muscle, clam and other shellfish, one in shape like a bean, another like a clam, both good meat and great abundance at all time. beside it abound with diverse sort of fresh fish in their season. the governor, or sachim, of this place be call canacum, who have former as well as many other yea, all with who, as yet we have to do, acknowledge themselves the subject of our sovereign lord the king. this sachim use the governor very kind and it seem be of good respect and authority. as yet we have to do acknowledge themselves the subject of our sovereign lord the king, this sachim use the governor very kind and it seem be of good respect and authority among the indian. for while the governor be there, within night in bitter weather, come two man from manamoick before speak of and have set aside their bow and quiver according to their manner, sit down by the fire and take a pipe of tobacco. not use any word in that time, nor any other to they, but all remain silent, expect when they will speak. at length, they look towards canacum and one of they make a short speech and deliver a present to he from his sachim, which be a basket of tobacco and will speak at length. they look towards canacum and one of they make a short speech and deliver a present to he from his sachim, which be a basket of tobacco and many bead, which the other receive thankful, after which he make a long speech to he. the content hereof be relate to we by hobbamock, who then accompany the governor for his guide to be as follow: it happen that two of their man sell out as they be in game, for they use game as much as any where and will play away all, even their skin from their back, yea, and for their wife skin also, though it may be. they be many mile distant from they, as myself have see and grow to. all, even their skin from their back, yea, and for their wife, skin also though it may be. they be many mile distant from they, as myself have see and grow to great heat. the one kill the other. the actor of this fact be a powah, one of special more among they, and such a one as they can not well miss. yet another people great than themselves threaten they with war if they will not put he to death. the party offend be in hold. neither will their sachim do one way or other till their return. rest upon he for advice and furtherance in so weighty a matter. after this, there be silence a short time at length. man give their judgement what they think. till their return. rest upon he for advice and furtherance in so weighty a matter. after this there be silence a short time at length. man give their judgement what they think best. among other, he ask hobbamock what he think. who answer he be but a stranger to they, but think it be better that one shall die than many, since he have deserve it and the rest be innocent, whereupon he pass the sentence of death upon he not long after, have no great quantity of corn. leave captain standish. go again with a shallop to mattachy. meet also with the like extremity of weather, both of wind, snow and frost. insomuch as they be freeze in the harbour the first night, they enter the same. shallop to mattachy, meet also with the like extremity of weather, both of wind, snow and frost, insomuch as they be freeze in the harbour. the first night they enter the same here. they pretend their wont love and spare they a good quantity of corn to confirm. the same stranger also come to this place, pretend only to see, he and his company, who they never see before that time but intend to join with the rest to kill they as after appear, but be force through extremity to lodge in their house, which they much press. god, possess the heart of the captain with just jealousy. give strait, command that as one part of his company sleep, the rest shall wake. declare some thing to they. much press. god possess the heart of the captain with just jealousy. give strait command that as one part of his company sleep, the rest shall wake. declare some thing to they which he understand, whereof he can make no good construction. some of the indian spy, a fit opportunity. steal some bead also from he which he no soon perceive have not above six man with he. draw they all from the boat and set they on their guard about the sachims house, where the most of the people be threaten to fall upon they without further delay if they will not forthwith restore they. signify to the sachim especial, and so to they all, that as he will not offer the least injury, so he will. without further delay. if they will not forthwith restore, they signify to the sachim especial, and so to they all, that as he will not offer the least injury, so he will not receive any at their hand which shall escape without punishment or due satisfaction. hereupon, the sachim bestir, he to find out the party which, when he have do cause he to return they again to the shallop and come to the captain, desire he to search whether they be not about the boat. who suspect their knavery, send one who find they lie open upon the boat cuddie. yet to appease his anger they bring corn afresh to trade, insomuch as he lade his shallop and so depart. this accident, so daunt their courage as open upon the boat cuddie. yet to appease his anger they bring corn afresh to trade, insomuch as he lade his shallop and so depart. this accident so daunt their courage as they dare not attempt any thing against he, so that through the good mercy and providence of god they return in safety. at this place. the indian get abundance of both summer and winter. for it be now february, they abound with they. in the begin of march, have refresh himself, he take a shallop and go to manomet to fetch home that which the governor have former buy. hope also to get more from they, but be deceive in his expectation. not find that entertainment he find elsewhere and the governor have there receive the the governor have former buy hope also to get more from they, but be deceive in his expectation not find that entertainment he find elsewhere. and the governor have there receive the reason whereof and of the treachery intend in the place before speak of. be not then know unto we, but afterward wherein may be observe the abundant mercy of god. work with his providence for our good captain standish be now far from the boat and not above two or three of our man with he and as many with the shallop be not long at canacum, the sachims house, but in come two of the massachuset man, the chief of they be call a notable insult villain one who have former imbrue his hand in. long at canacum, the sachims house, but in come two of the massachuset man, the chief of they be, call a notable insult villain, one who have former imbrue his hand in the blood of english and french and have oft boast of his own valour and deride their weakness. especial because, as he say, they die cry, make sour face, more like child than man, this villain take a dagger from about his neck which he have get of master weston people and present it to the sachim and, after make a long speech in a audacious manner, frame it in such sort as the captain. though he be the best linguist among we, can not gather any thing from it. the end of it be afterward. a audacious manner, frame it in such sort as the captain, though he be the best linguist among we, can not gather any thing from it. the end of it be afterward discover to be as follow: the massacheuseuck have former conclude to ruinate master weston colony and think themselves be about thirty or forty man strong enough to execute the same. yet they dare not attempt it till such time as they have gather more strength to themselves. to make their party good against we at plymouth conclude that if we remain, though, they have no other argument to use against we. yet we will never leave the death of our countryman unrevenged, and therefore their safety can not be without the overthrow of both plantation to no other argument to use against we. yet we will never leave the death of our countryman unrevenged and therefore their safety can not be without the overthrow of both plantation. to this end they have former solicit this sachim, as also the other, call janough at mattachy and many other to assist they and now again come to prosecute the same. and since there be so fair a opportunity offer by the captain presence, they think best to make sure he and his company, after this his message be deliver. his entertainment much exceed the captain, insomuch as he scorn at their behaviour and tell they of it, after which they will have persuade he, because the weather be cold, to have send to the boat for captain, insomuch as he scorn at their behaviour and tell they of it. after which they will have persuade he, because the weather be cold, to have send to the boat for the rest of his company. but he will not desire, according to promise that the corn may be carry down and he will content the woman for their labour, which they do at the same time. there be a lusty indian of paomet or cape cod then present, who have ever demean himself well towards we be in his general carriage, very affable, courteous and love especial towards the captain. this savage be now enter into confederacy with the rest. yet, to avoid suspicion, make many sign of his continue affection and will needs bestow a. and love especial towards the captain. this savage be now enter into confederacy with the rest. yet to avoid suspicion, make many sign of his continue affection and will needs. bestow a kettle of some six or seven gallon on he and will not accept of any thing in lieu thereof. say he be rich and can afford to bestow such favour on his friend who he love also, he will free help to carry some of the corn. affirm he have never do the like in his life before. and the wind be bad will needs lodge with he at their rendezvous. have indeed undertake to kill he before they part. which do they intend to fall upon the rest? the night prove exceed cold, insomuch as needs lodge with he at their rendezvous, have indeed undertake to kill he before they part. which do they intend to fall upon the rest the night prove exceed cold insomuch as the captain can not take any rest but either walk or turn himself to and fro at the fire. this the other observe and ask wherefore he do not sleep as at other time. who answer he know not well, but have no desire at all to rest, so that he then miss his opportunity. the wind serve. on the next day they return home accompany with the other indian who use many argument to persuade they to go to paomet, where himself have much corn and many other, the most whereof he will procure for. home accompany with the other indian who use many argument to persuade they to go to paomet, where himself have much corn and many other the most whereof he will procure. for we seem to sorrow for our want once the captain put forth with he and be force back by contrary wind. which wind serve for the massachuset be fit to go thither. but on a sudden it alter again. during the time that the captain be at manomet, news come to plymouth that massassowat be like to die and that at the same time there be a dutch ship drive so high on the shore by stress of weather right before his dwell that till the tide increase she can not be get off now it. there be a dutch ship drive so high on the shore by stress of weather right before his dwell that till the tide increase she can not be get off. now. it be a commendable manner of the indian, when any especial of note be dangerous, sick for all that, profess friendship to they, to visit they in their extremity, either in their person or else to send some acceptable person to they. therefore, it be think meet be a good and warrantable action that, as we have ever profess friendship, so we shall now maintain the same by observe this their laudable custom and the, rather, because we desire to have some conference with the dutch, not know when we shall have so fit a opportunity to the same by observe this, their laudable custom and the rather, because we desire to have some conference with the dutch- not know when we shall have so fit a opportunity to that end. myself have former be there and understand in some measure the dutch tongue- the governor again lay this service upon myself and fit i with some cordial to administer to. he have one master, john hamden, a gentleman of london who then winter with we and desire much to see the country for my consort and hobbamock for our guide. so we set forward and lodge the first night at namasket where we have friendly entertainment. the next day, about one of the clock, we come to a ferry in conbatant country where upon set forward and lodge the first night at namasket where we have friendly entertainment. the next day, about one of the clock, we come to a ferry in conbatant country where, upon discharge of my piece, diverse indian come to we from a house not far off there. they tell we that massassowat be dead and that day bury, and that the dutch will be go before we can get thither, have hove off their ship already. this news strike we blank. but especial hobbamock, who desire we may return with all speed, i tell he, i will first think of it. consider now that he be dead, conbatant be the most like to succeed he, and that we be not above three mile from mattapuyst, his dwell. i will first think of it. consider, now that he be dead conbatant, be the most like to succeed he, and that we be not above three mile from mattapuyst, his dwell place. although he be but a hollow-hearted friend towards we, i think no time so fit as this to enter into more friendly term with he and the rest of the sachims thereabout hope. through the blessing of god, it will be a mean in that unsettle state to settle their affection towards we, and though it be somewhat dangerous in respect of our personal safety, because myself and hobbamock have be employ upon a service against he which he may now fit revenge, yet esteem it the best mean, leave the event to god in. personal safety. because myself and hobbamock have be employ upon a service against he which he may now fit revenge, yet esteem it the best mean, leave the event to god in his mercy. i resolve to put it in practice if master hamden and hobbamock dare attempt it with, i who i find willing to. that or any other course may tend to the general good. so we go towards mattapuyst. in the way hobbamock manifest a trouble spirit break forth into these speech, etc. my love sachim, my love sachim, many have i know, but never any like thou. and turn he to, i say while i live i shall never see his like among the indian. say he be no liar, he be not bloody. but never any like thou and turn he to i say while i live i shall never see his like among the indian. say he be no liar, he be not bloody and cruel like other indian in anger and passion. he be soon reclaim, easy to be, reconcile towards such as have offend. he rule by reason in such measure as he will not scorn the advice of mean man and that he govern his man better with few stroke than other. do with many true love where he love. yea he fear we have not a faithful friend. leave among the indian, show how he ofttimes restrain their malice etc. continue a long speech with such sign of lamentation and unfeigned sorrow as it will have. not a faithful friend, leave among the indian, show how he ofttimes restrain their malice etc. continue a long speech with such sign of lamentation and unfeigned sorrow as it will have make the hard heart relent at length. we come to mattapuy and go to the sachimo, for so they call the sachims place, though they call a ordinary house witeo, but conbatant the sachim be not at home but at puckanokick, which be some five or six mile off the squa-sachim, for so they call the sachims wife. give we friendly entertainment here. we inquire again concern massassowat. they think he dead but know no certainty, whereupon i hire one to go with all expedition to puckanokick that we may know the certainty thereof and withal. inquire again concern massassowat. they think he dead but know no certainty, whereupon i hire one to go with all expedition to puckanokick that we may know the certainty thereof and withal to acquaint with our there be. about half a hour before sunne-setting, the messenger return and tell we that he be not yet dead, though there be no hope we shall find he live. upon this we be much reviue and set forward with all speed, though it be late. within night ere we get thither about two of the clock that afternoon, the dutchman depart, so that in that respect our journey be frustrate. when we come thither we find the house so full of man as we can scarce get in, though they use. dutchman depart, so that in that respect our journey be frustrate. when we come thither we find the house so full of man as we can scarce get in, though they use their best diligence to make way for we there be they in the midst of their charm for he make such a hellish noise as it distemper we that be well and therefore unlike to ease he that be sick about he be six or eight woman who chafe his arm, leg and thigh to keep heat in he when they have make a end of their charm. one tell he that his friend the english be come to see. he have understanding leave, but his sight be whole go. he ask who be come they. end of their charm. one tell he that his friend the english be come to see. he have understanding, leave, but his sight be whole go. he ask who be come. they tell he winsnow, for they can pronounce the letter l but ordinary n in the place thereof. he desire to speak with i when i come to he, and they tell he of it, he put forth his hand to i, which i take. then he say twice, though very inward keen, winsnow, which be to say be thou winslow. i answer: ahhe, that be yes. then he double these word: matta, neon, wonckanet, winsnow, that be to say o winslow, i shall never see thou again. then i call hobbamock and desire he to tell. be yes, then he double these word: matta, neon, wonckanet, winsnow, that be to say o winslow, i shall never see thou again. then i call hobbamock and desire he to tell massassowat that the governor hear of his sickness. be sorry for the same, and though by reason of many business he can not come himself yet, he send i with such thing for he as he think most likely to do he good in this his extremity, and whereof, if he please to take, i will present. give he which he desire and have a confection of many comfortable conserve etc. on the point of my knife, i give he some which i can scarce get through his tooth when it be dissolve in his mouth. a confection of many comfortable conserve etc. on the point of my knife. i give he some which i can scarce get through his tooth. when it be dissolve in his mouth, he swallow the juice of it, whereat those that be about he much rejoice say he have not swallow any thing in two day before. then i desire to see his mouth, which be exceed fur, and his tongue swell in such manner as it be not possible for he to eat such meat as they have his passage be. stop up. then i wash his mouth and scrape his tongue and get abundance of corruption out of the same, after which i give he more of the confection which he swallow with more readiness. then wash his mouth and scrape his tongue and get abundance of corruption out of the same. after which i give he more of the confection which he swallow with more readiness. then he desire to drink. i dissolve some of it in water and give he thereof within half a hour. this wrought a great alteration in he. in the eye of all that behold he present. after his sight begin to come to he, which give he and we good encouragement in the mean time. i inquire how he sleep, and when he go to the stool they say he sleep not in two day before and have not have a stool in five. then i give he more and tell he of a mishap we have. the stool. they say he sleep not in two day before and have not have a stool in five. then i give he more and tell he of a mishap. we have, by the way, in break a bottle of drink which the governor also send. he say if he will send any of his man to patuxet i will send for more of the same also for chicken to make he broth and for other thing which i know be good for he and will stay the return of the messenger. if he desire this, he take marvelous kind and appoint some who be ready to go by two of the clock in the morning, against which time i make ready a letter, declare therein our good. he take marvelous kind and appoint some who be ready to go by two of the clock in the morning, against which time i make ready a letter, declare therein our good success, the state of his body etc. desire to send i such thing as i send for and such physic as the surgeon dare administer to he. he request i that the day follow. i will take my piece and kill he some fowl and make he some english pottage such as he have eat at plymouth, which i promise after his stomach come to he i must needs make he some without fowl before i go abroad, which somewhat trouble. i be unaccustomed and unacquainted in such business especial, have nothing to make it comfortable. to he i must needs make he some without fowl before i go abroad, which somewhat trouble. i be unaccustomed and unacquainted in such business. especial have nothing to make it comfortable. my consort be as ignorant as myself, but be, we must do somewhat. i cause a woman to bruise some corn and take the flower from it and set over the grut, or break corn in a pipkin, for they have earthen pot of all size. when the day break we go out, it be now march to seek herb but can not find any but strawberry leave, of which i gather a handful and put into the same, and because i have nothing to relish it, i go forth again and pull up a saxafras. any but strawberry leave, of which i gather a handful and put into the same, and because i have nothing to relish it, i go forth again and pull up a saxafras root and slice a piece thereof and boil it till it have a good relish and then take it out again, the broth be boil. i strain it through my handkerchief and give he at least a pint, which he drink and like it very well. after this his sight mend more and more. also, he have three moderate stool and take some rest. insomuch as we with admiration bless god for give his blessing to such raw and ignorant mean, make no doubt of his recovery himself. and all of they acknowledge we the instrument. insomuch as we with admiration bless god for give his blessing to such raw and ignorant mean, make no doubt of his recovery himself and all of they, acknowledge we the instrument of his preservation. that morning he cause i to spend in, go from one to another among those that be sick in the town, request i to wash their mouth also and give to each of they some of the same i give. he say they be good folk. this pain i take with willingness, though it be much offensive to i not be accustom with such poisonous savour. after dinner he desire i to get he a goose or duck and make he some pottage therewith with as much speed as i can. so i accustom with such poisonous savour after dinner he desire i to get he a goose or duck and make he some pottage therewith, with as much speed as i can. so i take a man with i and make a shot at a couple of duck, some six score pace off, and kill one at which he wonder. so we return forthwith and dress it, make more broth therewith which he much desire. never do i see a man so low bring recover in that measure in so short a time. the fowl be extraordinary fat. i tell hobbamock i must take off the top thereof, say it will make he very sick again if he do eat it. this he acquaint massassowat therewith, who will not be. i tell hobbamock i must take off the top thereof, say it will make he very sick again if he do eat it. this he acquaint massassowat therewith, who will not be persuade to it though i press it very much. show the strength thereof and the weakness of his stomach, which can not possible bear it notwithstanding, he make a gross meal of it and eat as much as will well have satisfy a man in health. about a hour after he begin to be very sick and strain very much, cast up the broth again and in over-straining himself begin to bleed at the nose and so continue the space of four hour. then they all wish he have be rule, conclude now he will die. again and in over-straining himself begin to bleed at the nose and so continue the space of four hour. then they all wish he have be rule, conclude now he will die, which we much fear. also. they ask i what i think of he. i answer his case be desperate. yet it may be it will save his life, for if it cease in time he will forthwith sleep and take rest, which be the principal thing he want. not long after his blood stay and he sleep at least six or eight hour. when he awake i wash his face and bathe and supple his beard and nose with a linen cloth, but on a sudden he chop his nose in the water and draw up. he awake, i wash his face and bathe and supple his beard and nose with a linen cloth, but on a sudden he chop his nose in the water and draw up some therein and send it forth again with such violence as he begin to bleed afresh, than they think there be no hope. but we perceive it be but the tenderness of his nostril and therefore tell they: i think it will stay present, as indeed it do. the messenger be now return, but find his stomach. come to he. he will not have the chicken kill, but keep they for breed. neither dare we give he any physic which be then send, because his body be so much alter since our instruction. neither see we. the chicken kill but keep they for breed. neither dare we give he any physic which be then send because his body be so much alter since our instruction. neither see we any need not doubt now of his recovery if he be careful. many, while we be there, come to see he, some by their report, from a place not less than a hundred mile to all that come one of his chief man relate the manner of his sickness, how near he be spend, how, among other, his friend the english come to see he, and how sudden they recover he to this strength they see he be now able to sit upright of himself. the day before our come, another sachim be there, tell he. he, and how sudden they recover he to this strength they see he be now able to sit upright of himself the day before our come. another sachim be there. tell he that now he may see how hollow-hearted the english be, say, if we have be such friend in deed as we be in show, we will have visit he in this his sickness, use many argument to withdraw his affection and to persuade he to give way to some thing against we which be motion to he not long before. but upon this his recovery, he break forth into these speech. now i see the english be my friend and love i, and while i live i will never forget this kindness they have, show i. recovery. he break forth into these speech. now i see the english be my friend and love i and while i live i will never forget this kindness they have. show i while we be there. our entertainment exceed all other, stranger, diverse other thing be worthy the note, but i fear i have be too tedious at our come away. he call hobbamock to he and private. none hear, save two or three other of his pneese who be of his council. reveal the plot of the massacheuseuck before speak of against master weston colony and so against. we say that the people of nauset, paomet, succonet, mattachy, manomet, agowaywam and the i will of capawack be join with they, himself also in his sickness, be earnest. and so against we say that the people of nauset, paomet, succonet, mattachy, manomet, agowaywam and the i will of capawack be, join with they, himself also in his sickness, be earnest solicit, but he will neither join therein nor give way to any of he. therefore, as we respect the life of our countryman and our own after-safety, he advise we to kill the man of massachuset who be the author of this intend mischief, and whereas we be wont to say we will not strike a stroke till they first begin. if, say he, upon this intelligence, they make that answer. tell they, when their countryman at wichaguscusset be kill, they be not able to defend themselves, that then it will be too late to recover. upon this intelligence. they make that answer. tell they, when their countryman at wichaguscusset be kill, they be not able to defend themselves, that then it will be too late to recover their life. nay, through the multitude of adversary they shall with great difficulty preserve their own, and therefore he counsel without delay to take away the principal, and then the plot will cease with this. he charge he thorough to acquaint i, by the way, that i may inform the governor thereof at my first come home, be fit for our return. we take our leave of he who return. many thanks to our governor and also to ourselves for our labour and love. the like do all that be about he. so we depart that. our leave of he who return. many thanks to our governor and also to ourselves for our labour and love. the like do all that be about he. so we depart that night through the earnest request of combatant who till now remain at sawaams or puckanukick. we lodge with he at mattapuyst. by the way, i have much conference with he, so likewise at his house he be a notable politician, yet full of merry, jest and squib, and never better, please, than when the like be return again upon he. among other thing, he ask i, if in case he be thus dangerous sick as massassowat have be, and shall send word thereof to for maskiet that be physic, whether then mr governor will send it. ask i if, in case he be thus dangerous sick as massassowat have be, and shall send word thereof to for maskiet that be physic, whether then mr governor will send it and if he will, whether i will come therewith to he. to both, which i answer yea, whereat he give i many joyful thanks after that be at his house. he demand further how we dare be. but two come so far into the country. i answer: where be true love, there be no fear, and my heart be so upright towards they that for my own part, i be fearless to come among they. but say he, if your love be such and it bring forth such fruit, how come it to pass that when? for my own part, i be fearless to come among they. but say he, if your love be such and it bring forth such fruit, how come it to pass that when we come to patuxet you stand upon your guard with the mouth of your piece present towards we? whereunto i answer it be the most honourable and respective entertainment we can give they. it be a order among we so to receive our best respect, friend, and as it be use on the land, so the ship observe it also at sea, which hobbamock know and have see, observe, but shake the head. he answer that he like not such salutation. further, observe we to crave a blessing on our meat before we do eat and know and have, see, observe, but shake the head. he answer that he like not such salutation. further, observe we to crave a blessing on our meat before we do eat and after to give thanks for the same. he ask we what be the meaning of that ordinary custom. hereupon i take occasion to tell they of god work of creation and preservation of his law and ordinance, especial of the ten commandment, all which they hearken unto with great attention, and like well, of only the seven commandment they, except against, think there be many inconvenience in it that a man shall be tie to one woman, about which we reason a good time. also, i tell they that whatsoever good thing we have, we receive. many inconvenience in it, that a man shall be tie to one woman, about which we reason a good time. also, i tell they that whatsoever good thing we have, we receive from god as the author and giver thereof and therefore crave his blessing upon that we have and be about to eat, that it may nourish and strengthen our body and have, eat sufficient, be satisfy therewith. we again return thanks to the same our god for that, our refresh, etc. this all of they conclude to be very well and say they believe almost all the same thing and that the same power that we call god, they call kietitan. much profitable conference be occasion hereby, which will be too tedious to relate yet be almost all the same thing and that the same power that we call god, they call kietitan. much profitable conference be occasion hereby, which will be too tedious to relate yet be no less delightful to they, then comfortable to we here we remain only that night, but never have better entertainment among any of they. the day follow in our journey, hobbamock tell i of the private conference he have with massassowat and how he charge. he perfect to acquaint i therewith, as i show before, which have do he use many argument himself to move we thereunto. that night we lodge at namasket and the day follow. about the midway between it and home we meet two indian who tell we that captain standish, be that. move we thereunto. that night we lodge at namasket and the day follow. about the midway between it and home we meet two indian who tell we that captain standish be that day go to the massachusets, but contrary wind again drive he back so that we find he at home where the indian of paomet still be be very importunate that the captain shall take the first opportunity of a fair wind to go with he. but their secret and villainous purpose: be through god mercy now make know the governor, cause captain standish to send he away without any distaste or manifestation of anger. that we may the better effect and bring to pass that which shall be think most necessary. before this journey we hear send he away without any distaste or manifestation of anger. that we may the better effect and bring to pass that which shall be think most necessary. before this journey we hear many complaint, both by the indian and some other, of best desert among master weston colony. how exceed their company, abase themselves by undirect mean to get victual from the indian who dwell not far from they, fetch they wood and water etc. and all for a meal, meat, whereas in the mean time they may, with diligence, have get enough to have, serve they three or four time other by night, break the earth and rob the indian store for which they have be public stock and whip. and yet be there. small amendment, this: they three or four time other by night, break the earth and rob the indian store for which they have be public stock and whip. and yet be there. small amendment: this be about the end of february, at which time they have spend all their bread and corn, not leave any for seed. neither will the indian lend or sell they any more upon any term. hereupon they have thought to take it by violence and to that spike up every entrance into their town. be well, empale, save one, with a full resolution to proceed. but some more honest mind advise john sanders, their overseer, first to write to plymouth, and if the governor advise he thereunto, he may the better do it. this course be. proceed. but some more honest mind advise john sanders, their overseer, first to write to plymouth, and if the governor advise he thereunto he may the better do it. this course be well like and a indian be send with all speed with a letter to our governor, the content whereof be to this effect: that be in great want and their people daily fall down. he intend to go to munhiggen, where be a plantation of sir ferdi gorges, to buy bread from the ship that come thither, a fish with the first opportunity of wind, but know not how the colony will be preserve. till his return he have use all mean both to buy and borrow of indian who he know to be store and wind but know not how the colony will be preserve till his return he have use all mean both to buy and borrow of indian who he know to be store and he think malicious with hold it and therefore be resolve to take it by violence and only wait the return of the messenger, which he desire shall be hasten, crave his advice therein, promise also to make restitution afterward. the governor, upon the receipt hereof, ask the messenger what store of corn they have, as if he have intend to buy of. they who answer very little more than that, they reserve for seed, have already spare all they can forthwith. the governor and his assistant send for many of we to advise with they herein. answer very little more than that. they reserve for seed, have already spare all they can forthwith. the governor and his assistant send for many of we to advise with they herein who, after serious consideration, no way approve of this. intend course the governor answer his letter and cause many of we to set our hand thereto, the content whereof be to this purpose. we altogether dislike their intendment as be against the law of god and nature. show how it will cross the worthy end and proceed of the king majesty and his honourable council for this place, both in respect of the peaceable enlarge of his majesty dominion and also of the propagation of the knowledge and law of god and the glad tiding of council for this place, both in respect of the peaceable enlarge of his majesty dominion and also of the propagation of the knowledge and law of god and the glad tiding of salvation which we and they be bind to seek. and be not to use such mean as will breed a distaste in the savage against our person and profession. assure they, their master will incur much blame hereby. neither can they answer the same. for our own part, our case be almost the same, with they have but a small quantity of corn leave and be enforce to live on ground, nut, clam, mussel and such other thing as natural the country afford and which do and will maintain strength and be easy to be get. and be enforce to live on ground, nut, clam, mussel and such other thing as natural, the country afford and which do and will maintain strength and be easy to be get, all which thing they have in great abundance, yea oyster also, which we want, and therefore necessity can not be say to constrain they thereunto, moreover, that they shall consider, if they proceed therein, all they can so get, will maintain they but a small time, and then they must perforce, seek their food abroad, which have make the indian their enemy, will be very difficult for they, and therefore much better to begin a little the soon and so continue their peace, upon which course they may, with good conscience, desire and expect the blessing. very difficult for they, and therefore much better to begin a little the soon and so continue their peace, upon which course they may, with good conscience, desire and expect the blessing of god, whereas on the contrary they can not. also that they shall consider their own weakness, be most swell and disease in their body and therefore the more unlikely to make their party good against they, and that they shall not expect help from we in that or any the like unlawful action last that, howsoever some of they may escape. yet the principal agent shall expect no better than the jailhouse whensoever any special officer shall be send over by his majesty or his council for new england, which we expect and who will. principal agent shall expect no better than the jailhouse, whensoever any special officer shall be send over by his majesty or his council for new england, which we expect and who will undoubted call they to account for the same. these be the content of our answer, which be direct to their whole colony. another particular letter our governor send to john sanders show how dangerous it will be for he, above all other, be he be their leader and commander, and therefore, in friendly manner, advise he to desist. with these letter we dispatch the messenger, upon the receipt whereof they alter their determination, resolve to shift as they can till the return of john sanders from munhiggen, who first come to plymouth, notwithstanding our own necessity. messenger, upon the receipt whereof they alter their determination, resolve to shift as they can till the return of john sanders from munhiggen, who first come to plymouth, notwithstanding our own necessity. the governor spare he some corn to carry they to munhiggen, but not have sufficient for the ship store. he take a shallop and leave other with instruction to over see thing till his return, set forward about the end of february, so that he know not of this conspiracy of the indian before his go, neither be it know to any of we. till our return from sawaams or puckanakick, at which time also another sachim call wassapinewat brother to obtaky, the sachim of the massachusets who have former smart for partake with coubatant and till our return from sawaams or puckanakick, at which time also another sachim call wassapinewat, brother to obtaky. the sachim of the massachusets, who have former smart for partake with coubatant and fear the like again to purge himself, reveal the same thing. the three and twenty of march be now come, which be a yearly court-day. the governor have a double testimony and many circumstance agree with the truth thereof. not be to undertake war without the consent of the body of the company. make know the same in public court, offer it to the consideration of the company. it be high time to come to resolution. how sudden soever it seem to, they fear it will be put in execution before we can give any intelligence. consideration of the company, it be high time to come to resolution. how sudden soever it seem to, they fear it will be put in execution before we can give any intelligence thereof. this business be no less troublesome than grievous, and the more because it be so ordinary in these time for man to measure thing by the event thereof, but especial for that we know no mean to deliver our countryman and preserve ourselves then by return their malicious and cruel purpose upon their own head and cause they to fall into the same pit they have dig for other though it much grieve we to shed the blood of those who good we ever intend and aim at as a principal in all our proceed. pit they have dig for other, though it much grieve we to shed the blood of those who good we ever intend and aim at as a principal in all our proceed, but in the end we come to this public conclusion that, because it be a matter of such weight as every man be not of sufficiency to judge nor fitness to know, because of many other indian which daily, as occasion, serve, converse with we, therefore the governor, his assistant and the captain shall take such to themselves as they think most meet, and conclude thereof which do we come to this conclusion that captain standish shall take so many man as he think sufficient to make his party good against all the indian in the conclude thereof? which do we come to this conclusion that captain standish shall take so many man as he think sufficient to make his party good against all the indian in the massachuset-bay and because, as all man know that have have to do in that kind, it be impossible to deal with they upon open defiance but to take they in such trap as they lie for other. therefore, he shall pretend trade as at other time, but first go to the english and acquaint they with the plot and the end of his own come that compare it with their carriage towards they. he may, the better judge of the certainty of it and more fit, take opportunity to revenge the same, but shall forbear if come that compare it with their carriage towards they. he may, the better judge of the certainty of it and more fit, take opportunity to revenge the same, but shall forbear, if it be possible, till such time as he can make sure that bloody and bold villain, before speak of who head he have order to bring with he that he may be a warning and terror to all of that disposition. upon this captain standish, make choice of eight man and will not take more because he will prevent jealousy. know their guilty conscience will soon be provoke thereunto. but on the next day, before he can go, come one of mr weston company by land unto we, with his pack at his back, who make will soon be provoke thereunto. but on the next day, before he can go, come one of mr weston company by land unto we with his pack at his back, who make a pitiful narration of their lamentable and weak estate and of the indian carriage who boldness increase abundant, insomuch as the victual they get, they will take it out of their pot and eat before their face. yea, if in any thing they gainsay they, they be ready to hold a knife at their breast that to give they content. since john sanders go to munhiggen, they have hang one of they that steal their corn, and yet they regard it not that another of their company be turn savage that their people have most forsake. to munhiggen. they have hang one of they that steal their corn, and yet they regard it not that another of their company be turn. savage that their people have most, forsake the town and make their rendezvous where they get their victual, because they will not take pain to bring it home that they have sell their clothes for corn and be ready to starve both with cold and hunger. also because they can not endure to get victual by reason of their nakedness and that they be disperse into three company scarce, have any powder and shot leave. what will be the event of these thing, he say he much fear and therefore not dare to stay any long among they, though he know not the powder and shot leave. what will be the event of these thing, he say he much fear and therefore not dare to stay any long among they, though he know not the way yet. adventure to come to we, partly to make know their weak and dangerous estate, as he conceive, and partly to desire he may there remain till thing, be better settle at the other plantation, as this relation be grievout to we. so it give we good encouragement to proceed in our intendment, for which captain standish be now fit and the wind come fair the next day, set forth for the massachusets. the indian at the massachusets miss this man and suspect his. come to we as we conceive, send one after he and come fair the next day, set forth for the massachusets. the indian at the massachusets miss this man and suspect his come to. we, as we conceive, send one after he and give out there that he will never come to patuxet but that some wolf or bear will eat he. but we know, both by our own experience and the report of other, that though they find a man, sleep yet so soon as there be life, discern they fear and shun he this indian, miss he but very little and miss he, pass by the town and go to manomet, who we hope to take at his return as afterward. we do now be our fort, make fit for service and some ordnance mount, and though the town and go to manomet, who we hope to take at his return as afterward. we do now be our fort, make fit for service and some ordnance mount, and though it may seem long work- it be ten month since it begin- yet we must note that where so great a work be begin, with such small mean, a little time can bring to perfection. beside those work which tend to the preservation of man, the enemy of mankind will hinder what in he lie, sometime blind the judgement and cause reasonable man to reason against their own safety. as among we diverse see the work prove tedious, will have, dissuade from proceed, flatter themselves with peace and security and account it rather a work of. reason against their own safety, as among we diverse, see the work prove tedious, will have, dissuade from proceed, flatter themselves with peace and security and account it rather a work of superfluity and vainglory, then, simple necessity. but god, who providence have, wake and, as i may say, watch for we, whilst we sleep, have determine to preserve we from these, intend treachery undoubted, ordain this as a special mean to advantage we and discourage our adversary, and therefore so stir up the heart of the governor and other forward instrument as the work be just, make serviceable against this needful and dangerous time, though we ignorant of the same. but that i may proceed, the indian last mention in his return from monomet, come through the. just make serviceable against this needful and dangerous time, though we ignorant of the same. but that i may proceed, the indian last mention in his return from monomet: come through the town, pretend still friendship and in love to see we, but as former other. so his end be to see whether we continue still in health and strength or fall into weakness like their neighbour, which they hope and look for. though god in mercy provide better for we, and he know will be glad tiding to his country man. but here the governor, stay he and send for he to the fort there, give the guard charge of he as their prisoner, where he tell he he must be content to remain till the return. stay he and send for he to the fort there, give the guard charge of he as their prisoner, where he tell he he must be content to remain till the return of captain standish from the massachusets so he be lock in a chain to a staple in the court of guard. and there keep thus be our fort hansel. this be the first day, as i take it, that ever any watch be there. keep the captain be. now come to the massachusets, go first to the ship, but find neither man or so much as a dog therein. upon the discharge of a musket, the master and some other of the plantation show themselves who be on the shore, gather ground-nut and get other food. much as a dog therein. upon the discharge of a musket, the master and some other of the plantation show themselves who be on the shore, gather ground-nut and get other food. after salutation, captain standish, ask they how they dare so leave the ship and live in such security. who answer, like man, senseless of their own misery. they fear not the indian, but live and suffer. they to lodge with. they not have sword or gun or need the same, to which the captain answer: if there be no cause, he be the glad. but upon further inquiry understand that those in who john sanders have receive most special confidence and leave in his stead to govern. the rest be at the plantation. thither he go. but upon further inquiry understand that those in who john sanders have receive most special confidence and leave in his stead to govern the rest. be at the plantation, thither he go and, to be brief, make know the indian purpose and the end of his own come. as also which former i omit that if afterward they dare not there stay, it be the intendment of the governor and people of plymouth there to receive they till they can be better provide. but if they conceive of any other course that may be more likely for their good, that himself shall further they therein to the uttermost of his power. these man compare other circumstance with that. they now hear answer. they can expect no better and for their good. that himself shall further they therein to the uttermost of his power. these man compare other circumstance with that. they now hear answer. they can expect no better, and it be god mercy that they be not kill before his come. desire therefore that he will neglect no opportunity to proceed hereupon. he advise they to secrecy, yet withal to send special command to one, three of their company that be far off, to come home, and there enjoin they on pain of death to keep the town himself. allow they a pint of indian corn to a man. for a day, though that store he have be spare out of our seed. the weather prove very wet and stormy. it be the long before of indian corn to a man. for a day though that store he have be spare out of our seed, the weather prove very wet and stormy. it be the long before he can do any thing. in the mean time a indian come to he and bring some fur, but rather to gather what he can from the captain. then come then for trade, and though the captain carry thing as smooth as possible he can, yet at his return he report, he see by his eye that he be angry in his heart and therefore begin to suspect themselves. discover this cause, one pecksuot, who be a pinese, be a man of a notable spirit, to come to hobbamock, who be then with they, and tell therefore begin to suspect themselves, discover this cause. one pecksuot, who be a pinese, be a man of a notable spirit to come to hobbamock, who be then with they, and tell he he understand that the captain be come to kill himself and the rest of the saluage there. tell he, say ho, we know it, but fear he not. neither will we shun he, but let he begin when he dare. he shall not take we at unaware. many time after diverse of they, several or few together, come to the plantation to he, where they will whet and sharpen the point of their knife before his face and use many other insult, gesture and speech among the rest, brag of the excellency of his knife. where they will whet and sharpen the point of their knife before his face and use many other insult gesture and speech among the rest brag of the excellency of his knife. on the end of the handle there be picture a woman face. but say he, i have another at home wherewith i have kill both french and english, and that have a man face on it, and by and by these two must marry further. he say of that knife: he, there have hinnaim michon cut, that be to say, by and by it shall see and by and by it shall eat, but not speak. also, pecksuot be a man of great stature than the captain tell. he though he be a great captain yet shall see, and by and by it shall eat but not speak. also, pecksuot be a man of great stature than the captain. tell he, though he be a great captain, yet he be but a little man. and say he, though i be no sachim, yet i be a man of great strength and courage. these thing the captain observe, yet bare with patience for the present on the next day. see, he can not get many of they together at once. and this and both together with another man and a youth of some eighteen year of age, which be brother to and villain-like tread in his step daily, put many trick upon the weak sort of man and have about as many of his own. eighteen year of age, which be brother to and villain-like tread in his step daily, put many trick upon the weak sort of man and have about as many of his own company in a room with. they. give the word to his man and the door be fast shut, begin himself with and snatch his own knife from his neck, though with much struggle, kill he therewith the point whereof he have make as sharp as a needle and ground the back also to a edge and the other man the rest kill and take the youth who the cap cause to be hang. but it be incredible how many wound these two pucese receive before they die. not make any fearful noise but catch at their the youth who the cap cause to be hang. but it be incredible how many wound these two pucese receive before they die. not make any fearful noise but catch at their weapon and strive to the last hobbamocke. stand by all this time as a spectator and meddle not, observe how our man demean themselves in this action. all be here, end, smile. he break forth into these. speech to the captain yesterday, pecksuot brag of his own strength and stature. say though you be a great captain, yet you be but a little man. but to day i see you be big enough to lay he on the ground. but to proceed there be some woman at the same time, captain standish, leave they in the but to day i see you be big enough to lay he on the ground but to proceed. there be some woman. at the same time, captain standish, leave they in the custody of mr weston people at the town and send word to another company that have intelligence of thing to kill those indian man that be among they. these kill two more, himself also with some of his own man, go to another place where they kill another and through the negligence of one man, a indian escape who discover and cross their proceed not long before this execution, three of mr weston man which more regard their belly then any command or commander have former fare well with the indian, for make they clanoe go. not long before this execution, three of mr weston man, which more regard their belly then any command or commander, have former fare well with the indian, for make they, clanoe, go again to the sachim to offer their service and have entertainment the first night. they come thither. within night late come a messenger with all speed and deliver a sad and short message, whereupon all the man gather together, put on their boot and breech, truss up themselves and take their bow and arrow and go forth, tell they they go a hunt and that at their return they shall have venison enough. be now go one. being more ancient and wise than the rest, call former thing to mind especial, the captain presence and the that at their return they shall have venison enough. be now go, one being more ancient and wise than the rest. call former thing to mind, especial the captain presence and the strait charge that on pain of death, none shall go a musket-shot from the plantation and compare this sudden departure of they there with begin to dislike and wish himself at home again, which be further of then. diverse other dwell hereupon. he move his fellow to return, but can not persuade they so there be none but woman leave, and the other that be turn savage about midnight. come away, forsake the path lest he shall be pursue and by this mean save his life. captain standish, take the one half of his man and be turn savage about midnight, come away, forsake the path lest he shall be pursue and by this mean save his life. captain standish, take the one half of his man and one or two of mr weston, and hobbamocke still seek to make spoil of they, and they, at length they espy a file of indian which make towards they amain and there be a small advantage in the ground by reason of a hill near they. both company, strive for it, captain standish, get it, whereupon they retreat and take each man his tree, let fly their arrow, amain, especial at himself and hobbamocke, whereupon hobbamocke cast off his coat and be a know pinese they be now kill, chase they so fast as our people. let fly their arrow, amain especial, at himself and hobbamocke, whereupon hobbamocke cast off his coat and be a know pinese. they be now kill, chase they so fast as our people be not able to hold way with he, insomuch as our man can have but one certain mark. and then but the arm and half face of a notable villain as he draw at captain standish who, together with another, both discharge at once at he and break his arm, whereupon they flee into a swampe. when they be in the thicket they parley, but to small purpose, get nothing but foul language. so our captain, dare the sachim to come out and fight like a man, show how base and woman like he be in. but to small purpose, get nothing but foul language. so our captain dare the sachim to come out and fight like a man, show how base and woman like he be in tongue it as he do. but he refuse and flee. so the captain return to the plantation where he release the woman and will not take their beaver coat from they nor suffer the least discourtesy to be offer. they now be, mr weston. people resolve to leave their plantation and go for munhiggen, hope to get passage and return with the fish ship. the captain tell they that for his own part he dare there live with few man than they be. yet since they be otherways, mind according to his order from the governor. the captain tell they that for his own part he dare there live with few man than they be. yet since they be otherways mind, according to his order from the governor and people of plymouth, he will help they with corn- competent for their provision, by the way, which he do scarce- leave himself more than bring they home. some of they dislike the choice of the body to go to munhiggen and therefore desire to go with he to plymouth. he take they into the shallop and see they set sail, and clear of the massachuset bay he take leave and return to plymouth whither he come in safety. bless, be god, and bring the head of with he. among the rest, there be a indian. the massachuset bay, he take leave and return to plymouth whither he come in safety. bless be god, and bring the head of with he. among the rest, there be a indian youth that be ever of a courteous and love disposition towards we. he, notwithstanding the death of his countryman, come to the captain without fear, say his good conscience and love towards we. embolden he so to do. this youth confess that the indian intend to kill mr weston people and not to delay any long than till they have two more canoe or boat which mr weston man will have finish by this time. have make they three already. have not the captain prevent they and the end of stay for those boat be to. boat which mr weston man will have finish by this time. have make they three already. have not the captain. prevent they and the end of stay for those boat be to take their ship therewith. now be the captain return and receive with joy the head. be bring to the fort and there set up. the governor and captain, with diverse other go up the same further to examine the prisoner who look piteous on the head. be ask whether he know it, he answer yea. then he confess the plot and that all the people provoke obtaky their sachim thereunto be draw to it by their importunity. five there be he say that prosecute it with more eagerness than the rest. the two principal be kill. people provoke obtaky their sachim thereunto be draw to it by their importunity. five there be he say that, prosecute it with more eagerness than the rest. the two principal be kill be pecksuot and who head be there. the other three be powah be yet live and know unto we, though one of they be wound as aforesaid for himself. he will not acknowledge that he have any hand therein. beg earnest for his life, say he be not a massachuset man but as a stranger. live with they hobbamock also. give a good report of he and beseech for he but be bribe. so to do nevertheless that we may show mercy as well as extremity. the governor release he and the rather, because we desire. of he and beseech for he, but be bribe so to do, nevertheless, that we may show mercy as well as extremity. the governor, release he and the rather, because we desire he may carry a message to obtakiest his master: no, soon be the iron from his leg, but he will have be go. but the governor bid he stay and fear not, for he shall receive no hurt. and by hobbamock command he to deliver this message to his master that for our part, it never enter into our heart to take such a course with they till their own treachery, enforce we thereunto and therefore may thank themselves for their own overthrow. yet since he have begin, if again by any, the like course he course, with they till their own treachery, enforce we thereunto and therefore may thank themselves for their own overthrow. yet since he have begin, if again by any the like course he do, provoke he, his country shall not hold he, for he will never suffer. he or he to rest in peace till he have utter consume they, and therefore shall take this as a warning further, that he shall send to patuxet the three englishman he have and not kill they also, that he shall not spoil the pale and house at wichaguscusset and that this messenger shall either bring the english or a answer, or both promise his safe return. this message be deliver and the party will have return with answer, but be at that this messenger shall either bring the english or a answer, or both promise his safe return. this message be deliver and the party will have return with answer, but be at first dissuade by they who afterward they will but can not persuade to come to we at length, though long. a woman come and tell we that obtaky be sorry that the english be kill before he hear from the governor, otherwise he will have send they also. she say he will fain make his peace again with we, but none of his man dare come to treat about it. have forsake his dwell and daily remove from place to place, expect when we will take further vengeance on he. concern those other people that intend. dare come to treat about it, have forsake his dwell and daily remove from place to place, expect when we will take further vengeance on he concern those other people that intend to join with the massachuseuck against we, though we never go against any of they. yet this sudden and unexpected execution, together with the just judgement of god upon their guilty conscience, have so terrify and amaze they, as, in like manner, they forsake their house, run so and fro like man, distract, live in swamp and other desert place, and so bring manifold disease among themselves, whereof very many be dead as canacum, the sachim of manomet aspinet, the sachim of nausat and janowh sachim of mattachurst, this sachim in his life in the midst. disease among themselves, whereof very many be dead, as canacum, the sachim of manomet aspinet, the sachim of nausat and janowh sachim of mattachurst, this sachim in his life, in the midst of these distraction, say the god of the english be offend with they and will destroy they in his anger and certain. it be strange to hear how many of late have and still daily die among they. neither be there any likelihood it will easy cease, because through fear they set little or no corn which be the staff of life and without which they can long preserve health and strength. from one of these place a boat be send with present to the governor, hope thereby to work their peace, but the boat be. which they can long preserve health and strength from one of these place. a boat be send with present to the governor, hope thereby to work their peace, but the boat be cast away and three of the person drown not far from our plantation. only one escape, who dare not come to we but return so as none of they dare come among we. i fear i have be too tedious both in this and other thing. yet when i consider how necessary a thing it be that the truth and ground of this action, especial, shall be make know and the several disposition of that dissolve colony who report undoubted will be as various, i can not but enlarge myself where i think to be most. especial shall be make know and the several disposition of that dissolve colony. who report, undoubted, will be as various. i can not but enlarge myself where i think to be most brief. neither dare i be too brief, lest i shall eclipse and rob god of that honour, glory and praise which belong to he. for preserve we from fall when we be at the pit brim and yet fear nor know not that we be in danger. the month of april be now come 1623. on all hand we begin to prepare for corne, and because there be no corn leave before this time, save that be, preserve for seed. be also hopeless of relief by supply, we think best to leave off all other work. and because there be no corn leave before this time, save that be, preserve for seed be also hopeless of relief by supply, we think best to leave off all other work and prosecute that as most necessary. and because there be no small hope of do good in that common course of labour, that former we be in for, that the governor that follow man to their labour have nothing to give man for their necessity and therefore can not (@) well exercise that command over they therein, as former they have do especial consider that self love wherewith every man in a measure more or less love and prefer his own good before his neighbour, and also the base disposition of some drone that, as at that self love wherewith every man, in a measure, more or less love and prefer his own good before his neighbour, and also the base disposition of some drone that, as at other time, so now especial, will be most burdenous to the rest. it be therefore think best that every man shall use the best diligence he can for his own preservation, both in respect of the time present and to prepare his own corn for the year. follow and bring in a competent portion for the maintenance of public officer, fisherman etc. which can not be free from their call without great inconvenience. this course be to continue till harvest and then the governor to gather in the appoint portion for the maintenance of themselves and not be free from their call, without great inconvenience, this course be to continue till harvest, and then the governor to gather in the appoint portion for the maintenance of themselves and such other as necessity constrain, to exempt from this condition only if occasion serve upon, any special service they may employ, such as they think most fit, to execute the same during this appoint time and, at the end thereof, all man to be employ by they in such service as they think most necessary for the general good and because there be great difference in the ground, that therefore a set quantity shall be set down for a person and each man to have his fall by lot as be most just and equal, and difference in the ground, that therefore a set quantity shall be set down for a person and each man to have his fall by lot, as be most just and equal and against which no man can, except at a general meeting of the company, many course be propound but this approve and follow as be the most likely for the present and future good of the company and therefore, before this month, begin to prepare our ground against seed time. in the midst of april we begin to set. the weather be then seasonable, which much encourage we give, we good hope of after plenty, the set season be good till the latter end of may. but it please god for our further chastisement to send a much encourage we give we good hope of, after plenty, the set season be good till the latter end of may, but it please god for our further chastisement to send a great drought, insomuch as in six week after the latter set there scarce fall any rain, so that the stalk of that be first set begin to send forth the ear before it come to half growth and that which be late, not like to yield any at all. both blade and stalk hang the head and change the colour in such manner as we judge it utter dead. our bean also run not up according to their wont manner but stand at a stay. many be parch away as though they have be scorch before. we judge it utter dead. our bean also run, not up according to their wont manner, but stand at a stay. many be parch away as though they have be scorch before the fire. now be our hope overthrow and we discourage. our joy be turn into mourn. to add also to this sorrowful estate in which we be. we hear of a supply that be send unto we many month since, which have two repulse before, be a three time in company of another ship, three hundred league at sea, and now, in three month time, hear no further of she, only the sign of a wrack be see on the coast which can not be judge to be any other than the same, so that at time hear no further of she, only the sign of a wrack be see on the coast which can not be judge to be any other than the same, so that at once god seem to deprive we of all future hope. the most courageous be now discourage, because god, which hitherto have be our only shield and supporter, now seem, in his anger, to arm himself against we and who can withstand the fierceness of his wrath. these and the like consideration move not only every good man, private, to enter into examination with his own estate between god and his conscience, and so to humiliation before he, but also, more solemn, to humble ourselves together before the lord, by fast and prayer to that end a. own estate between god and his conscience. and so to humiliation before he, but also, more solemn, to humble ourselves together before the lord, by fast and prayer. to that end, a day be appoint by public authority and set apart from all other employment. hope that the same god which have stir we up hereunto will be move hereby in mercy to look down upon we and grant the request of our deject soul. if our continuance there may any way stand with his glory and our good. but, oh, the mercy of our god, who be as ready to hear as we to ask for, though, in the morning when we assemble together, the heaven be as clear and the drought as like to continue as. who be as ready to hear as we to ask for, though, in the morning when we assemble together, the heaven be as clear and the drought as like to continue as ever it be. yet our exercise continue some eight or nine hour before our departure, the weather be overcast, the cloud gather together on all side and on the next morning distil such soft, sweet and moderate shower of rain continue some fourteen day and mix with such reasonable weather as it be hard to say whether our wither corn or droop affection be most quicken or revive. such be the bounty and goodness of our god. of this, the indian, by mean of hobbamock, take notice, who be then in the town and this exercise. most quicken or revive. such be the bounty and goodness of our god of this. the indian, by mean of hobbamock, take notice, who be then in the town and this exercise in the midst of the week, lay it be but three day since sunday, and therefore demand of a boy what be the reason thereof, which, when he know and see what effect follow thereupon, he and all of they admire the goodness of our god towards we that wrought so great a change in so short a time, show the difference between their conjuration and our invocation on the name of god for rain, they being mix with such storm and tempest as sometime in stead of. do they good it, lay the corn flat. conjuration and our invocation on the name of god for rain. they being mix with such storm and tempest as sometime, in stead of do they good it, lay the corn flat on the ground to their prejudice. but we, in so gentle and seasonable a manner as they never observe the like at the same time, captain standish, be former employ by the governor to buy provision for the refresh of the colony, return with the same accompany, with one, mr david tomson, a scotchman, who also, that spring, begin a plantation twenty five league north-east from we, near smith isle, at a place call pascatoquack, where he like well. now also hear we of the three repulse that our supply have, of their safe though dangerous. north-east from we, near smith isle, at a place call pascatoquack, where he like well. now also hear we of the three repulse that our supply have, of their safe though dangerous return into england and of their preparation to come to we. so that have these many sign of god favour and acceptation, we think it will be great ingratitude if secret, we shall smother up the same or content ourselves with private thanksgiving for that which by private prayer can not be obtain, and therefore another solemn day be set a part and appoint for that end, wherein we return glory, honour and praise with all thankfulness to our good god which deal so gracious with we who name for these and all other his mercy. for that end, wherein we return glory, honour and praise with all thankfulness to our good god, which deal so gracious with we who name for these and all other his mercy towards his church and choose one by they be. bless and praise now and evermore, amen. in the latter end of july and the beginning of august come two ship with supply unto we, who bring all their passenger except one, in health, who recover in short time, who also, notwithstanding all our want and hardship, bless be god- find not any one sick person among we at the plantation. the big ship call the anne be hire, and there again, freight back from whence we set sail, the ten of september. the lesser call the. person among we at the plantation. the big ship call the anne be hire and there again, freight back from whence we set sail the ten of september. the lesser call the little james be build for the company at their charge. she be now also fit for trade and discovery to the southward of cape cod and almost ready to set sail, who i pray god to bless in her good and lawful proceed. thus have i make a true and full narration of the state of our plantation and such thing as be most remarkable therein since decemb 1621.. if i have omit any thing, it be either through weakness of memory or because i judge it not material. i confess my style rude and unskilfulness. remarkable therein since decemb 1621.. if i have omit any thing, it be either through weakness of memory or because i judge it not material. i confess my style rude and unskilfulness in the task i undertake be urge thereunto by opportunity which i know to be want in other and but for which i will not have undertake the same yet as it be rude. so it be plain and therefore the easy to be understand wherein other may see that which we be bind to acknowledge, viz that if ever any people in these late age be uphold by the providence of god after a more special manner than other than we, and therefore be the more bind to celebrate the memory of his goodness with late age be uphold by the providence of god after a more special manner than other than we, and therefore be the more bind to celebrate the memory of his goodness with everlasting thankfulness. for in these forename strayt, such be our state, as in the morning we have often our food to seek for the day, and yet perform the duty of our calling. i mean other daily labour to provide for after time, and though at some time in some season, at noon i have see man stagger by reason of faintness, for want of food, yet ere night, by the good providence and blessing of god, we have enjoy such plenty as though the window of heaven have be open unto we. how few, weak, of food. yet ere night, by the good providence and blessing of god, we have enjoy such plenty, as though the window of heaven have be open unto we. how few, weak and raw be we at our first beginning and there settle and in the midst of barbarous enemy. yet god wrought our peace for we. how often have we be at the pit brim and in danger to be swallow up, yea, not know till afterward that we be in peril, and yet god preserve we, yea. and from how many that we yet know not of. he that know all thing can best tell, so that when i serious consider of thing, i can but think that god have a purpose to give that land. know not of, he that know all thing can best tell. so that when i serious consider of thing i can but think that god have a purpose to give that land as a inheritance to our nation, and great pity it be that it shall long lie in so desolate a state. consider it agree so well with the constitution of our body, be both fertile and so temperate for heat and cold, as in that respect one can scarce distinguish new-england from old. a few thing i think meet to add hereunto which i have observe among the indian. both touch their religion and sundry other custom among they. and first, whereas myself and other in former letter which come to the press against my will, have observe among the indian, both touch their religion and sundry other custom among they. and first, whereas myself and other, in former letter which come to the press against my will and knowledge, write that the indian about we be a people without any religion or knowledge of any god. therein i err, though we can then gather no better, for, as they conceive of many divine power, the meaning of the word kichtan, i think, have reference to antiquity, for chise be a old man and a man that exceed in age, so of one who they call kichtan, to be the principal and maker of all the rest and to be make by none. he, they say, create the heaven, earth, sea and all creature. one who they call kichtan, to be the principal and maker of all the rest and to be make by none. he, they say, create the heaven, earth, sea and all creature contain therein. also that he make one man and one woman, of who they and we and all mankind come. but how they become so far disperse, that know they not. at first they say there be no sachim or king but kichtan, who dwell above in the heaven, whither all good man go when they die, to see their friend and have their fill of all thing. this, his habitation lie far westward in the heaven. they say, thither the bad man, go also and knock at his door. but he bid, they quatchet that. fill of all thing this: his habitation lie far westward in the heaven. they say thither the bad man. go also and knock at his door, but he bid they quatchet, that be to say walk abroad, for there be no place for such, so that they wander in restless want and penury. never man see this kichtan, only old man. tell they of he and bid they tell their child yea, to charge they to teach their posterity the same and lay the like, charge upon they this power. they acknowledge to be good and when they will obtain any great matter, meet together and cry unto he, and so likewise for plenty, victory etc. sing, dance feast, give thanks and hang up garland and other thing. when they will obtain any great matter, meet together and cry unto he, and so likewise for plenty, victory etc. sing, dance feast, give thanks and hang up garland and other thing in memory of the same another power they worship, who they call hobbamock, and to the norward of we hobbamoqui- this, as far as we can conceive- be the devil. he they call upon to cure their wound and disease. when they be curable, he persuade they, he send the same for some conceive anger against they, but upon their call upon he can and do help they. but when they be mortal and not curable in nature, than he persuade they. kichtan be angry and send they who none can cure in so much as. and do help they, but when they be mortal and not curable in nature than he persuade they kichtan, be angry and send they who none can cure. in so much as in that respect only they somewhat doubt whether he be simple good and therefore, in sickness, never call upon he. this hobbamock, appear in sundry form unto they, as in the shape of a man, a dear, a fawn, a eagle, etc. but most ordinary, a snake. he appear not to all but the chief and most judicious among they, though all of they strive to attain to that hellish height of honour. he appear most ordinary and be most conversant with three sort of people. one, i confess, i neither know by name nor office. strive to attain to that hellish height of honour. he appear most ordinary and be most conversant with three sort of people. one, i confess, i neither know by name nor office direct. of these they have few, but esteem high of they and think that no weapon can kill they. another they call by the name of powah and the three pniese the office and duty of the powah be to be exercise principal in call upon the devil and cure disease of the sick or wound. the common people join with he in the exercise of invocation but do but only assent or, as we term it, say amen to that he say. yet sometime break out into a short musical note with he the powah. exercise of invocation, but do but only assent, or, as we term it, say amen to that he say. yet sometime break out into a short musical note with he the powah, be eager and free in speech, fierce in countenance and join many antic and laborious gesture with the same over the party disease. if the party be wound, he will also seem to suck the wound. but if they be curable, as they say, he touch it not. but a skooke that be the snake, or wobsacuck that be the eagle, sit on his shoulder and lick the same. this none see but the powah who tell they he do it himself. if the party be otherwise disease it be account sufficient if in any shape. shoulder and lick the same. this none see, but the powah, who tell they he do it himself. if the party be otherwise disease, it be account sufficient. if, in any shape he but come into the house, take it for a undoubted sign of recovery. and as in former age, apollo have his temple at delphos and diana at ephesus, so have i hear they call upon some as if they have their residence in some certain place or because they appear in those form. in the same. in the powah speech he promise to sacrifice many skin of beast, kettle, hatchet, bead, knife and other, the best thing they have, to the fiend if he will come to help the party disease, but whether they perform. sacrifice many skin of beast, kettle, hatchet, bead, knife and other, the best thing they have to the fiend if he will come to help the party disease. but whether they perform it i know not. the other practice i have see be necessary: call at some time to be with their sick and have use the best argument i can make they understand against the same they have tell i i shall see the devil at those time come to the party. but i assure myself and they of the contrary which so prove. yea themselves have confess they never see he when any of we be present in desperate and extraordinary hard travel in childbirth, when the party can be deliver by the ordinary mean they. themselves have confess they never see he when any of we be present in desperate and extraordinary hard travel in childbirth, when the party can be deliver by the ordinary mean they send for this powah, though ordinary their travel be not so extreme as in our part of the world, they be of a more hardy nature, for on the three day after childbirth i have see the mother with the infant upon a small occasion in cold weather in a boat upon the sea. many sacrifice the indian use and in some case kill child. it seem they be various in their religious worship in a little distance and grow more and more cold in their worship to kichtan. say in their memory he be much. child. it seem they be various in their religious worship in a little distance and grow more and more cold in their worship. to kichtan, say in their memory he be much more, call upon the nanohigganset, exceed in their blind devotion and have a great, spacious house wherein only some few, that be, as we may term they priest, come thither at certain know time, resort all their people and offer almost all the riches they have to their god as kettle, skin, hatchet, bead, knife, etc. all which be cast by the priest into a great fire that they make in the midst of the house and there consume to ash. to this offering every man bring free and the more he be know to bring. a great fire that they make in the midst of the house and there consume to ash to this offering every man bring free, and the more he be know to bring, have the better esteem of all man. this, the other indian about, we approve of as good and wish then sachims will appoint the like, and because the plague have not reign at nanohigganset as at other place, about they they attribute to this custom there, use the priese, be man of great courage and wisdom, and to these also the devil appear more familiar then to other and, as we conceive, make covenant with they to preserve they from death by wound with arrow, knife, hatcher, etc. or at least both themselves and especial the. familiar then to other and, as we conceive, make covenant with they to preserve they from death by wound with arrow, knife, hatcher etc. or at least both themselves and especial. the people think themselves to be free from the lame and though, against their battle, all of they, by paint, disfigure themselves. yet they be know by their courage and boldness, by reason, whereof one of they will chase almost a hundred man for they account it death for whosoever stand in their way. these be high esteem of all sort of people and be of the sachims council, without who they will not war or undertake any weighty business in war. their sachims, for their more safety, go in the midst of they. they be common. of the sachims council, without who they will not war or undertake any weighty business in war. their sachims, for their more safety, go in the midst of they. they be common man of the great stature and strength and such as will endure most hardness and yet be more discreet, courteous and human in their carryage then any among they scorn theft, lie and the like base deal and stand as much upon their reputation as any man and to the end they may have store of these. they train up the most forward and likely boy from their childhood in great hardness and make they abstain from dainty meat, observe diverse order, prescribe to the end that when they be of age the devil may appear. likely boy from their childhood in great hardness and make they abstain from dainty meat, observe diverse order, prescribe to the end that when they be of age the devil may appear to they. cause to drink the juice of sentry and other bitter herb till they cast, which they must disgorge into the platter and drink again and again till at length. through extraordinary oppress of nature, it will seem to be all blood, and this the boy will do with eagerness at the first and so continue till, by reason of faintness, they can scarce stand on their leg and then must go forth into the cold. also they beat their shin with stick and cause they to run through bush stump and bramble to make. scarce, stand on their leg and then must go forth into the cold. also. they beat their shin with stick and cause they to run through bush stump and bramble to make they hardy and acceptable to the devil that in time he may appear unto they. their sachims can be all call king, but only some few of they, to who the rest resort for protection and pay homage unto they. neither may they war without their knowledge and approbation. yet to be command by the great, as occasion serve of this sort be massassowat, our friend, and conanacus of our suppose enemy, every sachim take care for the widow and fatherless, also for such as be age and any way maim, if their friend be dead. our friend and conanacus of our suppose enemy, every sachim take care for the widow and fatherless also, for such as be age and any way maim. if their friend be dead or not able to provide for they, a sachim will not take any to wife, but such a one as be equal to he in birth. otherwise, they say, their seed will in time become ignoble. and though they have many other wife yet, be they no other than concubine or servant, and yield a kind of obedience to the principal who order the family and they in it, the like their man, observe also and will adhere to the first during their life but put away the other at their pleasure. this government be successive. family and they in it the like their man observe also and will adhere to the first during their life but put away the other at their pleasure. this government be successive and not by choice. if the father die before the son or daughter be of age, than the child be commit to the protection and tuition of some one among they who rule in his stead till he be of age. but when that be, i know, not every sachim know how far the bound and limit of his own country extend, and that be his own proper inheritance out of that. if any of his man desire land to set their corn, he give they as much as they can use and set they their. be his own proper inheritance out of that. if any of his man desire land to set their corn, he give they as much as they can use and set they their bound in this circuit, whosoever hunt. if they kill any venison, bring he his fee, which be the fore part of the same if it be kill on the land but if in the water than the skin thereof. the great sachims or king know their own bound or limit of land as well as the rest. all traveller or stranger for the most part, lodge at the sachims. when they come they tell they how long they will stay and to what place they go, during which time they receive entertainment according to their person. part lodge at the sachims. when they come they tell they how long they will stay and to what place they go, during which time. they receive entertainment according to their person, but want not. once a year the priese use to provoke the people to bestow much corn on the sachim. to that end they appoint a certain time and place near the sachims dwelling where the people bring many basket of corn and make a great stack thereof there. the pniese stand ready to give thanks to the people on the sachims behalf and, after acquaint the sachim therewith who fetch the same and be no less thankful, bestow many gift on they. when any be visit with sickness their friend resort unto they for their after acquaint the sachim therewith, who fetch the same and be no less thankful, bestow many gift on they. when any be visit with sickness, their friend resort unto they for their comfort and continue with they, ofttimes till their death or recovery. if they die, they stay a certain time to mourn for they, night and morning. they perform this duty many day after the burial in a most doleful manner, insomuch as though it be ordinary and the note musical which they take, one from another and all together. yet it will draw tear from their eye and almost from we also. but if they recover, then, because their sickness be chargeable, they send corn and other gift unto they at a certain appoint time, whereat from their eye and almost from we also. but if they recover, then because their sickness be chargeable, they send corn and other gift unto they at a certain appoint time whereat they feast and dance, which they call commeco. when they bury the dead, they sow up the corpse in a mat and so put it in the earth. if the party be a sachim, they cover he with many curious mat and bury all his riches with he and enclose the grave with a pale. if it be a child, the father will also put his own most special jewel and ornament in the earth with it also will cut his hair and disfigure himself very much in token of sorrow. if it be the man, put his own most special jewel and ornament in the earth with it also will cut his hair and disfigure himself very much in token of sorrow. if it be the man or woman of the house, they will pull down the mat and leave the frame stand and bury they in or near the same and either remove their dwell or give over housekeeping. the man employ themselves whole in hunt and other exercise of the bow, except at some time they take some pain in fish. the woman live a most slavish life. they carry all their burden, set and dress their corn, gather it in, seek out for much of their food, bear and make ready the corn to eat and have all household care. carry all their burden, set and dress their corn, gather it in, seek out for much of their food, bear and make ready the corn to eat and have all household care lie upon. they, the young sort, reverence the elder and do all mean office whilst they be together. although they be stranger, boy and girl may not wear their hair like man and woman but be distinguish thereby. a man be not account a man till he do some notable act or show forth such courage and resolution as become his place. the man take much tobacco, but for boy so to do they account it odious. all their name be significant and variable, for when they come to the state of man and woman they take much tobacco, but for boy, so to do they account it odious. all their name be significant and variable, for when they come to the state of man and woman they alter they according to their deed or disposition. when a maid be take in marriage, she first cut her hair and after wear a cover on her head till her hair be grow out. their woman be diverse, dispose, some as modest as they will scarce talk one with another in the company of man. be very chaste also. yet other some light, lascivious and wanton. if a woman have a bad husband or can affect he and there be war or opposition between that and any other people, she will run away from he to and wanton. if a woman have a bad husband or can affect he and there be war or opposition between that and any other people, she will run away from he to the contrary party and there live where they never come unwelcome for where be most woman there be great plenty. when a woman have her monthly term, she separate herself from all other company and live certain day in a house alone, after which she wash herself and all that she have touch or use and be again receive to her husband, bed or family for adultery. the husband will beat his wife and put she away if he please. some common strumpet there be as well as in other place, but they be such as family for adultery. the husband will beat his wife and put she away if he please. some common strumpet there be as well as in other place, but they be such as either never marry or widow or put away for adultery, for no man will keep such a one to wife. in matter of unjust and dishonest deal, the sachim examine and punish the same in case of theft. for the first offence he be disgraceful rebuke. for the second, beat by the sachim with a cudgel on the naked back. for the three, he be beat with many stroke and have his nose slit upward that thereby all man may both know and shun he. if any man kill another, he must likewise die for the. be beat with many stroke and have his nose slit upward that thereby all man may both know and shun he. if any man kill another, he must likewise die for the same. the sachim not only pass the sentence upon malefactor but execute the same with his own hand if the party be then present. if not send his own knife in case of death in the hand of other to perform the same. but if the offender be to receive other punishment, he will not receive the same, but from the sachim himself before, who be naked, he kneel and will not offer to run away, though he beat he never so much. it be a great disparagement for a man to cry during the time. who be naked. he kneel and will not offer to run away, though he beat he never so much. it be a great disparagement for a man to cry during the time of his correction. then be his offence and punishment. as for their apparel, they wear breech and stocking in one, like some irish, which be make of dear skin and have shoe of the same leather. they wear also a dear skin, loose about they like a cloak which they will turn to the weather side. in this habit they travel, but when they be at home or come to their journey end present, they pull off their breech, stocking and shoe, wring out the water. if they be wet and dry, they and rub or be at home or come to their journey end present. they pull off their breech stocking and shoe, wring out the water. if they be wet and dry, they and rub or chafe the same though these be off. yet have they another small garment that cover their secret? the man wear also, when they go abroad in cold weather, a otter or fox skin on their right arm, but only their bracer on the left. woman, and all of that sex, wear string about their leg, which the man never do. the people be very ingenious and observative. they keep account of time by the moon and winter or summer. they know diverse of the star by name. in particular they know the north-star and call it. ingenious and observative. they keep account of time, by the moon and winter or summer. they know diverse of the star by name. in particular they know the north-star and call it mask, which be to say the bear. also they have many name for the wind. they will guess very well at the wind and weather before hand by observation in the heaven. they report also that some of they can cause the wind to blow, in what part they list can raise storm and tempest, which they usual do when they intend the death or destruction of other people. that by reason of the unseasonable weather, they may take advantage of their enemy in their house. at such time they perform their great exploit and in or destruction of other people, that by reason of the unseasonable weather, they may take advantage of their enemy in their house. at such time they perform their great exploit, and in such season, when they be at enmity with any, they keep more careful watch then at other time. as for the language, it be very copious, large and difficult. as yet we can attain to any great measure thereof, but can understand they and explain ourselves to their understanding by the help of those that daily converse with we, and though there be difference in a hundred mile distance of place, both in language and manner, yet not so much, but that they very well understand each other and thus much of their life and manner. in a hundred mile distance of place, both in language and manner, yet not so much, but that they very well understand each other and thus much of their life and manner in stead of record and chronicle. they take this course where any remarkable act be do in memory of it, either in the place or by some pathway near adjoin, they make a round hole in the ground about a foot deep and as much, over which, when other pass by, behold they inquire the cause and occasion of the same which be once know. they be careful to acquaint all man as occasion serve therewith, and lest such hole shall be fill or grow up by any accident as man pass by they will oft. know. they be careful to acquaint all man as occasion serve therewith, and lest such hole shall be fill or grow up by any accident. as man pass by, they will oft renew the same, by which mean many thing of great antiquity be fresh in memory so that, as a man travel, if he can understand his guide, his journey will be the less tedious by reason of the many historical discourse will be relate unto he in all this. it may be say i have neither praise nor dispraise the country, and since i live so long therein, my judgement thereof will give no less satisfaction to they that know i than the relation of our proceed, to which i answer that as in one so live so long therein. my judgement thereof will give no less satisfaction to they that know i than the relation of our proceed, to which i answer that as in one, so of the other i will speak as spare as i can yet will make know what i conceive thereof, and first for that continent on which we be call new england, although it have ever be conceive by the english to be a part of that main land adjoin to virginia. yet by relation of the indian it shall appear to be otherwise, for they affirm, confident, that it be a island and that either the dutch or french pass through from sea to sea between we and virginia and drive a great trade in the they affirm, confident, that it be a island and that either the dutch or french pass through from sea to sea between we and virginia and drive a great trade in the same. the name of that inlet of the sea they call mohegon, which i take to be the same which we call hudsons-river, up which, master hudson, go many league and, for want of mean as i hear, leave it undiscovered. for confirmation of this, their opinion be thus much though virginia be not above a hundred and fifty league from we, yet they never hear of powhatan or know that any english be plant in his country, save only by we and who go in a english ship thither, and therefore it be the more. never hear of powhatan or know that any english be plant in his country, save only by we and who go in a english ship thither, and therefore it be the more probable because the water be not passable for they who be very adventurous in their boates. then for the temperature of the air, in almost three year experience i can scarce distinguish new-england from old england in respect of heat and cold, frost, snow, rain, wind, etc. some object because our plantation lie in the latitude of 42. it must needs be much hot. i confess i can give the reason of the contrary. only experience teach we that if it do exceed england it be so (@) as must require better judgement to discern it. i confess i can give the reason of the contrary. only experience teach we that if it do exceed england, it be so (@), as must require better judgement to discern it. and for the winter i rather think, if there be difference, it be both sharp and long in new england, then old, and yet the want of those comfort in the one which i have enjoy in the other may deceive my judgement also. but in my best observation, compare our own condition with the relation of other part of america, i can conceive of any to agree better with the constitution of the english, not be oppress with extremity of heat, nor nip with bite cold by which mean bless be god, we enjoy our. of any, to agree better with the constitution of the english, not be oppress with extremity of heat, nor nip with bite cold, by which mean bless be god. we enjoy our health notwithstanding those difficulty. we have under-gone in such a measure as will have be admire if we have live in england with the like mean: the day be two hour long than here when it be at the short, and as much short there when it be at the long. the soil be variable: in some place mould, in some clay, other a mix sand, etc. the chief grain be the indian may or ginny-wheate. the seedtime begin in midst of april and continue good till the midst of may. our harvest begin with september. mix, sand etc. the chief grain be the indian may or ginny-wheate. the seedtime begin in midst of april and continue good till the midst of may. our harvest begin with september. this come increase in great measure but be inferior in quantity to the same in virginia. the reason i conceive be because virginia be far hot than it be with we. it require great heat to ripen. but whereas it be object against new-england that corn will not there grow except the ground be manure with fish. i answer that where man set with fish, as with we, it be more easy so to do then to clear ground and set without some five or six year and so begin anew as in virginia and else. fish as with we, it be more easy so to do then to clear ground and set without some five or six year, and so begin anew, as in virginia and else where not, but that in some place where they can be take with ease in such abundance. the indian set four year together without and have as good corn or better than we have that set with they, though indeed i think if we have cattle to till the ground it will be more profitable and better agreeable to the soil to sow wheat, rye, barley pease and oat, then to set may, which our indian call ewachim, for we have have experience that they like and thrive well, and the other will not be procure. rye, barley, pease and oat, then to set may, which our indian call ewachim, for we have have experience that they like and thrive well, and the other will not be procure without good labour and diligence, especial at seedtime, when it must also be watch by night to keep the wolf from the fish till it be rot, which will be in fourteen day. yet man agree together and take their turn, it be not much. much may be speak of the benefit that may come to, such as shall here plant by trade with the indian for fur, if man take a right course for obtain the same. for i dare presume upon that small experience, i have have to affirm that the english, dutch and the indian for fur, if man take a right course for obtain the same. for i dare presume upon that small experience, i have have to affirm that the english, dutch and french return yearly many thousand pound profit by trade only from that island on which we be seat. tobacco may be there plant, but not with that profit as in some other place, neither be it profitable there to follow it, though the increase be equal, because fish be a better and rich commodity and more necessary, which may be and be there have in as great abundance as in any other part of the world. witness the west country merchant of england which return incredible gain yearly from thence, and if they can so do. in as great abundance as in any other part of the world. witness the west country merchant of england which return incredible gain yearly from thence and, if they can so do, which here buy their salt at a great charge and transport more company to make their voyage. then will sail their ship. what may the planter expect when, once they be seat and make the most of their salt there and employ themselves at lest eight month in fish, whereas the other fish but four, and have their ship lie dead in the harbour all the time, whereas such ship as belong to plantation may take freight of passenger or cattle thither and have their lade provide against they come. i confess we have come. so all the time, whereas such ship as belong to plantation may take freight of passenger or cattle thither and have their lade provide against they come. i confess we have come so far short of the mean to raise such return as with great difficulty we have preserve our life, insomuch as when i look back upon our condition and weak mean to preserve the same, i rather admire at god mercy and providence in our preservation, then that no great thing have be effect by we, but though our beginning have be thus raw, small and difficult, as thou have see, yet the same god that have hitherto lead we through the former, i hope, will raise mean to accomplish the latter, not that we altogether, or and difficult, as thou have see. yet the same god that have hitherto lead we, through the former i hope, will raise mean to accomplish the latter, not that we altogether or principal propound profit to be the main end of that we have undertake, but the glory of god and the honour of our country in the enlarge of his majesty dominion, yet want outward mean to set thing in that forwardness we desire, and to further the latter by the former, i think, meet, to offer both to consideration, hope that where religion and profit jump together, which be rare in so honourable a action, it will encourage every honest man, either in person or purse, to set forward the same or at leastwise to commend. profit jump together, which be rare in so honourable a action. it will encourage every honest man, either in person or purse, to set forward the same, or at leastwise to commend the welfare thereof in his daily prayer to the blessing of the bless god. i will not again speak of the abundance of foul store, of venison and variety of fish in their season, which may encourage many to go in their person only. i advise all such, before hand, to consider that, as they hear of country that abound with the good creature of god, so mean must be use for the take of every one in his kind, and therefore not only to content themselves that there be sufficient, but to foresee how they of god. so mean must be use for the take of every one in his kind, and therefore not only to content themselves that there be sufficient, but to foresee how they shall be able to obtain the same. otherwise, as he that walk london street, though he be in the midst of plenty. yet if he want, mean, be not the better, but have rather his sorrow increase by the sight of that he want and can enjoy it. so also there. if thou want art and other necessary thereunto belong, thou may see that thou want and thy heart desire, and yet be never the better. for the same, therefore, if thou see thy own insufficiency of thyself, then join to some other where thou may. thou want and thy heart desire, and yet be never the better for the same. therefore, if thou see thy own insufficiency of thyself, then join to some other where thou may in some measure enjoy the same. otherwise, assure thyself, thou be better where thou be. some there be that think altogether of their present want they enjoy here and not dream of any there, through indiscretion, plunge themselves into a deep sea of misery, as for example it may be here. rend and fire be so chargeable as without great difficulty a man can accomplish the same. never consider that, as he shall have no rent to pay, so he must build his house before he have it, and peradventure may with more ease pay for. accomplish the same, never consider that, as he shall have no rent to pay, so he must build his house before he have it, and peradventure may, with more ease, pay for his fuel here, then cut and fetch it home if he have not cattle to draw it. there though there be no scarcity, but rather too great plenty. i write not these thing to dissuade any that shall serious, upon due examination, set themselves to further the glory of god and the honour of our country in so worthy a enterprise, but rather to discourage such as with too great lightness undertake such course, who peradventure strain themselves and their friend for their passage thither and be no soon there, then see their foolish imagination make. discourage, such as with too great lightness undertake such course, who peradventure, strain themselves and their friend for their passage thither and be no soon there. then see their foolish imagination make void be at their wit end and will give ten time so much for their return, if they can procure it. and out of such discontent, passion and humour, spare not to lay that imputation upon the country and other which themselves deserve, as for example i have hear some complain of other for their large report of new-england. and yet, because they must drink water and want many delicate they here enjoy, can present return with their mouth full of clamour and can any be so simple as to conceive that the fountain shall stream. drink water and want many delicate they here enjoy, can present return with their mouth full of clamour. and can any be so simple as to conceive that the fountain shall stream forth wine or bear, or the wood and river be like butchers-shop or fishmonger stall where they may have thing take to their hand. if thou can not live without such thing and have no mean to procure the one, and will not take pain for the other, nor have ability to employ other, for thou, rest where thou be, for as a proud heart, a dainty tooth, a beggar purse and a idle hand be here intolerable, so that person that have these quality there be much more abominable. if, therefore, god have, give thou. heart, a dainty tooth, a beggar purse and a idle hand be here intolerable, so that person that have these quality there be much more abominable. if, therefore, god have give thou a heart to undertake such course, upon such ground as bear thou out in all difficulty, viz his glory as a principal and all other outward good thing, but as accessary, which peradventure thou shall enjoy- and it may be not- then thou will, with true comfort and thankfulness, receive the least of his mercy, whereas, on the contrary, man deprive themselves of much happiness, be senseless of great blessing and through prejudice smother up the love and bounty of god who name be ever glorify in we and by we, now and evermore. amen. happiness, be senseless of great blessing and through prejudice smother up the love and bounty of god, who name be ever glorify in we and by we, now and evermore amen.