new england prospect, chap i of the situation, bay, havens and inlet. for as much as the king, most excellent majesty, have be gracious, please, by the grant of his letter patent at first, to give life to the plantation of new england and have daily, likewise, by his favour and royal protection, cherish their grow hope whereby many of his majesty, faithful subject, have be embolden to venture person, state and endeavour to the enlargement of his dominion in that western continent. wherefore i think fit for the further encouragement of those that hereafter, either by purse or person, shall help forward the plantation. to set forth these few observation out of my personal and experimental knowledge, the place whereon the english have build their colony be by purse or person shall help forward the plantation. to set forth these few observation out of my personal and experimental knowledge, the place whereon the english have build their colony- be judge by those who have best skill in discovery- either to be a island surround, on the north side with the spacious river cannada, and on the south with hudson river, or else a peninsula. these two river overlap one another, have their rise from the great lake, which be not far off one another, as the indian do. certain inform we, but it be not my intent to wander far from our patent, wherefore i refer you to the thrice memorable discoverer of those part, captain smith, who have likewise full describe the southern and be not my intent to wander far from our patent, wherefore i refer you to the thrice memorable discoverer of those part, captain smith, who have likewise full describe the southern and north-east part of new england with the note headland, cape, harbour, river, pond and lake, with the nature of the soil and commodity, both by sea and land, etc. within the degree of forty one and forty five. the bay of massachusets lie under the degree of forty two and forty three, bear south-west from the land end of england, at the bottom whereof be situate most of the english plantation. this bay be both safe, spacious and deep, free from such cockle sea as run upon the coast of ireland and in the channel of. be situate most of the english plantation. this bay be both safe, spacious and deep, free from such cockle sea as run upon the coast of ireland and in the channel of england. there be no stiff run current or rock shelf. bar quicksand the mariner have sail two or three league towards the bottom. may behold the two cape embrace their welcome ship in their arm, which thrust themselves out into the sea in form of a halfmoon. the surround shore be high and show many white cliff in a most pleasant prospect, with diverse place of low land out of which diverse river vent themselves into the ocean, with many open. where be good harbour for ship of any burden, so that if a unexpected storm? place of low land, out of which diverse river vent themselves into the ocean, with many open where. be good harbour for ship of any burden, so that if a unexpected storm or cross wind shall bar the mariner from recover his desire port, he may reach other harbour as plymouth, cape ann, salome, marvill, head, all which afford good ground for anchorage. be likewise land-lockt from wind and sea. the chief and usual harbour be the still bay of massachusets, which be close aboard the plantation in which most of our ship come to anchor. be the near their mart and usual place of land of passenger. it be a safe and pleasant harbour within have but one common and safe entrance, and that not very broad. be the near their mart and usual place of land of passenger. it be a safe and pleasant harbour within have but one common and safe entrance and that not very broad. there scarce be room for 3. ship to come in board and board at a time but be once within there be room for the anchorage of 500 ship. this harbour be make by a great company of land who, high cliff shoulder out the boisterous sea, yet may easy deceive any unskilful pilot. present many fair, open and broad sound, which afford too shallow water for any ship, though navigable for boat and small pinnace. the entrance into the great haven be call nantascot, which be two league from boston. this place of itself be shallow water for any ship, though navigable for boat and small pinnace. the entrance into the great haven be call nantascot, which be two league from boston. this place of itself be a very good haven where ship common cast anchor until wind and tide serve they for other place. from hence they may sail to the river of wessaguscus, naponset, charles river and mystic river, on which river be seat many town. in any of these forenamed harbour the seaman have spend their old store of wood and water may have fresh supply from the adjacent land with good timber to repair their weather-beaten ship. here likewise may be have mast or yard be store of such tree as be useful for the same purpose. chap 2: adjacent land with good timber to repair their weather-beaten ship. here likewise may be have mast or yard, be store of such tree as be useful for the same purpose. chap 2 of the season of the year, winter and summer. together with the heat, cold, snow, raine, and the effect of it for that part of the country wherein most of the english have their habitation, it be for certain the best ground and sweet climate in all those part bear the name of new england, agree well with the temper of our english body, be high land and sharp air, and though most of our english town border upon the sea-coast, yet be they not often trouble with mist or unwholesome fog or cold weather from be high land and sharp air, and though most of our english town border upon the sea-coast, yet be they not often trouble with mist or unwholesome fog or cold weather from the sea which lie east and south from the land, and whereas in england most of the cold wind and weather come from the sea, and those situation be count most unwholesome that be near the sea-coast in that country. it be not so but otherwise, for in the extremity of winter the north-east and south wind come from the sea, produce warm weather and bring in the warme-working water of the sea, loosn the freeze bay, carry away their ice with their tide, melt the snow and thaw the ground. only the northwest wind come. and bring in the warme-working water of the sea, loosn the freeze bay, carry away their ice with their tide, melt the snow and thaw the ground. only the northwest wind come over the land, be the cause of extreme cold weather, be always accompany with deep snow and bitter frost, so that in two or three day the river be passable for horse and man. but as it be a axiom in nature, no extreme last long. so this cold wind blow seldom above three day together, after which the weather be more tolerable, the air be nothing so sharp but peradventure. in four or five day after this cold messenger will blow a fresh command: every man to his house, forbid any to outface, he without. air be nothing so sharp but peradventure. in four or five day after this cold messenger will blow a fresh command: every man to his house, forbid any to outface he without prejudice to their nose. but it may be object that it be too cold a country for our english man who have be accustom to a warm climate, to which it may be answer: there be wood, good store and better, cheap to build warm house and make good fire which make the winter less tedious. and moreover, the extremity of this cold weather, last but for two month or ten week, begin in december and break up the ten day of february, which have be a passage very remarkable that for ten or a dozen last, but for two month or ten week, begin in december and break up the ten day of february, which have be a passage very remarkable that for ten or a dozen year the weather have hold himself to his day, unlook his icy bay and river, which be never freeze again the same year, except there be some small frost until the middle of march. it be observe by the indian that every ten year there be little or no winter, which have be twice. observe of the english, the year of new plymouth man arrival be no winter in comparison, and in the ten year after likewise, when the great company set lead themselves in massachusets bay, be a very mild season, little frost and less. arrival be no winter in comparison, and in the ten year after, likewise, when the great company set lead themselves in massachusets bay, be a very mild season, little frost and less snow, but clear, serene weather. few northwest wind, which be a great mercy to the english, come over so raw and uncomfortable. provide want all utensil and provision which belong to the well be of planter, and whereas many die at the begin of the plantation, it be not because the country be unhealthful, but because their body be corrupt with sea-diet which be naught, their beef and pork be taint, their butter and cheese corrupt, their fish rot and voyage long by reason of cross wind, so that winter approach before they can get warm. naught, their beef and pork be taint, their butter and cheese corrupt, their fish rot and voyage long by reason of cross wind, so that winter approach before they can get warm house and the search sharpness of that pure climate creep in at the cranny of their craze body, cause death and sickness but their harm have. teach future voyager more wisdom in ship, good provision for sea and find warm house at land, find health in both. it have be observe that of five or six hundred passenger in one year, not above three have die at sea, have their health likewise at land. but to return to the matter in hand, daily observation make it apparent that the pierce cold of that country produce not have die at sea, have their health likewise at land. but to return to the matter in hand, daily observation make it apparent that the pierce cold of that country produce not so many noisome effect as the raw winter of england. in public assembly it be strange to hear a man sneeze or cough, as ordinary they do in old england, yet not to smother any thing. lest you judge i too partial in recite good of the country and not bad. true it be that some venture too naked in extremity of cold, be more fool hardy than wise. have for a time lose the use of their foot, other the use of their finger. but time and surgery afterward recover they. some have have their. more fool, hardy than wise, have for a time lose the use of their foot, other the use of their finger. but time and surgery afterward recover they. some have have their overgrow beard so freeze together that they can not get their strong water-bottells into their mouth. i never hear of any that utter perish at land with cold, save one english man and a indian who go together a fowl the morning, be fair at their set out. afterward a terrible storm arise. they intend to return home but the storm be in their face and they, not able to withstand it, be freeze to death. the indian have gain three slight-shot more of his journey homeward be find rear up against a tree with his face and they, not able to withstand it, be freeze to death. the indian have gain three slight-shot more of his journey homeward, be find rear up against a tree with his aquavitae bottle at head. a second passage concern which many think hardly of the country in regard of his cold, be the miscarriage of a boat at sea. certain man have intend a voyage to new plymouth, set sail towards night. they want time to fetch it be constrain to put into another harbour where be negligent of the well moore of their boat. a strong wind come from the shore in the night, loosen their killocke and drive they to sea without sight of land before they have awake out of sleep. but see the. a strong wind come from the shore in the night, loosen their killocke and drive they to sea without sight of land, before they have awake out of sleep. but see the eminent danger such as be not benumb with cold, ship out their oar, shape their course for cape cod, where the indian meet, they who bury the dead and carry the boat with the live to plymouth, where some of they die and some recover. these thing may fright some, but be that there have be many passage of the like nature in our english climate. it can dishearten such as serious consider it. see likewise that their own ruin spring from their own negligence. the country be not so extreme cold, unless it be when english climate. it can dishearten such as serious consider it. see likewise that their own ruin spring from their own negligence. the country be not so extreme cold, unless it be when the northwest wind be high at other time. it be ordinary for fisherman to go to sea in january and february, in which time they get more fish and better than in summer. only observe to reach some good harbour before night where by good fire they sleep as well and quiet, have their main sail tent at their back to shelter they from the wind as if they be at home. to relate how some english body have bear out cold will, it may be startle belief of some it be so strange, yet not. the wind as if they be at home, to relate how some english body have bear out cold will. it may be startle belief of some it be so strange, yet not so strange as true. a certain man, be something, distract, break away from his keeper and run into the wood can not be find with much seek after. but four day be expire, he return to appearance as well in body as at his egress and in mind. much better for a mad man to hit home through the unbeaten wood be strange. but to live without meat or drink in the deep of winter, stranger. and yet return home better. be most strange. but if truth may gain belief, you may behold a more superlative. to live without meat or drink in the deep of winter. stranger, and yet return home better be most strange. but if truth may gain belief you may behold a more superlative strangeness. a certain maid, in the extremity of cold weather as it fall out, take a uncertain journey in her intent, short, not above four mile, yet long in event for lose her way. she wander six or seven day in most bitter weather, not have one bit of bread to strengthen she. sometime a fresh spring quench her thirst, which be all the refreshment she have. the snow be upon the ground at first. she may have track. she own footstep back again, but want that understanding. she wander till god by his special providence. refreshment she have. the snow be upon the ground. at first she may have track. she own footstep back again. but want that understanding she wander till god, by his special providence, bring she to the place she go from where she live to this day. the hard winter be common, the forerunner of pleasant spring-time and fertile summer. be judge likewise to make much for the health of our english body. it be find to be more healthful for such as. shall adventure thither to come towards winter than the hot summer. the climate in winter be common, cold and dry. the snow lie long, which be think to be no small nourish to the ground for the indian. burn it to suppress the under-wood, which else winter be common, cold and dry. the snow lie long, which be think to be no small nourish to the ground for the indian. burn it to suppress the under-wood which else will grow. all over the country. the snow fall not long after, keep the ground warm and with his melt convey the ash into the pore of the earth which do fatten it. it have be observe that english wheat and rye prove better which be winter sow and be keep warm by the snow, than that which be sow in the spring. the summer be hot than in england because of their more southern latitude, yet be they tolerable, be often cool with fresh blow wind. it seldom be so hot as man be drive. summer be hot than in england because of their more southern latitude. yet be they tolerable, be often cool with fresh blow wind. it seldom be so hot as man be drive from their labour. especial such who employment be within door or under the cool shade servant, have hitherto be privilege to rest from their labour in extreme hot weather from ten of the clock till two, which they regain by their early rise in the morning and double diligence in cool weather. the summer be common, hot and dry. there be seldom any reins. i have know it six or seven week before one shower have moisten the ploughman labour. yet the harvest have be very good. the indian corn require more heat than wet for. i have know it six or seven week before one shower have moisten the ploughman labour. yet the harvest have be very good. the indian corn require more heat than wet. for the english corn it be refresh with the nightly dew till it grow up to shade his root with his own substance. from the parch sun in former time the rain come seldom but very violent. continue his drop which be great and many, sometime four and twenty hour together, sometime eight and forty, which water the ground for a long time afrer, but of late the season be much alter. the rain come often, but more moderate, with less thunder and lightning and sudden gust of wind. i dare be bold to affirm it that. of late the season be much alter. the rain come often, but more moderate, with less thunder and lightning and sudden gust of wind. i dare be bold to affirm it that i see not so much rain, raw cold and misty fog in four year in those part as be in england in the space of four month, the last winter. yet no man at the year end complain of too much drought or too little rain. the time of most rain be in the begin of april and at michaelmas the early spring and long summer make but short autumn and winter. in the spring, when the grass begin to put forth, it grow apace so that where it be all black by reason of winter, long summer make, but short autumn and winter. in the spring, when the grass begin to put forth, it grow apace so that where it be all black by reason of winter burn, in a fortnight there will be grass a foot high. chap 3 of the climate: length and shortness of day and night. with the suiteablenesse of it to english body for health and sickness, the country be near the equinoctial than england. the day and night be more equal divide. in summer the day be two hour short and likewise in winter two hour long than in england. in a word, both summer and winter be more commend of the english there than the summer. winter and winter summer of england and who be there. hour long than in england. in a word, both summer and winter be more commend of the english there than the summer winter and winter summer of england. and who be there that can not wish that england climate be as it have be in quondam time, cold in winter and hot in summer, or who will condemn that which be as england have be? virginia have no winter to speak of but extreme hot summer have dry up much english blood and by pestiferous disease sweep away many lusty body, change their complexion not into swarthiness but into paleness, so that when as they come for trade into our part, we can know many of they by their face. this alteration certain come not from any want. swarthiness but into paleness, so that when, as they come for trade into our part, we can know many of they by their face. this alteration, certain, come not from any want of victual or necessary food, for their soil be very fertile and pleasant, yield both corn and cattle plenty, but rather from the climate, which indeed be find to be hot than be suitable to a ordinary english constitution. in new england both man and woman keep their natural complexion in so much as sea man wonder, when they arrive in those part to see their countryman so fresh and ruddy, if the sun do tan any. yet the winter cold restore they to their former complexion, and as it be for the outward complexion, so see their countryman so fresh and ruddy. if the sun do tan any yet the winter cold restore they to their former complexion. and as it be for the outward complexion, so it be for the inward constitution. not very many be trouble with inflammation or such disease as be increase by too much heat. and whereas i say not very many yet dare i not exclude any. for death. be certain to all, in all nation, there must be something tend to death of like certainty. the sound body be mortal and subject to change, therefore fall into disease and from disease to death. now, the two chief messenger of mortality be fever and callenture. but they be easy. help if take in time and as easy. therefore fall into disease and from disease to death. now the two chief messenger of mortality be fever and callenture. but they be easy help if take in time and as easy prevent of any that will not prove a mere fool to his body. for the common disease of england they be stranger to the english. now in that strange land to my knowledge i never know any that have the pox, measles, green-sickness, headache, stone or consumption etc. many that have come infirm out of england retain their old grievance still and some that be long trouble with linger disease as cough of the lung, consumption etc, have be restore by that medicineable climate to their former strength and health. god have be please so to. be long trouble with linger disease, as cough of the lung consumption etc. have be restore by that medicineable climate to their former strength and health. god have be please so to bless man in the health of their body that i dare confident say it, out of that town from whence i come in three year and a half there die but three, one of which be craze before he come into the land, the other be two child bear at one, birth before their time. the mother be accidental hurt. to make good which loss i have see four child baptise at a time which wipe away that common aspersion that woman have no child be a mere falsity. there be as sweet, lusty child as loss. i have see four child baptise at a time which wipe away that common aspersion that woman have no child be a mere falsity. there be as sweet, lusty child as many other nation and reckon so many for so many more double birth than in england. the woman likewise have a more speedy recovery and gather of strength after their delivery than in england. the last argument to confirm the healthfulness of the country shall be from my own experience who, although in england i be bring up tender under the careful hatch of my dear friend, yet scarce can i be acquaint with health. have be blood six time for the pleurisy before i go. likewise be assail with other, weaken disease but be plant. my dear friend. yet scarce can i be acquaint with health, have be blood six time for the pleurisy before i go. likewise, be assail with other, weaken disease, but be plant in that new soil and healthful air which be more correspondent to my nature. i speak it with praise to the merciful god, though my occasion have be to pass through heat and cold, wet and dry, by sea and land, in winter and summer, day by day, for four year together. yet scarce do i know what belong to a day sickness. chap 4 of the nature of the soil. the soil be for the general a warm kind of earth. there be little cold-spewing and no morish fen, no quagmire. the low ground be. 4 of the nature of the soil. the soil be for the general a warm kind of earth. there be little cold-spewing and no morish fen, no quagmire. the low ground be the marsh over which every full and change the sea flow. these marsh be rich ground and bring plenty of hay of which the cattle feed and like as if they be feed with the best upland hay in new england, of which likewise there be great store which grow. common between the marsh and the wood. this meadow ground lie high than the marsh, whereby it be free from the overflow of the sea and beside this, in many place where the tree grow thin, there be good fodder to be get among the wood. marsh whereby it be free from the overflow of the sea. and beside this, in many place where the tree grow thin, there be good fodder to be get among the wood there be. likewise, in diverse place near the plantation, great broad meadow wherein grow neither shrub nor tree, lie low in which plain grow as much grass as may be, throw out with a scythe thick and long, as high as a man middle, some as high as the shoulder, so that a good mower may cut three load in a day. but many object this be but a course fodder. true it be that it be not so fine to (@) eye as english grass, but it be not sour though it grow thus rank. object this be but a course fodder. true it be that it be not so fine to (@) eye as english grass, but it be not sour though it grow thus rank, but be make into hay. the cattle eat it as well as it be lea-hay and like as well with it. i do not think england can show fair cattle either in winter or summer than be in those part both winter and summer. be general, large and better of milch and bring forth young as ordinary as cattle do in england and have hitherto be free from many disease that be incident to cattle in england. to return to the subject in hand, there be so much hay-ground in the country as the rich voyager. hitherto be free from many disease that be incident to cattle in england. to return to the subject in hand, there be so much hay-ground in the country as the rich voyager that shall venture thither need not fear want of fodder, though his hear increase into thousand. there be thousand of acre that yet be never meddle with, and whereas it have be report that some have mow a day for half of a load of hay, i do not say, but it may be true. a man may do as much and get as little in england, on salisbury plain or in other place where grass can be expect. so hay-ground be not in all place in new england, wherefore it shall behoove every man according. little in england, on salisbury plain or in other place where grass can be expect so hay-ground be not in all place in new england, wherefore it shall behoove every man, according to his call and estate, to look for a fit situation at the first, and if he be one that intend to live on his stock, to choose the grassy valley before the woody mountain. furthermore, whereas it have be general report in many place of england that the grass grow not in those place where it be cut the forego year, it be a mere falsehood, for it grow as well, the ensue spring as it do before and be more spiery and thick like our english grass, and in such place where the cattle a mere falsehood, for it grow as well the ensue spring as it do before and be more spiery and thick, like our english grass, and in such place where the cattle use to graze the ground, be much improve in the wood, grow more grassy and less weedy. the worst that can be say against the meddow-ground be because there be little edish or after-pasture, which may proceed from the late mow more than from any thing else. but though the edish be not worth much yet, be there such plenty of other grass and feed that there be no want of winter-fodder till december, at which time man begin to house their milch-cattle and calf. some, notwithstanding the cold of the winter, have their young cattle. feed that there be no want of winter-fodder till december, at which time man begin to house their milch-cattle and calf. some, notwithstanding the cold of the winter, have their young cattle without door, give they meat at morning and evening. for the more upland ground there be different kind: in some place clay, some gravel, some a red sand, all which be cover with a black mould, in some place above a foot deep, in other place not so deep. there be very few that have the experience of the ground that can condemn it of barrenness, although many deem it barren because the english use to manure their land with fish, which they do not because the land can not bring corn without it, but because of barrenness, although many deem it barren because the english use to manure their land with fish, which they do not, because the land can not bring corn without it, but because it bring more with it. the land likewise be keep in hart the long beside the plenty of fish which they have for little or nothing. be better so use than cast away. but to argue the goodness of the ground, the indian who be too lazy to catch fish, plant corn eight or ten year in one place without it, have very good crop, such be the rankness of the ground that it must be sow the first year with indian corn, which be a soak grain, before it will be fit for to receive. crop, such be the rankness of the ground that it must be sow the first year with indian corn, which be a soak grain before it will be fit for to receive english seed. in a word, as there be no ground so pure, good as the long force and improve ground of england, so be there none so extreme, bad as in many place of england that as yet have not be manure and improve. the wood of new england be account better ground than the forest of england, or woodland ground or heathy plain for the natural soil. i prefer it before the country of surry or middlesex which, if they be not enrich with continual manure, will be less fertile than the mean ground in for the natural soil, i prefer it before the country of surry or middlesex which, if they be not enrich with continual manure, will be less fertile than the mean ground in new england, wherefore it be neither impossible nor much improbable that, upon improvement, the soil may be as good in time as england. and whereas some gather the ground to be naught, and soon out of hart because plymouth man remove from their old habitation, i answer they do no more remove from their habitation than the citizen which have one house in the city and another in the country for his pleasure, health and profit. for although they have take new plot of ground and build house upon they, yet do they retain their old. city and another in the country for his pleasure, health and profit. for although they have take new plot of ground and build house upon they, yet do they retain their old house still and repair to they every sabbath day. neither do they esteem their old lot, worse than when they first take they. what if they do not plant on they every year? i hope it be no ill husbandry to rest the land, nor be always that the worst that lie sometime fallow. if any man doubt of the goodness of the ground, let he comfort himself with the cheapness of it. such bad land in england, i be sure, will bring in store of good money. this ground be in some place of a let he comfort himself with the cheapness of it. such bad land in england i be sure will bring in store of good money. this ground be in some place of a soft mould and easy to plough, in other place so tough and hard that i have see ten ox toil, their iron chain break and their share and coulter much strain, but after the first break up it be so easy that two ox and a horse may plough it there have as good english corn grow there as can be desire, especial rye and oat and barley. there have be no great trial as yet of wheat and bean. only thus much i affirm that these two grain grow well in garden. therefore it be and oat and barley. there have be no great trial as yet of wheat and bean. only thus much i affirm that these two grain grow well in garden. therefore it be not improbable. but when they can gather seed of that which be sow in the country it may grow as well as any other grain. but common the seed that come out of england be heat at sea and therefore can thrive at land. chap v of the herb, fruit, wood, water and mineral, the ground afford very good kitchen garden for turnip, parsnip, carrot, radish and pompion, muskmillion, squonterquash, coucumber, onion and whatsoever grow well in england, grow as well there. many thing be better and large there be. likewise grow all manner of herb. carrot, radish and pompion, muskmillion, squonterquash, coucumber, onion and whatsoever grow well in england, grow as well there. many thing be better and large. there be likewise grow all manner of herb for meat and medicine, and that not only in plant garden but in the wood, without either the art or the help of man, as sweet marjoran, purslane, sorrell, penerial, yarrow, myrtle, saxifarilla bayes, etc. there be likewise strawberry in abundance, very large one, some being two inch about. one may gather half a bushel in a forenoon. in other season there be gooseberry, bilbery, resberies, treacklebery, hurtleberry, currant, which, be dry in the sun, be little inferior to those that our grocer sell in england. this land likewise afford hemp and flax, some natural and bilbery, resberies, treacklebery, hurtleberry currant, which be dry in the sun, be little inferior to those that our grocer sell in england. this land likewise afford hemp and flax, some natural and some plant by the english with rape, if they be well manage for such commodity as lie underground. i can, out of my own experience or knowledge, say much. have take no great notice of such thing, but it be certain report that there be iron stone and the indian inform we that they can lead we to the mountain of black lead and have show we lead over. if our small judgement in such thing do not deceive we, and though no body dare confident conclude yet, dare they not utter deny but that the have show we lead over. if our small judgement in such thing do not deceive, we, and though no body dare confident conclude yet, dare they not utter deny but that the spaniard bliss may lie hide in the barren mountain such as have coast the country, affirm that they know where to fetch seacole. if wood be scant, there be plenty of stone, both rough and smooth, useful for many thing, with quarry of slate out of which they get cover for house, with good clay whereof they make tile and brick and pavement for their necessary use. for the country, it be as well water as any land under the sun. every family, or every two family, have a spring of sweet water. betwixt they which their necessary use. for the country it be as well water as any land under the sun. every family, or every two family, have a spring of sweet water, betwixt they, which be far different from the water of england, be not so sharp but of a fat substance and of a more jetty colour. it be think there can be no better water in the world. yet dare i not prefer it before good beer, as some have do? but any man will choose it before bad beer, wheay or buttermilk. those that drink it be as healthful, fresh and lusty as they that drink beer. these spring be not only within land but likewise border upon the sea coast, so that some time the tide overflow. be as healthful, fresh and lusty as they that drink beer. these spring be not only within land but likewise border upon the sea coast, so that some time the tide overflow some of they, which be account rare. in the most part of england no man hitherto have be constrain to dig deep for his water or to fetch it far, or to fetch of several water for several use. one kind of water serve for wash and brew, and other thing. now, beside these spring, there be diverse spacious pond in many place of the country, out of which run many sweet stream, which be constant in their course both winter and summer, whereat the cattle quench their thirst and upon which may be build water. the country out of which run many sweet stream, which be constant in their course both winter and summer, whereat the cattle quench their thirst and upon which may be build water mill as the plantation increase. the next commodity the land afford be good store of wood, and that not only such as may be needful for fuel but likewise for the build of ship and house and mill and all manner of waterwork about which wood be needful. the timber of the country grow straight and tall. some tree be twenty, some thirty foot high before he spread forth his branch general. the tree be not very thick, though there be many that will serve for mill post, some be three foot and a half over. high before he spread forth his branch. general, the tree be not very thick, though there be many that will serve for mill post. some be three foot and a half over, and whereas it be general conceive that the wood grow so thick that there be no more clear ground than be hew out by labour of man, it be nothing so. in many place, diverse acre be clear so that one may ride a hunt in most place of the land if he will venture himself for be lose. there be no underwood save in swamp and low ground that be wet, in which the english get osier and hazel and such small wood as be for their use. of these swamp, some be ten, some in swamp and low ground that be wet, in which the english get osier and hazel and such small wood as be for their use. of these swamp, some be ten, some twenty, some thirty mile long, be preserve by the witness of the soil wherein they grow. for it be the custom of the indian to burn the wood in november, when the grass be wither and leave dry it, consume all the underwood and rubbish which otherwise will over grow the country, make it unpassable and spoil their much affect hunt, so that by this mean, in those place where the indian inhabit there be scarce a bush or bramble or any cumbersome underwood to be see. in the more champion ground small wood grow in. this mean in those place where the indian inhabit there be scarce a bush or bramble or any cumbersome underwood to be see in the more champion ground. small wood grow in these place where the fire can not come be preserve in some place where the indian die of the plague some fourteen year ago. be much underwood, as in the mid way betwixt wessaguscus and plymouth. because it have not be burn certain river stop the fire from come to clear that place of the country have make it unuseful and troublesome to travel through in, so much that it be call ragged plain because it tear and rend the clothes of they that pass now, because it may be necessary for mechanical artificer to know. through in so much that it be call ragged plain because it tear and rend the clothes of they that pass. now, because it may be necessary for mechanical artificer to know what timber and wood of use be in the country, i will recite the most useful as follow: tree, both in hill and plain, in plenty, be the long live oak and mournful cypris tree, sky tower pine and chestnut coate. rough the last cedar with the walnut, tough the rezin drop. fir for mast in use the boatman seek for oar light. neat grow. sprewse the brittle ash, the over-trembling asp, the broad-spread elm who concave harbour wasp the water spungy alder, good for nought. small eldern by the indian fletcher seek the knotty maple. grow sprewse the brittle ash, the over-trembling asp, the broad-spread elm who concave harbour wasp, the water spungy alder, good for nought. small eldern by the indian fletcher, seek the knotty maple, pallid birtch, hawthorne, the horn bind tree that to be cleave scorn, which from the tender vine oft take his spouse who twine, embrace arm about his bough. within this indian orchard fruit, be some the ruddy cherry and the jettie plumbe snake murder. hazel with sweet saxaphrage who spurn in beer allay hot fever rage. the dyer shumach with more tree there be that be both good to use and rare to see, though many of these tree may seem to have epithet contrary to the nature of they as they grow in england. yet that be both good to use and rare to see. though many of these tree may seem to have epithet contrary to the nature of they as they grow in england, yet be they agreeable with the tree of that country. the chief and common timber for ordinary use be oak and walnut. of oak there be three kind: the red oak, white and black. as these be different in kind, so be they choose for such use as they be most fit for one kind, be more fit for clappboard, other for saw board, some fit for ship, other for house. these tree afford much mast for hog especial. every three year bear a big acorn than our english oak. the walnut tree be something different from. fit for ship, other for house. these tree afford much mast for hog especial every three year. bear a big acorn than our english oak. the walnut tree be something different from the english walnut, be a great deal more tough and more serviceable and altogether as heavy. and whereas our gun that be stock with english walnut be soon break and crack in frost, be a brittle wood we be drive to stock they new with the country wallnut which will endure all blow and weather. last time out of mind. these tree bear a very good nut, something small but nothing inferior in sweetness and goodness to the english nut. have no bitter pill. there be likewise a tree in some part of the country that very good nut, something small but nothing inferior in sweetness and goodness to the english nut. have no bitter pill. there be likewise a tree in some part of the country that bear a nut as big as a small pear. the cedar tree be a tree of no great growth, not bear above a foot and a half square at the most, neither be it very high. i suppose they be much inferior to the cedar of lebanon so much commend in holy writ. this wood be more desire for ornament than substance. be of colour red and white like yew, smell as sweet as juniper. it be common use for ceiling of house and make of chest box and staff. the fir and pine be tree. colour red and white like yew, smell as sweet as juniper. it be common use for ceiling of house and make of chest box and staff. the fir and pine be tree that grow in many place shoot up, exceed high, especial the pine. they do afford good mast, good board rozin and turpentine out of these pine be. get the candlewood that be so much speak of, which may serve for a shift among poor folk. but i can commend it for singular good because it be something sluttish. drop a pitchy kind of substance where it stand here, no doubt may be good. do with see mill, for i have see of these stately highgrowne tree ten mile together, close by the river side from whence. where it stand here no doubt may be good. do with see mill, for i have see of these stately highgrowne tree ten mile together, close by the river side, from whence by ship they may be convey to any desire port. likewise, it be not improbable that pitch and tar may be force from these tree which bear no other kind of fruit. for that country ash it be much different from the ash of england. be brittle and good for little, so that wallnut be use for it. the horne-bound tree be a tough kind of wood that require so much pain in rive as be almost incredible. be the best for to make boat and dish not be subject to crack or leak this tree. kind of wood that require so much pain in rive as be almost incredible. be the best for to make boat and dish not be subject to crack or leak. this tree grow with broad, spread arm. the vine wind their curl branch about. they, which vine, afford great store of grape which be very big both for the grape and cluster. sweet and good these be of two sort, red and white. there be likewise a small kind of grape which grow in the island, which be soon ripe and more delectable, so that there be no know reason why, as good wine may not be make in those part as well as in burdevax in france, be under the same degree. it be great pity. no. be no know reason why, as good wine may not be make in those part as well as in burdevax in france, be under the same degree. it be great pity no man set upon such a venture whereby he may in small time enrich himself and benefit the country. i know nothing which do hinder, but want of skilful man to manage such a employment. for the country be hot enough, the ground good enough and many convenient hill which lie towards the south sun as if they be there place for the purpose. the cherry tree yield great store of cherry which grow on cluster like grape. they be much small than our english cherry, nothing near so good if they be not very ripe. they cherry tree yield great store of cherry which grow on cluster like grape. they be much small than our english cherry, nothing near so good if they be not very ripe. they so fur the mouth that the tongue will cleave to the roof and the throat. wax horse with swallow. those red bully, as i may call they, be little better in taste. english order may bring they to be a english cherry, but yet they be as wild as the indian. the plum of the country be better for plum than the cherry be for cherry. they be black and yellow about the bigness of a damson of a reasonable good taste. the white thorn afford haw as big as a english cherry which be esteem. for cherry, they be black and yellow. about the bigness of a damson of a reasonable good taste. the white thorn afford haw as big as a english cherry, which be esteem above a cherry for his goodness and pleasantness to the taste. chap 5 of the beast that live on the land have relate unto you: the pleasant situation of the country, the healthfulness of the climate, the nature of the soil with his vegetative and other commodity. it will not be amiss to inform you of such irrational creature as be, daily breed and continual nourish in this country, which do much conduce to the well be of the inhabitant, afford not only meat for the belly but clothing for the back the beast be as. continual nourish in this country, which do much conduce to the well be of the inhabitant, afford not only meat for the belly but clothing for the back. the beast be as: follow: the kingly lion and the strong arm bear the large lime moose with the trip, dear quill, dart, porcupine and rackcoone be castelld in the hollow of a age tree. the skip squerrell rabbit, purblind hare immure in the selfsame castle. be lest red-eyd ferret, wily fox shall they undermine if rampird, but with mould, the grim face, ounce and ravenous howl wolf who, meager paunch, suck like a swallow gulf. black glister otter and rich coate beaver. the civet scent, musquash, smell. ever concern lion? i will not say that i ever see any. who, meager paunch, suck like a swallow gulf. black glister otter and rich coate beaver. the civet scent, musquash smell, ever concern lion. i will not say that i ever see any myself, but some affirm that they have see a lion at cape anne which be not above six league from boston. some likewise be lose in wood, have hear such terrible roar as have make they much aghast, which must either be devil or lion. there be no other creature which use to roar save bear, which have not such a terrible kind of roar beside plymouth. man have trade for lion skin in former time, but sure it be that there be lion on that continent, for the virginian see a old lion in their roar beside plymouth man have trade for lion skin in former time. but sure it be that there be lion on that continent. for the virginian see a old lion in their plantation who have lose his jackall, which be wont to hunt his prey, be bring so poor that he can go no further. for bear they be common be a great black kind of bear which be most fierce in strawberry time, at which time they have young one. at this time likewise they will go upright like a man and climb tree and swim to the island which if the indian see there will be more sportful bear bait than paris garden can afford. for see the bear take water, a indian will leap after. swim to the island which, if the indian see there, will be more sportful bear bait than paris garden can afford. for see the bear take water, a indian will leap after he. where they go to water, cuff for bloody nose and scratch side. in the end the man get the victory. ride the bear over the watery plain till he can bear he no long. in the winter they take themselves to the cliff of rock and thick swamp to shelter they from the cold and food be scant. in those cold and hard time they live only by sleep and suck their paw, which keep they as fat as they be. in summer. there will be more of they if it be not for the time they live only by sleep and suck their paw which keep they as fat as they be in summer. there will be more of they if it be not for the woolve which devour they. a kennel of those raven runnagadoe set on a poor single bear will tear he as a dog will tear a kid. it will be a good change if the country have for every wolf a bear, upon the condition all the woolve be banish. so shall the inhabitant be not only rid of their great annoyance but furnish with more store of provision. bear be account, very good meat esteem of all man above venison. again, they never prey upon the english cattle or offer to assault the person of any. more store of provision. bear be account: very good meat esteem of all man above venison. again, they never prey upon the english cattle or offer to assault the person of any man, unless be vex with a shot and a man run upon they before they be dead, in which case they will stand in their own defence, as may appear by this instance. two man go a fowl appoint at evening to meet at a certain pond side to share equal and to return home one of these gunner have kill a seal or sea calf, bring it to the side of the pond where he be to meet his comrade afterward, return to the sea side for more gain and have load himself with more. sea calf, bring it to the side of the pond where he be to meet his comrade afterward, return to the sea side for more gain and have load himself with more goose and duck. he repair to the pond where he see a great bear feed on his seal, which cause he to throw down his load and give the bear a salute which, though it be, but with goose, shoot. yet tumble he over and over, whereupon the man, suppose he to be in a manner, dead run and beat he with the hand of his gun. the bear perceive he to be such a coward to strike he when he be down, scramble up, stand at defiance with he, scratch his leg, tear his clothes. of his gun. the bear perceive he to be such a coward to strike he, when he be down, scramble up, stand at defiance with he, scratch his leg, tear his clothes and face who stand it out till his six foot gun be break in the middle, then be deprive of his weapon. he run up to the shoulder into the pond where he remain till the bear be go and his mate come in who accompany he home the beast call a moose, be not much unlike red dear this beast be as big as a ox, slow of foot, head like a buck, with a broad beam, some being two yard wide in the head. their flesh be as good as beef, their hide good. as a ox, slow of foot, head like a buck, with a broad beam, some being two yard wide in the head. their flesh be as good as beef, their hide good for clothing the english have some thought of. keep they tame and to accustom they to the yoke, which will be a great commodity. first, because they be so fruitful, bring forth three at a time. be likewise very uberous. second, because they will live in winter without any fodder. there be not many of these in the massachusets bay, but forty mile to the north-east there be great store of they, these poor beast likewise be much devour by the woolve. the ordinary dear be much big than the dear of england of a bright the north-east there be great store of they, these poor beast. likewise be much devour by the woolve. the ordinary dear be much big than the dear of england, of a bright colour, more incline to red, with spot belly. the most store of these be in winter, when the more northern part of the country be cold for they, they desire to be near the sea so that they may swim to the island. when they be chase by the woolve, it be not to be think into what great multitude they will increase, be it not for the common devourer, the wolf. they have general, three at a time which they hide a mile one from another. give they suck by turn. thus they do that. it not for the common devourer, the wolf. they have general three at a time which they hide a mile one from another. give they suck by turn. thus they do that if the wolf shall find one he may miss of the other. these dear be fat in the deep of winter. in summer it be hard catch of they with the best greyhound that may be procure, because they be swift of foot. some credible person have affirm that they have see a dear leap three score foot at little or no forcement. beside there be so many old tree, rot, stump and indian barn that a dog can well run without be shoulder-shot. yet will i not dissuade any from carry good dog for in. there be so many old tree, rot, stump and indian barn that a dog can well run without be shoulder-shot. yet will i not dissuade any from carry good dog, for in the winter time they be very useful for when the snow be hard, freeze the dear be heavy, sink into the snow, the dog be light, run upon the top and overtake they and pull they down. some by this mean have get twenty buck and do in a winter. the horn of these dear grow in such a straight manner, overhang their head that they can feed upon such thing as grow low till they have cast their old horn. of these dear there be a great many and more in the massachusets bay than that they can feed upon such thing as grow low till they have cast their old horn. of these dear there be a great many, and more in the massachusets bay than in any other place, which be a great help and refreshment to these planter. the porcupine be a small thing, not much unlike a hedgehog, something big who stand upon his guard and proclaim a to man and beast that shall approach too near. he dart his quill into their leg and hide. the be a deep fur beast, not much unlike a badger. have a tail like a fox, as good meat as a lamb. there be one of they in the tower. these beast in the day time sleep in hollow tree in the. have a tail like a fox, as good meat as a lamb. there be one of they in the tower. these beast in the day time sleep in hollow tree. in the moon shine night they go to feed on clamme at a low tide by the sea side where the english hunt. they with their dog, the squerrell be of three sort. first the great gray squerrell, which be almost as big as a english rabbit. of these there be the great plenty. one may kill a dozen of they in a afternoon. about three of the clock they begin to walk. the second be, a small squerrell, not unlike the english squerrell, which do much trouble the planter of corn so that they be constrain to. of the clock they begin to walk. the second be a small squerrell, not unlike the english squerrell which do much trouble the planter of corn, so that they be constrain to set diverse trap and to carry their cat into the corn field till their corn be three week old. the three kind be a fly squerrell which be not very big, slender of body, with a great deal of loose skin which she spread square when she fly, which the wind get and so waft her batlike body from place to place. it be a creature more for sight and wonderment than either pleasure or profit. the rabbit be much like we in england. the hare be some of they white and a yard long. these a creature more for sight and wonderment than either pleasure or profit. the rabbit be much like we in england, the hare. be some of they white and a yard long, these two harmless creature be glad to shelter themselves from the harmful fox in hollow tree, have a hole at the entrance no big than they can creep in at. if they shall make they hole in the ground, as on english rabbit do the undermine renoilds will rob they of their life and extirpate their generation. the beast of offence be squuncke, ferret fox, who impudence sometime drive they to the good wife hen roost to fill their paunch. some of these be black, their fur be of much esteem. the ounce or the wild cat. who impudence sometime drive they to the good wife hen roost to fill their paunch. some of these be black, their fur be of much esteem the ounce. or the wild cat be as big as a mongrel dog. this creature be by nature fierce and more dangerous to be meet withal than any other creature. not fear either dog or man he use to kill dear which he thus effect know the deer tract he will lie, lurk in long weed. the dear pass by, he sudden leap upon his back from thence get to his neck and scratch out his throat. he have likewise a devise to get goose for be much of the colour of a goose, he will place himself close by the water. his neck and scratch out his throat. he have likewise a devise: to get goose for be much of the colour of a goose, he will place himself close by the water. hold we his bob tail, which be like a goose neck. the goose see this counterfeit goose approach nigh to visit he who, with a sudden jerk, apprehend his mistrustless prey. the english kill many of these, account they very good meat. their skin be a very deep kind of fur spot, white and black on the belly. the woolve be in some respect different from they of other country. it be never know yet that a wolf ever set upon a man or woman. neither do they trouble horse or cow, but swine goat and different from they of other country. it be never know yet that a wolf ever set upon a man or woman. neither do they trouble horse or cow, but swine, goat and red calf which they take for dear, be often destroy by they, so that a red calf be cheap than a black one. in that regard, in autumn and the beginning of the spring these ravenous ranger do most frequent our english habitation, follow the dear which come down at that time to those part they be make much like a mongrel, be big bone, lank, paunch, deep breasted, have a thick neck and head, prick ear and long snout with dangerous tooth, long stare hair and a great bush tail. it be think of many. bone lank, paunch, deep breasted, have a thick neck and head, prick ear and long snout with dangerous tooth, long stare hair and a great bush tail. it be think of many that our english mastiff may be too hard for they, but it be no such matter, for they care no more for a ordinary mastiff than a ordinary mastiff care for a cur. many good dog have be spoil with they. once a fair grayhound hear they at their howl run out to chide they who be tear in piece before he can be rescue one of. they make no more bone to run away with a pig than a dog to run away with a marrow bone. it be observe that they have no joint. rescue one of. they make no more bone to run away with a pig than a dog to run away with a marrow bone. it be observe that they have no joint from the head to the tail which prevent they from leap or sudden turn, as may appear by what i shall show you. a certain man have shoot a wolf as he be feed upon a swine, break his leg. only he know not how to devise his death on a sudden. the wolf be a black one. he be loath to spoil his fur with a second shot, his skin be worth five or six pound sterling, wherefore he resolve to get he by the tail and thrust he into a river. that be hard. fur with a second shot, his skin be worth five or six pound sterling, wherefore he resolve to get he by the tail and thrust he into a river. that be hard, by which effect the wolf be not able to turn his joyntlesse body to bite he be. take that they can. leap may appear by this wolf who mouth water at a few poor empale kid will needs leap over a five-foote pale to be at they, but his foot slip in the rise, he fall a little short of his desire and be hang in the carpenter stock, howl so loud that he fright away the kid and call the english who kill he. these be kill daily in some place or other, either by hang in the carpenter stock howl so loud that he fright away the kid and call the english who kill he. these be kill daily in some place or other, either by the english or indian, who have a certain rate for every head. yet be there little hope of their utter destruction. the country be so spacious and they, so numerous, travel in the swamp by kennel. sometime, ten or twelve be of a company, late at night and early in the morning they set up their howl and call their company together at night to hunt, at morning to sleep. in a word, they be the great inconveniency the country have, both for matter of damage to private man in particular and the whole country in. to hunt at morning to sleep. in a word, they be the great inconveniency the country have, both for matter of damage to private man in particular and the whole country in general. chap 7: beast live in the water. for all creature that live both by land and water. they be first, otter, which be most of they black, who fur be much use for muff and be hold almost as dear as beaver the flesh of. they be none of the best meat but their oil be of rare use for many thing. second, martin, a good fur for their bigness. three, musquash, which be much like a beaver for shape but nothing near so big. the male have two stone which smell as sweet as martin, a good fur for their bigness. three: musquash, which be much like a beaver for shape, but nothing near so big. the male have two stone which smell as sweet as musk and be kill in winter, never lose their sweet smell. these skin be no big than a coney-skinne yet be sell for five shilling a piece, be send for token into england. one good skin will perfume a whole housefull of clothes if it be right and good. four, the beaver concern who, if i shall at large discourse according to knowledge or information i may make a volume. the wisdom and understanding of this beast will almost conclude. he a reasonable creature. his shape be thick and short, have likewise short leg, foot like information i may make a volume. the wisdom and understanding of this beast will almost conclude. he a reasonable creature. his shape be thick and short, have likewise short leg. foot like a mole, before and behind like a goose. a broad tail in form like a shoe-sole, very tough and strong. his head be something like a otter head, save that his tooth before be place like the tooth of a rabbit, two above and two beneath, sharp and broad, with which he cut down tree as thick as a man. thigh afterward divide they into length according to the use they be appoint, for if one beaver be too weak to carry the log, than another help he. if they two be too weak, then four. into length according to the use they be appoint, for if one beaver be too weak to carry the log, than another help he. if they two be too weak, then four more add their help be place three to three, which set their tooth in one another, tough tail and lay the load on the two hindermost they draw the log to the desire place. that this may not seem altogether incredible. remember that the like almost may be see in our ant which will join sometime seven or eight together in the carry of a burden. these creature build themselves house of wood and clay, close by the pond side and know the season. build they answerable house, have they three story high so that as a burden. these creature build themselves house of wood and clay, close by the pond side and know the season, build they answerable house, have they three story high so that as land-flood be raise by great rain, as the water arise they mount high in their house. as they assuage they descend low again. these house be so strong that no creature, save a industrious man with his penetrate tool can prejudice they. their ingress and egress be under water. these make likewise very good pond. know whence a stream run from between two rise hill, they will there pitch down pile of wood, place small rubbish before it with clay and sod, not leave till by their art and industry they have make a firm and hill they will there pitch down pile of wood, place small rubbish before it with clay and sod, not leave till. by their art and industry they have make a firm and curious damme-head which may draw admiration from wise, understand man. these creature keep themselves to their own family, never part so long as they be able to keep house together. and it be common say, if any beaver accidental light into a strange place, he be make a drudge so long as he live there to carry at the great end of the log unless he creep away by stealth. their wisdom secure, they from the english who seldom or never kill any of they. be not patient to lay a long siege or to be unless he creep away by stealth their wisdom. secure they from the english who seldom or never kill any of they. be not patient to lay a long siege or to be so often deceive by their cunning evasion so that all the beaver which the english have come first from the indian, who time and experience fit they for that employment. chap 8 of the bird and fowl, both of land and water, have show you the most desirable, useful and beneficial creature with the most offensive carrion that belong to our wilderness. it remain, in the next place, to show you such kind of foul as the country afford. they be many and we have much variety, both at sea and on land and such as. in the next place to show you such kind of foul as the country afford. they be many and we have much variety, both at sea and on land, and such as yield we much profit and honest pleasure, and be these that follow as the princely eagle and the soar hawk who, in their unknown way, there be none can chawke the humberd for some queen rich cage, more fit than in the vacant wilderness to sit. the swift wing swallow sweep to and fro as swift as arrow from tartarian bow when, as aurora infant day, new spring, there the morning mount lark, her sweet lay sings the harmonious thrush swift pigeon turtledove who to her mate do ever constant prove the turky-phesant heathcocke partridge rare. infant day, new spring. there the morning mount lark, her sweet lay sings. the harmonious thrush swift pigeon turtledove who to her mate do ever constant prove. the turky-phesant heathcocke partridge rare. the carrion-tearing crow and hurtful stare. the long live raven. the ominous screech-owl who tell, as old wife say, disaster foul. the drowsy madge that leave her day-loved nest and love to when day-bird be at rest. the eel-murdering hearne and greedy cormorant that near the creek in morish marsh haunt. the bellow bitterne with the long-leged crane presage winter hard and dearth of grain. the silver swan that tune her mournful breath to sing the dirge of her approach death. the tattle oldwine and the cackle goose. the fearful gull that shun the murder piece. grain. the silver swan that tune her mournful breath to sing the dirge of her approach death. the tattle oldwine and the cackle goose. the fearful gull that shun the murder piece. the strong wing mallard with the nimble teal and ill-shapeed loon who his harsh note do squeale there widgins sheldracke and humiliteers snite dopper sea-larke in whole million flee. the eagle of the country be of two sort: one like the eagle that be in england, the other be something big with a great white head and white tail. these be common call gripe, these prey upon duck and goose and such fish as be cast upon the seashore. and although a eagle be count king of that feather regiment, yet be there a certain black these prey upon duck and goose and such fish as be cast upon the seashore. and although a eagle be count king of that feather regiment, yet be there a certain black hawk that beat he so that he be oonstrayn to soar so high till heat expel his adversary. this hawk be much prize of the indian, be account a sagamores ransom to speak. much of hawk be to trespass upon my own judgement and bring upon myself a deserve censure for abuse the falconer term. but by relation from those that have more insight into they than myself, there be diverse kind of hawk. their aiery be easy to come by, be in the hole of rock near the shore, so that any who be addict. into they than myself. there be diverse kind of hawk, their aiery be easy to come by, be in the hole of rock near the shore, so that any who be addict to that sport- if he will be, but at the charge of find poultry for they may have his desire. we can wish they well. mew in england, for they make havoc of hen, partridge, heathcocke and duck, often hinder the fowler of his long. look for shoot the humbird, be one of the wonder of the country, be no big than a hornet yet have all the dimension of a bird as bill and wing, with quill, spider-like leg, small claw for colour. she be as glorious as the rainbow, as she fly she make. yet have all the dimension of a bird as bill and wing, with quill, spider-like leg, small claw for colour. she be as glorious as the rainbow. as she fly she make a little hum noise like a humblebee, wherefore she be call the humbird the pigeon of that country. be something different from our dove-house pigeon in england, be more like turtle, of the same colour, but they have long tail like a magpie and they seem not so big because they carry not so many feather on their back as our english dove. yet be they as big in body. these bird come into the country to go to the north part in the begin of our spring, at which time, if i may be count, be they as big in body, these bird come into the country to go to the north part in the begin of our spring, at which time, if i may be count, worthy to be believe in a thing that be not so strange as true, i have see they fly as if the airy regiment have be pigeon. see neither beginning nor end length or breadth of these million of million. the shout of people, the rattle of gun and pelt of small shot can not drive they out of their course, but so they continue for four or five hour together. yet it must not be conclude that it be thus often, for it be. but at the begin of the spring and at michaelmas, when continue for four or five hour together. yet it must not be conclude that it be thus often. for it be, but at the begin of the spring and at michaelmas, when they return back to the southward, yet be there some all the year long, which be easy attain by such as: look after they. many of they build among the pine-tree thirty mile to the north-east of our plantation, join nest to nest and tree to tree by their nest, so that the sun never see the ground in that place, from whence the indian fetch whole load of they. the turkey be a very large bird of a black colour yet white in flesh, much big than our english turkey. he have the use of. indian fetch, whole load of they. the turkey be a very large bird of a black colour yet white in flesh, much big than our english turkey. he have the use of his long leg so ready that he can run as fast as a dog and fly as well as a goose. of these, sometime there will be forty, threescore and a hundred of a flock, sometimes more and sometime less. their feed be acorn, haw and berry. some of they get a haunt to frequent our english corn in winter, when the snow cover the ground, they resort to the sea shore to look for shrimp and such small fish at low tide such as love. turkey hunt must follow it in winter after a new the ground. they resort to the sea shore to look for shrimp and such small fish at low tide such as love. turkey hunt must follow it in winter after a new fall snow, when he may follow they by their tract. some have kill ten or a dozen in half a day if they can be find towards a evening and watch where they peirch. if one come about ten or eleven of the clock he may shoot as often as he will. they will sit unless they be slender wound. these turkey remain all the year long. the price of a good turkey cock be four shilling and he be well worth it, for he may be in weight. forty pound a hen, two shilling pheason. the year long. the price of a good turkey cock be four shilling and he be well worth it, for he may be in weight forty pound, a hen two shilling. pheason be very rare but heathcocke and partridge be common. he that be a husband and will be stir betimes may kill half a dozen in a morning. the partridge be big than they be in england. the flesh of the heathcocke be red and the flesh of a partridge white. their price be four penny a piece. the raven and the crow be much like they of other country. there be no magpie, jackedawe, cuckoo, jay, sparrow etc. the stare be big than those in england. as black as crow be the most troublesome and injurious. like they of other country. there be no magpie, jackedawe, cuckoo, jay, sparrow, etc. the stare be big than those in england, as black as crow be the most troublesome and injurious bird of all other. pull up the corn by the root when it be young so that those who plant by reedy and seggy place where they frequent be much annoy with they. they be so audacious that they fear not gun or their fellow hang upon pole. but the corn have a week or nine day growth be pass their spoil. the owl be of two sort. the one be small, speckled like a partridge with ear. the other be a great owl, almost as big as a eagle. his body be as good meat. be of two sort. the one be small, speckled like a partridge with ear. the other be a great owl, almost as big as a eagle. his body be as good meat as a partridge cormorant. be as common as other fowl which destroy abundance of small fish. these be not worth the shoot because they be the worst of fowl, for meat taste, rank and fishy. again, one may shoot twenty time and miss, for see the fire in the pan. they dive under the water before the shot. come to the place where they be, they use to roost upon the top of tree and rock. be a very heavy, drowsy creature, so that the indian will go in their cannowe in the night and take be. they use to roost upon the top of tree and rock, be a very heavy, drowsy creature, so that the indian will go in their cannowe in the night and take they from the rock as easy as woman take a hen from roost. no duck pond can afford more delight than a lame cormorant and two or three lusty dog. the crane, although he be almost as tall as a man by reason of his long leg and neck, yet be his body round than other fowl, not much unlike the body of a turkey. i have see many of these fowl, yet do i never see one that be far. i suppose it be contrary to their nature to grow fat. of these there be. turkey. i have see many of these fowl, yet do i never see one. that be far. i suppose it be contrary to their nature to grow fat. of these there be many in summer but none in winter. their price be two shilling. there be likewise many swan which frequent the fresh pond and river, seldom consort themselves with duck and goose. these be very good meat. the price of one be six shilling. the goose of the country be of three sort. first, a brant goose, which be a goose almost like the wild goose in england. the price of one of these be six penny. the second kind be a white goose, almost as big as a english tame goose. these come in great flock. goose in england. the price of one of these be six penny. the second kind be a white goose, almost as big as a english tame goose. these come in great flock about michelmasse sometime. there will be two or three thousand in a flock. these continue six week and so fly to the southward. return in march and stay six week more. return again to the northward. the price of one of these be eight penny. the three kind of goose be a great gray goose with a black neck and a black and white head. strong of flight. these be a great deal big than the ordinary goose of england, some very fat and in the spring so full of feather that the shot can scarce. head, strong of flight. these be a great deal big than the ordinary goose of england, some very fat and in the spring so full of feather that the shot can scarce pierce. they, most of these goose, remain with we from michaelmas to april. they feed on the sea of fish and in the wood of acorn have, as other foul have, their pass and repass to the northward and southward. the accurate marksman kill of these both fly and sit. the price of a good gray goose be eighteen penny. the duck of the country be very large one and in great abundance so be there of teal. likewise, the price of a duck be six penny, of a teal three penny, if i shall tell. country be very large one, and in great abundance so be there, of teal. likewise, the price of a duck be six penny, of a teal three penny. if i shall tell you how some have kill a hundred goose in a week, 50. duck at a shot, 40. teal at another. it may be count. impossible, though nothing more certain. the oldwife be a foul that never leave tattle, day or night, something big than a duck. the loon be a ill shape thing like a cormorant, but that he can neither go nor fly. he make a noise sometime like a sowgelder horn. the humility, or simplicity, as i may rather call they be of two sort. the big be as big as a green plover. he make a noise sometime like a sowgelder horn. the humility or simplicity as i may rather call. they be of two sort. the big be as big as a green plover, the other as big as bird. we call knot in england. such be the simplicity of the small sort of these bird that one may drive they on a heap like so many sheep and see a fit time, shoot they the live, see the dead settle themselves on the same place again, among which the fowler discharge. again, i myself have kill twelve, score at two. shoot these bird be to be have upon sandy brake at the latter end of summer before the goose come in. thus much have i show you as i. score at two shoot. these bird be to be have upon sandy brake at the latter end of summer, before the goose come in. thus much have, i show you, as i know to be true, concern the fowl of the country. but i think i hear some say that this be very good if it can be catch, or likely to continue, and that much shoot will fright away the fowl. true it be that every one employment will not permit he to foul. what then, yet those employment furnish they with silver gun with which they may have it more easy for the fright of the foul. true it be that many go blurt away their powder and shot that have no more skill to kill. which they may have it more easy for the fright of the foul. true it be that many go blurt away their powder and shot, that have no more skill to kill or win a goose than many in england that have rusty musket in their house know what belong to a soldier. yet be they not much affright. i have see more live and dead the last year than i have do in former year. chap 9 of fish: hhve do with these. let i lead you from the land to the sea to view what commodity may come from thence. there be no country know that yield more variety of fish winter and summer, and that not only for the present spend and sustentation of the what commodity may come from thence there be no country know that yield more variety of fish winter and summer, and that not only for the present spend and sustentation of the plantation but likewise for trade into other country, so that those which have have stage and make fish voyage into those part have gain. it be think, more than the new find land jobber, codfish in these sea be large than in new find land, six or seven make a quintal, whereas there they have fifteen to the same weight. and though this they seem a base and more contemptible commodity in the judgement of more neat adventurer. yet it have be the enrichment of other nation and and be likely to prove no small commodity. seem a base and more contemptible commodity in the judgement of more neat adventurer. yet it have be the enrichment of other nation and and be likely to prove no small commodity to the planter and likewise to england if it be thorough undertake. salt may be have from the salt island and, as be suppose may be make in the country. the chief fish for trade be cod, but for the use of the country there be all manner of fish as follow: the king of water, the sea shoulder whale, the snuff, grampus with the oily seal, the storm praesage, porpus, herring-hogge, line, shear shark, the catfish and sea dog, the scale-fenced sturgeon, wry mouth, the flounse salmon, codfish, greedigut, cole, haddock, hage, the thornebacke and. the oily seal, the storm praesage, porpus, herring-hogge line, shear shark, the catfish and sea dog, the scale-fenced sturgeon, wry mouth, the flounse salmon, codfish, greedigut, cole, haddock, hage, the thornebacke and the scate who, slimy outside, make he seld in date. the stately old neptune fleet post that tide it out and in from sea to coast. consort herring and the bony shad, big belly, alewife, machrill, rich clad with rainbow colour, the frost fish and the smell, as good as ever. lady gustus feel the spot. lampron, eel, the lampery that seek fresh water brook with argus eye. these watery villager with thousand more do pass and repass near the verdant shore. kind of all shellfish: the luscious lobster with the crabfish raw, the brinish oyster. brook with argus eye, these watery villager with thousand more do pass and repass near the verdant shore. kind of all, shellfish, the luscious lobster with the crabfish raw, the brinish oyster, muscle periwig and tortoise seek for by the indian squaw which, to the flat dance many a winter jig to dive for cocles and to dig for clamm whereby her lazy husband gut she cram to omit such of these as be not useful. therefore, not to be speak of and only to certify you of such as be useful. first, the seal which be that which be call the sea calf, his skin be good for diverse use, his body be between fish and flesh, it be not very delectable to the palate or congruent. be that which be call the sea calf. his skin be good for diverse use. his body be between fish and flesh. it be not very delectable to the palate or congruent with the stomach. his oil be very good to burn in lamp, of which he afford a great deal. the shark be a kind of fish as big as a man, some as big as a horse, with three row of tooth within his mouth with which he snap asunder the fisherman line if he be not very circumspect. this fish will leap at a man hand if it be over board and with his tooth, snap off a man leg or hand if he be a swim. these be often take be good for nothing. a man hand if it be over board and with his tooth snap off a man leg or hand if he be a swim. these be often take be good for nothing but to put on the ground for manure of land. the sturgeon be all over the country but the best catch of they be upon the shoal of cape cod and in the river of mirrimacke where much be take pickle and bring for england. some of these be 12.14.18 foot long. i set not down the price of fish there because it be so cheap so that one may have as much for two penny as will give he a angel in england. the salmon be as good as it be in england and in so cheap so that one may have as much for two penny as will give he a angel in england. the salmon be as good as it be in england, and in great plenty. the be not much unlike a please or turbut, some being two yard long and one wide and a foot thick. the plenty of better fish make these of little esteem, except the head and fin which stew or bake be very good. these hollibut be little set by while be in season. thornebacke and scates be give to the dog. be not count worth the dress in many place. the be one of the best fish in the country. and though man be soon weary with other fish, yet be they never with. not count worth the dress in many place. the be one of the best fish in the country, and though man be soon weary with other fish, yet be they never with it be a delicate, fine, fat, fast. fish have a bone in his head which contain a sawcerfull of marrow. sweet and good, pleasant to the palate and wholesome to the stomach. when there be great store of they, we only eat the head and salt up the body for winter which exceed ling or gaberdine. of these fish, some be three and some four foot long, some big, some lesser. at some tide a man may catch a dozen or twenty of these in three hour. the way to catch they be with hook and four foot long, some big, some lesser. at some tide a man may catch a dozen or twenty of these in three hour. the way to catch they be with hook and line. the fisherman take a great cod-line to which he fasten a piece of lobster and throw it into the sea. the fish bite at it, he pull she to he and knock she on the head with a stick. these be at one time when alewife pass up the river to be catch in river in lobster time at the rock in macrill time in the bay, at michaelmas, in the sea when they use to tide it in and out to the river and creek the english at the top of a high water. time in the bay at michaelmas in the sea, when they use to tide it in and out to the river and creek. the english, at the top of a high water, do cross the creek with long scane or net which stop in the fish and the water ebb from they. they be leave on the dry ground sometime, two or three thousand at a set which be salt up against winter or distribute to such as have present occasion either to spend they in their house or use they for their ground. the herring be much like they that be catch on the english coast. alewife be a kind of fish which be much like a herring which in the latter end of april come up. be much like they that be catch on the english coast. alewife be a kind of fish which be much like a herring which in the latter end of april, come up to the fresh river to spawn in such multitude as be almost incredible, press up in such shallow water as will scarce permit they to swim, have likewise such long desire after the fresh water pond that no beat with pole or forcive agitation by other device will cause they to return to the sea till they have cast their spawn. the shadde be big than the english shadde and fat. the macrell be of two sort in the begin of the year be great one which be upon the coast, some be 18. inch long. big than the english shadde and fat. the macrell be of two sort in the begin of the year, be great one which be upon the coast, some be 18. inch long in summer, as in may, june, july and august come in a small kind of they. these macrill be take with draile, which be a long small line with a lead and hook at the end of it, be bait with a piece of red cloth. this kind of fish be count a lean fish in england, but there it be so fat that it can scarce be save against winter without rei. there be a great store of salt water eeles, especial in such place where grass grow. for to take these there be certain. it can scarce, be save against winter without rei. there be a great store of salt water eeles, especial in such place where grass grow for to take these. there be certain eel pot make of osyers which must be bait with a piece of lobster into which the eel enter can return back again. some take a bushel in a night in this manner, eat as many as they have need of for the present and salt up the rest against winter. these eel be not of so luscious a taste as they be in england, neither be they so aguish, but be both wholesome for the body and delightful for the taste. lampron and lampreyes be not much set by lobster, be in plenty in most. england. neither be they so aguish, but be both wholesome for the body and delightful for the taste. lampron and lampreyes be not much set by lobster be in plenty in most place. very large one, some being 20.. pound in weight. these be take at a low water among the rock. they be very good fish. the small one be the best. their plenty make they little esteem and seldom eat. the indian get many of they every day for to bait their hook withal and to eat when they can get. no, the oyster be great one in form of a shoe horn, some be a foot long. these breed on certain bank that be bare every spring tide. this fish without the shell be so. be great one in form of a shoe horn, some be a foot long. these breed on certain bank that be bare every spring tide. this fish, without the shell be so big that it must admit of a division before you can well get it into your mouth. the periwig be a kind of fish that lie in the oaze like a head of hair which be touch convey itself. leave nothing to be see but a small round hole muscle. be in great plenty. leave only for the hog which, if they be in england, will be more esteem of the poor sort. clamm or clamp be a shellfish, not much unlike a cockle. it lie under the sand every six or seven of they have. england will be more esteem of the poor sort. clamm or clamp be a shellfish, not much unlike a cockle. it lie under the sand. every six or seven of they have a round hole to take air and receive water at when the tide ebb and flow. a man run over these clamm bank will present be make all wet by their spout of water out of those small hole. these fish be in great plenty in most place of the country, which be a great commodity for the feed of swine both in winter and summer. for be once use to those place, they will repair to they as due every ebb, as if they be drive to they by keeper in some place of the and summer, for be once use to those place, they will repair to they as due every ebb, as if they be drive to they by keeper. in some place of the country there be clamm as big as a penny white loaf which be great dainty among the native and will be in good esteem among the english, be it not for better fish. chap x, of the several plantation in particular have describe the situation of the country in general, with all his commodity arise from land and sea. it may add to your content and satisfaction to be inform of the situation of every several plantation, with his convenience, commodity and discommodity etc. where first i will begin with the outmost plantation in the patent. content and satisfaction to be inform of the situation of every several plantation with his convenience, commodity and discommodity etc. where first i will begin with the outmost plantation in the patent to the south ward, which be call a indian name. this as yet be but a small village, yet it be very pleasant and healthful, very good ground and be well timber and have good store of hey ground. it have a very spacious harbour for ship before the town. the salt water be navigable for boat and pinnace two league, hear the inhabitant. have good store of fish of all sort and swine, have acorn and clamm at the time of year. here be likewise a alewife river three mile to the north of this. have good store of fish of all sort and swine, have acorn and clamm at the time of year. here be likewise a alewife river. three mile to the north of this be mount walleston, a very fertile soil and a place very convenient for farmer house. there be great store of plain ground without tree. this place be call massachusets field, where the great sagamore in the country live before the plague, who cause it to be clear for himself. the great inconvenience be that there be not very many spring, as in other place of the country yet water may be have for dig. a second inconvenience be that boat can come in at a low water, nor ship ride near the shore six mile further. of the country, yet water may be have for dig. a second inconvenience be that boat can come in at a low water, nor ship ride near the shore. six mile further to the north lie dorchester- dorchester, which be the great town in new england. well, wood and water, very good arable ground and hay-ground, fair corne-field and pleasant garden with kitchen-garden. in this plantation be a great many cattle as cow, goat and swine. this plantation have a reasonable harbour for ship. here be no alewife-river, which be a great inconvenience. the inhabitant of this town be the first that set upon the trade of fish in the bay, who receive so much fruit of their labour that they encourage other to the same. undertake a. this town be the first that set upon the trade of fish in the bay, who receive so much fruit of their labour that they encourage other to the same undertake. a mile from this town lie roxberry, which be a fair and handsome countrey-towne roxberry. the inhabitant of it be all very rich. this town lie upon the main, so that it be well wood and water, have a clear and fresh brook run through the town, up which, although there come no alewife yet, there be great store of smelt and therefore it be call smelt-brooke. a quarter of a mile to the north-side of the town be another river, call stony-river, upon which be build a water-mill. here be good ground for corn and meadow. call smelt-brooke, a quarter of a mile to the north-side of the town. be another river call stony-river, upon which be build a water-mill. here be good ground for corn and meadow for cattle. up westward from the town it be something rocky whence it have the name of roxberry. the inhabitant have fair house, store of cattle, empale corne-field and fruitful garden. here be no harbour for ship because the town be seat in the bottom of a shallow bay which be make by the neck of land on which boston be build, so that they can transport all their good from the ship in boat from boston, which be the near harbour. boston be two mile north-east from roxberry. his situation be very pleasant. be a. they can transport all their good from the ship in boat from boston, which be the near harbour. boston be two mile north-east from roxberry, his situation be very pleasant. be a peninsula boston hem in, on the southside with the bay of roxberry, on the north-side with clarly-river, the marsh on the backside. be not half a quarter of a mile over, so that a little fence will secure their cattle from the wolf. their great want be wood and medow-ground, which never be in that place. be constrain to fetch their building-timber and firewood from the land in boat and their hay in loiter. it be a neck and bare of wood. they be not trouble with three great annoyance of woolve, rattle-snake and musketoe. these from the land in boat and their hay in loiter. it be a neck and bare of wood. they be not trouble with three great annoyance of woolve, rattle-snake and musketoe. these that live here upon their cattle must be constrain to take farm in the country or else they can subsist. the place be too small to contain many and fit for such as can trade into england for such commodity as the country want be the chief place for ship and merchandise. this neck of land be not above four mile in compass, in form almost square. have on the southside, at one corner a great broad hill whereon be plant a fort which can command any ship as she sail into any harbour within the. form almost square, have on the southside, at one corner, a great, broad hill whereon be plant a fort which can command any ship as she sail into any harbour within the still bay. on the north-side be another hill, equal in bigness, whereon stand a windmill. to the northwest be a high mountain with three little rise hill on the top of it, wherefore it be call the tramount. from the top of this mountain, a man may overlook all the land which lie before the bay and descry such ship as be upon the sea-coast. this town, although it be neither the great nor the rich, yet it be the most note and frequent, be the centre of the plantation where the monthly court be keep. sea-coast. this town, although it be neither the great nor the rich, yet it be the most note and frequent, be the centre of the plantation where the monthly court be keep here likewise dwell the governor. this place have very good land, afford rich corne-field and fruitful garden. have likewise sweet and pleasant spring. the inhabitant of this place, for their enlargement, have take to themselves farme-house in a place call muddy-river, two mile from their town, where be good ground, large timber and store of marshland and meadow. in this place they keep their swine and other cattle in the summer, whilst the corn be on the ground at boston and bring they to the town in winter. on the north-side of charles river be charles. swine and other cattle in the summer, whilst the corn be on the ground at boston and bring they to the town in winter. on the north-side of charles river be charles town, which be another neck of land, charles-towne, on who north-side run misticke-river. this town, for all thing, may be well parallel with her neighbour boston, be in the same fashion with her bare neck and constrain to borrow convenience from the main and to provide for themselves farm in the country for their better subsistence. at this town there be keep a ferry-boate to convey passenger over charles river which between the two town be a quarter of a mile over, be a very deep channel. here may ride forty ship at a time up. to convey passenger over charles river which between the two town be a quarter of a mile over. be a very deep channel. here may ride forty ship at a time. up high it be a broad bay. be above two mile between the shore into which run stony-river and muddy-river. towards the south-west, in the middle of this bay be a great oyster-banke. towards the northwest of this bay be a great creek. upon who shore be situate the village of medford. medford, a very fertile and pleasant place and fit for more inhabitant than be yet in it. this town be a mile and a half from charles town and at the bottom of this bay the river begin to be narrow, be but half a. be yet in it. this town be a mile and a half from charles town and at the bottom of this bay the river begin to be narrow, be but half a quarter of a mile broad newtowne. by the side of this river be build newtowne which be three mile by land from charles town and a league and a half by water. this place be first intend for a city but upon more serious consideration it be not think so fit. be too far from the sea. be the great inconvenience it have. this be one of the near and best compact town in new england. have many fair structure with many handsome contrive street. the inhabitant, most of they be very rich and well store. be one of the near and best compact town in new england. have many fair structure with many handsome contrive street. the inhabitant, most of they be very rich and well store with cattle of all sort. have many hundred acre of ground pale in with one general fence which be about a mile and a half long, which secure all their weak cattle from the wild beast. on the other side of the river lie all their meadow and marsh-ground for hay. half a mile westward of this plantation be water-towne, a place nothing inferior for land, wood, meadow and water to newtowne. within half a mile of this town be a great pond which be divide between those two town, which divide their bound northward a. for land, wood, meadow and water to newtowne. within half a mile of this town, be a great pond which be divide between those two town, which divide their bound. northward, a mile and a half from this town be a fall of fresh water which convey themselves into the ocean through charles river. a little below this fall of water the inhabitant of water-towne have build a wayre to catch fish water-towne wherein they take great store of shad and alewife. in two tide they have get one hundred thousand of those fish. this be no small benefit to the plantation. ship of small burden may come up to these two town but the oyster-banke do bar out the big ship misticke. the next town. be mystic. no small benefit to the plantation. ship of small burden may come up to these two town but the oyster-banke do bar out the big ship misticke. the next town be mystic, which be three mile from charles town by land and a league and a half by water. it be seat by the water side, very pleasant. there be not many house as yet. at the head of this river be great and spacious pond whither the alewife press to spawn. this be a note place for that kind of fish, the english resort thither to take they. on the west side of this river the governor have a farm where he keep most of his cattle. on the east side be master craddocke plantation where he to take they. on the west side of this river the governor have a farm where he keep most of his cattle. on the east side, be master craddocke plantation where he have empale, a park where he keep his cattle till he can store it with deer here. likewise, he be at charge of build ship the last year. one be upon the stock of a hundred tun that be finish they be to build one twice. her burden ship without either ballast or load, may float down this river, otherwise the oyster-banke will hinder they which cross the channel. winnisimet, the last town in the still bay, be winnisimet, a very sweet place for situation and stand, very commodious. be fit to entertain more planter than they which cross the channel, winnisimet, the last town in the still bay. be winnisimet, a very sweet place for situation and stand very commodious. be fit to entertain more planter than be yet seat land. there it be within a mile of charles town, the river only part. they, the chief land which keep out the wind and the sea from disturb the harbour. be first, dear island, which lie wirhin a flightshot of pullin-point. this island be so call because of the dear which often swim thither from the main when they be chase by the woolve. some have kill sixteen deer in a day. upon this island. the opposite shore be call pullin-point because that be the usual channel boat use to pass through into. by the woolve. some have kill sixteen deer in a day upon this island. the opposite shore be call pullin-point because that be the usual channel boat use to pass through into the bay and the tide be very strong. they be constrain to go ashore and hale their boat by the seal or road whereupon it be call pullin-point. the next island of note be long island, so call from his longitude divers other land be within these viz noddle isle round i will the governors garden where be plant a orchard and a vine-yard with many other convenience and slate-iland, glasse-iland, bird-iland, etc. these isle bind with wood and water and medow-ground and whatsoever. the spacious, fertile main afford the inhabitant use to put their cattle. with many other convenience and slate-iland, glasse-iland, bird-iland, etc. these isle bind with wood and water and medow-ground and whatsoever. the spacious, fertile main afford the inhabitant use to put their cattle in these for safety, viz their ram goat and swine when their corn be on the ground. those town that lie without the bay be a great deal near the main and reap a great benefit from the sea in regard of the plenty both of fish and fowl which they receive from thence, so that they live more comfortable and at less charge than those that be more remote from the sea in the land-plantations. the next plantation be saugus saugus, six mile north-east from winnesimet. this town be pleasant for situation seat at the. than those that be more remote from the sea in the land-plantations. the next plantation be saugus saugus, six mile north-east from winnesimet. this town be pleasant for situation, seat at the bottom of a bay which be make on the one side with the surround shore and on the other side with a long sandy beach. this sandy beach be two mile long at the end, whereon be a neck of land call nahant nahant. it be six mile in circumference. well wood with oak, pine and cedar. it be beside well water, have beside the fresh spring, a great pond in the middle, before which be a spacious marsh in this neck be store of good ground, fit for the blow but for the present it. the fresh spring. a great pond in the middle, before which be a spacious marsh in this neck, be store of good ground fit for the blow, but for the present it be only use for to put young cattle in and weather-goate and swine to secure they from the wolf. a few post and rail from the low water-marke to the shore. keep out the woolve and keep in the cattle. one black william, a indian duke, out of his generosity, give this place in general to this plantation of saugus, so that no other can appropriate it to himself. upon the southside of the sandy beach, the sea beat, which be a true prognostication to presage storm and foul weather and the break up of the. can appropriate it to himself. upon the southside of the sandy beach, the sea beat, which be a true prognostication to presage storm and foul weather and the break up of the frost. for when a storm have be or be likely to be, it will roar like thunder, be hear six mile, and after storm cast up great store of great clamme which the indian take out of their shell, carry home in basket. on the north-side of this bay be two great marsh which be make two by a pleasant river which run between they. northward up this river go great store of alewife, of which they make good red herring, in so much that they have be at charge to make a wayre and a. they northward up this river go, great store of alewife, of which they make good red herring in, so much that they have be at charge to make a wayre and a herringhouse to dry these herring in the last year, be dry some 4 or 5 last, for a experiment which prove very good. this be like to prove a great inrichment to the land, be a staple commodity in other country, for there be such innumerable company in every river that i have see ten thousand take in two hour by two man without any weire at all, save a few stone to stone their passage up the river. there likewise come store of which the indian and english catch with hook and line some fifty. any weire at all, save a few stone to stone their passage up the river. there likewise come store of which the indian and english catch with hook and line, some fifty or threescore at a tide. at the mouth of this river run up a great creek into that great marsh which be call rumny marsh, which be 4 mile long and a mile broad. half of it be marsh ground and half upland grass without tree or bush. this marsh be cross with diverse creek wherein lie great store of goose and duck. there be convenient land for the plant of duckcoye. here be likewise belong to this place diverse fresh meadow which afford good grass and four spacious pond like little lake wherein be store. be convenient land for the plant of duckcoye here be. likewise, belong to this place diverse fresh meadow which afford good grass and four spacious pond like little lake wherein be store of fresh fish within a mile of the town, out of which run a curious fresh brook that be seldom freeze by reason of the warmness of the water. upon this stream be build a water milne and up this river come smelt and frost fish much big than a gudgeon for wood. there be no want. there be store of good oak, wallnut, cedar, asp, elm. the ground be very good in many place, without tree fit for the plough. in this plantation be more english tillage than in all new england and virginia beside. cedar asp elm. the ground be very good in many place without tree fit for the plough. in this plantation be more english tillage than in all new england and virginia beside, which prove as well as can be expect. the corn be very good, especial the barley rye and oat. the land afford the inhabitant as many ratity as any place else and the sea more. the continue from the middle of april to michaelmas which stay not above half that time. in the bay beside here be a great deal of rockcod and macrill, insomuch that shoal of have drive up shoal of macrill from one end of the sandy breach to the other, which the inhabitant have gather up in wheel-barrowe the bay that lie. insomuch that shoal of have drive up shoal of macrill from one end of the sandy breach to the other, which the inhabitant have gather up in wheel-barrowe. the bay that lie before the town at a low spring tie will be all flatt for two mile together, upon which be great store of muscle bank and clam bank and lobster among the rock and grassy hole. these flatt make it unnavigable for ship. yet at high water great boat loiter and pinnace of 20 and 30 tun may sail up to the plantation but they need have a skilful pilot because of many dangerous rock and foam breaker that lie at the mouth of that bay. the very aspect of the place be fortification enough to keep. need have a skilful pilot because of many dangerous rock and foam breaker that lie at the mouth of that bay, the very aspect of the place be fortification enough to keep off a unknown enemy. yet may it be fortify at a little charge. be but few land place there about, and those obscure. four mile north-east from sangus lie salem. salem which stand on the middle of a neck of land very pleasant, have a south river on the one side and a north river on the other side. upon this neck, where the most of the house stand, be very bad and sandy ground. yet for seven year together it have bring forth exceed good corn by be fish, but every three year in some. most of the house stand, be very bad and sandy ground. yet for seven year together it have bring forth exceed good corn by be fish but every three year in some place. be very good ground and very good timber and diverse spring hard by the sea side. here likewise be store of fish as base: eel, lobster, clamme, etc. although their land be none of the best. yet beyond those river be a very good soil where they have take farm and get their hay and plant their corn there. they cross these river with small cannowe which be make of whole pine tree, be about two foot and a half over and 20. foot long. in these likewise they go a fowl sometime two league. with small cannowe which be make of whole pine tree, be about two foot and a half over and 20. foot long in these. likewise they go a fowl. sometime two league to sea. there be more cannowe in this town than in all the whole patent. every household have a water-house or two. this town want a alewife river which be a great inconvenience. it have two good harbour, the one be call winter and the other summer harbour, which lie within derbies fort, which place, if it be well fortify, may keep ship from land of force in any of those two place. marvill head be a place which lie 4 mile full south from salem and be a very convenient place for a plantation especial. land of force in any of those two. place marvill head: be a place which lie 4 mile full south from salem and be a very convenient place for a plantation, especial for such as will set upon the trade of fish there. be make here a ship load of fish the last year where still stand the stage and dry scaffold. here be good harbour for boat and safe ride for ship. agowamme be nine mile to the north from salem. agowam which be one of the most spacious place for a plantation. be near the sea. it abound with fish and flesh of fowl and beast, great mead and marsh and plain plow ground, many good river and harbour and no rattle snake. in a word. the sea. it abound with fish and flesh of fowl and beast, great mead and marsh and plain plow ground, many good river and harbour and no rattle snake. in a word, it be the best place, but one which be merrimacke, lie 8 mile beyond it, where be a river, 20 league navigable merrimack river all along the river side. be fresh marsh in sum place 3 mile broad. in this river be sturgeon, sammon and and diverse other kind of fish. to conclude, the country have not that which this place can yield, so that these two place may contain twice as many people as be yet in new england there be as yet scarce any inhabitant in these two spacious place three mile beyond the. that these two place may contain twice as many people as be. yet in new england there be as yet scarce any inhabitant in these two spacious place three mile beyond the river of merrimacke. be the outside of our patent for the massachusetts bay. these be all the town that be begin when i come for england, which be the 15 of august 1633.. chap 11 of the evil and such thing as be hurtful in the plantation. i have inform you of the country in general and of every plantation in particular, with their commodity and wherein one excel another. now that i may be every way faithful to my reader in this work, i will, as full and true, relate to you what be evil. commodity and wherein one excel another. now that i may be every way faithful to my reader in this work, i will, as full and true, relate to you what be evil and of most annoyance to the inhabitant. first, those which bring most prejudice to their estate be the ravenous woolve which destroy the weak cattle. but of these you have hear before that which be most injurious to the person and life of man. be a rattle snake which be general, a yard and a half long, as thick in the middle as the small of a man leg. she have a yellow belly. her back be spot with black, russet, yellow and green colour place like scale at her tail. be a rattle with which small of a man leg. she have a yellow belly, her back be spot with black, russet, yellow and green colour place like scale at her tail be a rattle with which she make a noise when she be molest or when she see any approach near she. her neck seem to be no thick than a man thumb, yet can she swallow a squerill, have a great, wide mouth with tooth as sharp as needle wherewith she bite such as tread upon she. her poison lie in her tooth for she have no sting. when any man be bite by any of these creature, the poison spread so sudden through the vein and so run to the heart that in one hour it cause death unless he any man be bite by any of these creature, the poison spread so sudden through the vein and so run to the heart that in one hour it cause death unless he have the antidote to expel the poison, which be a root call snakeweed, which must be champ the spittle swallow and the root apply to the sore. this be present cure against that which will be present death without it. this weed be rank poison if it be take by any man that be not bite. whosoever be bite by these snake, his flesh become as spot as a leper until he be perfect cure. it be report that if the party live that be bite the snake will die and if the party die the become as spot as a leper until he be perfect cure. it be report that if the party live that be bite the snake will die. and if the party die the snake will live. this be a most poisonous and dangerous creature. yet nothing so bad as the report go of. he in england, for whereas he be say to kill a man with his breath and that he can fly, there be no such matter for he be natural, the most sleepy and unnimble creature that live never offer to leap or bite any man if he be not tread on first. and it be their desire in hot weather to lie in path where the sun may shine on they, where they will sleep. so man if he be not tread on first and it be their desire, in hot weather, to lie in path where the sun may shine on they, where they will sleep so soundy that i have know four man stride over one of they and never awake she. 5 or 6 man have be bite by they which, by use of snakeweede be all cure, never any yet lose his life by they. cow have be bite but be cut in diverse place and this weed thrust into their flesh be cure. i never hear of any beast that be yet lose by any of they, save one mare. a small switch will easy kill one of these snake. in many place of the country there be none. any beast that be yet lose by any of they, save one mare. a small switch will easy kill one of these snake. in many place of the country there be none of they, as at plymouth, newtowne, igowamme, nahant, etc. in some place they will live on one side of the river and swim, but over the water. as soon as they be come into the wood they turn up their yellow belly and die up into the country. westward from the plantation be a high hill which be call rattlesnake hill, where there be great store of these poisonous creature. there be diverse other kind of snake, one whereof be a great long black snake, two yard in length, which will glide through the wood very. great store of these poisonous creature. there be diverse other kind of snake, one whereof be a great long black snake, two yard in length, which will glide through the wood very swift. these never do any hurt, neither do any other kind of snake molest either man or beast. these creature, in the winter time, creep into cliff of rock and into hole under ground where they lid close till may or june. here likewise be great store of frog, which in the spring do chirp and whistle like a bird, and at the latter end of summer croak like our english frog. here be also toad which will climb the tope of high tree where they will sit croak to the wonderment of such as be. end of summer. croak, like our english frog, here be also toad which will climb the tope of high tree where they will sit. croak to the wonderment of such as be not acquaint with they. i never see any worm or mole, but pismire and spider be there. there be likewise troublesome fly. first there be a wild bee or wasp which common guard the grape, build by cobweb habitation among the leaf. second, a great green fly, not much unlike our horse fly in england. they will nip so sore that they will fetch blood either of man or beast and be most troublesome where most cattle be, which bring they from out of the wood to the house. this fly continue, but for the month. blood either of man or beast and be most troublesome where most cattle be, which bring they from out of the wood to the house. this fly continue, but for the month of june. the three be gurnipper, which be a small black fly, no big than a flea. her bite cause a itch upon the hand or face which provoke scratch which be troublesome to some. this fly be busy but in close morning or evening and continue not above three week. the least wind or heat expel they. the four be a musketor which be not unlike to our gnat in england in place where there be no thick wood or swampe, there be none or very few in new plantation. they be troublesome for the be not unlike to our gnat in england. in place where there be no thick wood or swampe, there be none or very few. in new plantation they be troublesome for the first year, but the wood decay they vanish. these fly can endure wind, heat or cold, so that these be only troublesome in close, thick weather and against rain. many that be bite will fall a scratch, whereupon their face and hand swell. other be never trouble with they at all. those likewise that swell with their bite the first year, never swell the second. for my own part, i have be trouble as much with they, or some like they in the country of england as ever i be there. here be the fly that. second, for my own part, i have be trouble as much with they, or some like they, in the country of england as ever. i be there here be the fly that be call chantharides. so much esteem of surgeon with diverse kind of butterfly. thus have you hear of the worst of the country, but some peradventure may say no and reply that they have hear that the people have be often drive to great want and extremity, to which i answer: it be true that some have live for a certain time with a little bread, other without any. yet all this argue nothing against the country in itself but condemn the folly and improvidence of such as will venture into so rude and unmanaged a. little bread, other without any. yet all this argue nothing against the country in itself, but condemn the folly and improvidence of such as will venture into so rude and unmanaged a country without so much provision as shall have comfortable maintain they in health and strength till by their labour they have bring the land to yield his fruit. i have myself hear some say that they hear it be a rich land, a brave country, but when they come there they can see nothing but a few canvas booth and old house, suppose at the first to have find wall, town fortification and corn field, as if town can have build themselves or corn field have grow of themselves without the husbandry of man. these man the first to have find wall, town fortification and corn field, as if town can have build themselves or corn field have grow of themselves without the husbandry of man. these man miss of their expectation, return home and rail against the country. other may object that of late time there have be great want. i deny it not, but look to the original and tell i from whence it come. the root of their want spring up in england, for many hundred hear of the plenty of the country, be so much their own foe and country hindrance as to come without provision which make thing both dear and scant. wherefore, let none blame the country so much as condemn the indiscreetnesse of such as will needs. and country hindrance as to come without provision, which make thing both dear and scant. wherefore, let none blame the country so much as condemn the indiscreetnesse of such as will needs run themselves upon hardship, and i dare further assure any that will carry provision enough for a year and a half shall not need to fear want if he either be industrious himself or have industrious agent to manage his estate and affair. and whereas many do disparrage the land, say a man can live without labour, in that they more disparage and discredit themselves in give the world occasion to take notice of their droanish disposition that will live of the sweat of another man brow. sure they be much deceive or else ill inform. themselves in give the world occasion to take notice of their droanish disposition that will live of the sweat of another man brow, sure they be much deceive, or else ill inform that venture thither in hope to live in plenty and idleness, both at a time, and it be as much pity as he that can work and will not shall eat, as it be pity that he that will work and can shall fast. i condemn not such, therefore, as be now there and be not able to work, but i advise for the future those man that be of weak constitution to keep at home if their estate can maintain servant for all. new england must be worker in some kind, and whereas it have, future those man that be of weak constitution to keep at home if their estate can maintain. servant for all new england must be worker in some kind, and whereas it have be former report, that boy of ten or a twelve year of age may do much more than get their live that can be, for he must have more than a boy head and no less than a man, strength that intend to live comfortable, and he that have understanding and industry. with a stock of a hundred pound shall live better there than he shall do here of twenty pound. but many i know will say: if it be thus, how come it to pass then that they be so poor? to which i answer. he shall do here of twenty pound. but many i know will say: if it be thus, how come it to pass then that they be so poor? to which i answer that they be poor. but in comparison compare they with the rich merchant or great land man in england and then i know they will seem poor. there be no probability they shall be exceed rich, because none of such great estate go over yet beside. a man of estate must first scatter before he gather. he must lay out money for transport of servant and cattle and good for house and fence and garden etc. this may make his purse seem light and to the eye of other seem a leak in his estate, whereas servant and cattle and good for house and fence and garden etc. this may make his purse seem light and to the eye of other seem a leak in his estate, whereas these disbursment be for his future enrichment, for he be once well seat and quiet, settle his increase come in double. and howsoever they be, account poor, they be well content and look not so much at abundance as a competency, so little be the poverty of the country that i be persuade if many in england which be constrain to beg their bread be there, they will live better than many do here that have money to buy it. furthermore, when corn be scarce yet may they have either or flesh for their labour and be there, they will live better than many do here that have money to buy it. furthermore, when corn be scarce, yet may they have either or flesh for their labour, and sure that place be not miserable poor to they that be there. where four egg may be have for a penny and a quart of new milk at the same rate. where butter be sixpence a pound and cheshire-cheese at five penny, sure middlesex afford london no better pennyworth. what, though there be no such plenty as to cry these thing in the street yet every day, afford these pennyworth to those that need they. in most place, i dare not say in all, can they be very poor where for four thousand soul there be? yet every day afford these pennyworth to those that need they. in most place, i dare not say in all, can they be very poor where for four thousand soul there be fifteen hundred head of cattle beside four thousand goat and swine innumerable in a ill sheepe-yeare? i have know mutton as dear in old-england and dear than goates-flesh be in new-england, which be altogether as good if fancy be set aside chap 12, what provision be to be make for a journey at sea and and what to carry with we for our use at land. many peradventure at the look over of these relation may have inclination or resolution for the voyage to who i wish all prosperity in their undertake, although i will use at land. many peradventure at the look over of these relation may have inclination or resolution for the voyage, to who i wish all prosperity in their undertake, although i will use no forcive argument to persuade any, but leave they to the relation. yet by way of advice i will commend to they a few line from the pen of experience. and because the way to new england be over sea, it will not be amiss to give you direction what be most necessary to be carry. many, i suppose, know as well or better than myself. yet all do not to those my direction tend. although every man have ship-provision, allow he for his five pound a man which be salt beef, pork, salt fish, butter. than myself. yet all do not to those my direction tend. although every man have ship-provision, allow he for his five pound a man- which be salt beef, pork, salt fish, butter, cheese, pease, pottage, water-gruel and such kind of victual with good biscuit and sixe-shilling beer. yet will it be necessary to carry some comfortable refresh of fresh victual as first for such as have ability, some conserve and good claret wine to burn at sea, or you may have it by some of your vintner or wine-coopers, burn here and put up into vessel which will keep much better than other. burn wine be a very comfortable thing for the stomach, or such as be seasick salad-oil. likewise prune be good to be stew sugar for. which will keep much better than other. burn wine be a very comfortable thing for the stomach or such as be seasick salad-oil. likewise prune be good to be stew sugar for many thing, white biscuit and egg and bacon, rice, poultry and some weather-sheepe to kill aboard the ship and fine flowre-baked meat will keep about a week or nine day at sea. juice of lemon, well put up, be good either to prevent or cure the scurvy. here it must not be forget to carry small skillet or pipkin and small frying-panns to dress their victual in at sea for bed, so it be easy and clean and warm it be, no matter how old or coarse it be for the use of the sea. and their victual in at sea for bed, so it be easy and clean and warm it be, no matter how old or coarse it be for the use of the sea. and so likewise for apparel, the old clothes be the fit, with a long coarse coat to keep better thing from the pitch rope and plank. whosoever shall put to sea in a stout and well-conditioned ship, have a honest master and love. seaman shall not need to fear, but he shall find as good content at sea as at land. it be too common with many to fear the sea more than they need, and all such as put to sea confess it to be less tedious than they either fear or expect a ship at. with many to fear the sea more than they need, and all such as put to sea confess it to be less tedious than they either fear or expect. a ship at sea may well be compare to a cradle rock by a careful mother hand which, though it be move up and down, yet be it not in danger of fall. so a ship may often be rock too, and again upon the troublesome sea, yet seldom do it sink or overturn, because it be keep by that careful hand of providence by which it be rock. it be never know yet that any ship in that voyage be cast away or that ever fall into the enemy hand. for the health of passenger it have be. be rock, it be never know yet that any ship in that voyage be cast away or that ever fall into the enemy hand. for the health of passenger, it have be observe that of six hundred soul not above three or four have die at sea. it be probable in such a company more may have die either by sickness or casualty if they have stay at home. for woman i see not but that they do as well as man and young child as well as either have their health as well at sea as at land. many likewise which have come with such foul body to sea as do make their day uncomfortable at land, have be so purge and clarify at sea that they as at land. many likewise, which have come with such foul body to sea as do make their day uncomfortable at land, have be so purge and clarify at sea that they have be more healthful for aftertime. their weak appetite be turn to good stomach, not only desire but likewise digest such victual as the sea afford second for direction for the country. it be not to be fear but that man of good estate may do well there. always provide that they go well accommodate with servant in which i will not wish they to take overmany. ten or twelve lusty servant be able to manage a estate of two or three thousand pound. it be not the multiplicity of many bad servant which present eat. to take overmany ten or twelve lusty servant, be able to manage a estate of two or three thousand pound. it be not the multiplicity of many bad servant which present, eat a man out of house and harbour, as lamentable experience have make manifest, but the industry of the faithful and diligent labourer that enrich the careful master so that he that have many dronish servant shall soon be poor and he that have a industrious family shall as soon be rich. now, for the encouragement of his man, he must not do as many have do, more through ignorance than desire. carry many mouth and no meat, but rather much meat for a few mouth. want of due maintenance produce nothing but a grumble spirit with have do more through ignorance than desire, carry many mouth and no meat, but rather much meat for a few mouth. want of due maintenance produce nothing but a grumble spirit with a sluggish idleness when, as those servant which be well provide for go through their employment with speed and cheerfulness. for meal it will be requisite to carry a hogshead and a half for every one that be a labourer, to keep he till he may receive the fruit of his own labour, which will be a year and a half after his arrival if he land in may or june. he must likewise carry malt, beef, butter, cheese, some pease, good wine, vinegar, strong-water, etc. whosoever transport more of these than he himself use his. if he land in may or june, he must likewise carry malt, beef, butter, cheese, some pease, good wine, vinegar, strong-water, etc. whosoever transport more of these than he himself use his overplus be sell will yield as much profit as any other staple commodity. every man likewise must carry over good store of apparel, for if he come to buy it there he shall find it dear than in england. woollencloth be a very good commodity and linen better, as holland lockram, flaxen, hempen, calico stuff, linsey-woolfies and blue callicoe, green say for housewife, apron, hat, boot, shoe, good irish stocking which, if they be good, be much more serviceable than knit-ones. all kind of grocery ware as sugar, prune, raisin, currant, honey, nutmeg, clover, etc. soap. hat, boot, shoe, good irish stocking which if they be good be much more serviceable than knit-ones. all kind of grocery ware as sugar, prune, raisin, currant, honey, nutmeg, clover etc. soap, candle and lamp etc. all manner of household stuff be very good trade there as pewter and brass, but great iron-pot be prefer before brass for the use of that country. warming-panne and stewing-panne be of necessary use and good traffic there. all manner of iron-ware as all manner of nail for house and all manner of spikes for building of boat, ship and fish stage. all manner of tool for workman, hoes for planter, broad and narrow for set and weed with axe both broad and pitching-ax. all manner of anger pierce bit whip-saw twohanded. fish stage, all manner of tool for workman, hoes for planter, broad and narrow, for set and weed with axe, both broad and pitching-ax, all manner of anger pierce, bit whip-saw, twohanded saw froe, both for the rive of pail and lath, ring for beetle head and iron-wedge. though all these be make in the country there be diverse blacke-smith, yet be a heavy commodity and take but a little stowage. it be cheap to carry such commodity out of england. glass ought not to be forget of any that desire to benefit themselves or the country, if it be well leaded and careful pack up. i know no commodity better for portage or sail here. likewise must not be forget all utensil for the sea, as barbel. country if it be well leaded and careful pack up. i know no commodity better for portage or sail here. likewise must not be forget all utensil for the sea, as barbel splitting-knive, lead and cod-hooke and line machrill-hook and line sharke-hooke, seane or net large and strong herring-net, etc. such as will eat foul. must not forget their sixe-foote gun, their good powder and shot of all sort. a great round shoot, call bastable-shot, be the best being make of a black lead than ordinary shot. furthermore, good pooldavy to make sail for boat, road and anchor for boat and pinnace be good sea-coal, iron, lead and millstone, flint, ordonance and whatsoever a man can conceive be good for the country that will lie as ballast he. and anchor for boat and pinnace be good, sea-coal, iron, lead and millstone, flint, ordonance and whatsoever a man can conceive be good for the country, that will lie as ballast. he can be a loser by it. and lest i shall forget a thing of so great importance, no man must neglect to provide for himself or those belong to he, his munition for the defence of himself and the country. for there be no man there that bear a head but that bear military arm. even boy of fourteen year of age be practise with man in military discipline every three week. who soever shall carry over drum and english colour patteson, halberd, pick musket bandelerous with sword, shall not need to fear good gain for with man in military discipline every three week. who soever shall carry over drum and english colour patteson, halberd, pick musket bandelerous with sword shall not need to fear good gain, for they such thing be want in the country. likewise, whatsoever shall be needful for fortification of hold and castle whereby the common enemy may be keep out in future time be much desire. they as yet have have no great cause to fear. but because security have be the overthrow of many a new plantation, it be their care, according to their ability to secure themselves by fortification as well as they can thus have, show what commodity be most useful. it will not be amiss to show you what man be most fit for these. secure themselves by fortification as well as they can thus have, show what commodity be most useful. it will not be amiss to show you what man be most fit for these plantation first. man of good work and contrive head, a well experience, common wealth, man for the good of the body politic in matter of advice and counsel, a well skill and industrious husbandman for tillage and improvement of ground. a ingenious carpenter, a cunning joiner, a handsome cooper, such a one as can make strong ware for the use of the country, and a good brickmaker, a tyler and a smith, a leather dresser, a gardener and a tailor, one that have good skill in the trade of fish, be of special use and so. a good brickmaker, a tyler and a smith, a leather dresser, a gardener and a tailor, one that have good skill in the trade of fish, be of special use and so be a good fowler, if there be any that have skill in any of these trade. if he can transport himself, he need not fear, but he may improve his time and endeavour to his own benefit and comfort. if any can transport himself, he may provide himself of a honest master, and so may do as well. there be be as much freedom and liberty for servant as in england, and more too. a wrong servant shall have right from his injurious master, and a wrong master shall have right of his injurious servant, as and liberty for servant, as in england, and more too. a wrong servant shall have right from his injurious master and a wrong master shall have right of his injurious servant as well as here, wherefore let no servant be discourage from the voyage that intend it. and now, whereas it be general report that servant and poor man grow rich and the master and gentry grow poor, i must needs confess that the diligent hand make rich and that labour man have good store of employment and as good pay, live well and content. but i can perceive that those that set they a work be any way impoverish by they peradventure. they have less money by reason of they, but never the less riches a man. i can perceive that those that set they a work be any way impoverish by they peradventure. they have less money by reason of they, but never the less riches a man work well do, being more beneficial than his money or other dead commodity which otherwise will lie by he to no purpose. many man be so improvident as to set man about building of castle in the air or other unnecessary employment. he may grow poor, but such as employ labourer about plant of corn, build of house, fence in of ground, fish and diverse other necessary occasion shall receive as much or more by poor man labour than those that live in england do from the industry of such as they hire, wherefore i do. diverse other necessary occasion shall receive as much or more by poor man labour than those that live in england do from the industry of such as they hire. wherefore i do suppose this to be but the surmise of some that be ignorant of the state of the country or else misinform by some ill willer to the plantation. many objection i know be daily, invent to hinder the proceed of these new plantation, which may damp the unsettle spirit of such as be not great affect with those undertake. some say the spaniard lay claim to the whole country be the first discoverer hereof and that he may make invasion upon those part as well as he have do upon s christopher and s martin and claim to the whole country be the first discoverer hereof and that he may make invasion upon those part as well as he have do upon s christopher and s martin and those place. but it do not follow that because he take such place as lay just in his way to the west indies that he shall come thousand of mile with a great navy to plantation as yet not worth the pillage. and when the plantation be grow, note in the eye of the common foe for wealth, it be hope that when the bee have honey in their hive they will have sting in their tail. have not virginia be plant many year, which be four hundred mile near the spaniard course and yet never? bee have honey in their hive, they will have sting in their tail, have not virginia be plant many year, which be four hundred mile near the spaniard course and yet never meet with any affrontment? so that this scruple smell of fear and pusillanimity. to wipe away all groundless calumniation and to answer to every too too curious objection and frivolous question, some so simple as not ashamed to ask whether the sun shine there or no, be to run in. but i hope that the several manuscript and letter and information by word of mouth from such of our honest countryman which daily have recourse unto we have, give full satisfaction to such as be well willer to the plantation and for such as be estrange. mouth from such of our honest countryman which daily have recourse unto we have give full satisfaction to such as be well willer to the plantation and for such as be estrange to it in affection. if every word that have be either write or speak be a forcive argument, yet will it be two little to steady their belief in any one particular concern the country. some be nimble ear to hear fault and so ready tongue to publish. they yea often time with strain construction. a false asseveration usual win more belief than two verify negative can resettle some. there be who count with claudian that it be a incomparable happiness to have their birth life and bury in the same place. these be never likely. verify negative can resettle. some there be who count with claudian that it be a incomparable happiness to have their birth life and bury in the same place. these be never likely to remove further than the shell of their own country, but because there be some noble spirit that devote their state and their person to the common good of their king and country. i have therefore, for their direction and delight, make this relation, for as the end of my travel be observation, so i desire the end of my observation may tend to the information of other. as i have observe what i have see and write what i have observe, so do i desire to publish what i have write, desire it may be. the information of other. as i have observe what i have see and write what i have observe, so do i desire to publish what i have write, desire it may be beneficial to posterity. and if any man desire to fill himself at that fountain, from whence this taste cup be take, his own experience shall tell he as much as i have here relate, and thus i pass from the country as it stand to the english and come to discourse how it stand to the old native and they to it, as follow: the second part of the indian: their person, clothing, diet, nature, custom law, marriage, worship, conjuration, war, game, hunt, fish, sport, language, death and burial. chap i of the connectacut mowhack, or. the second part of the indian: their person, clothing, diet, nature, custom, law, marriage, worship, conjuration, war, game, hunt, fish, sport, language, death and burial. chap i of the connectacut, mowhack or such indian as be westward. the country, as it be in relation to the indian, be divide as it be into shire. every several division be sway by a several king. the indian to the east and north east bear the name of churcher and tarrenteene. these in the southern part be call pequant and those who be seat westward be call connectacut and mowhack. our indian that live to the northward of they be call aberginian who, before the sweep plague, be a inhabitant, not fear but rather scorn the confrontment of such as now. mowhack, our indian that live to the northward of they be call aberginian, who, before the sweep plague be a inhabitant, not fear but rather scorn the confrontment of such as now count they but the scum of the country and will soon root they out of their native possession. be it not for the english. these be a cruel, bloody people which be wont to come down upon their poor neighbour with more than brutish savageness: spoil of their corn, burn their house, slay man, ravish woman, yea, very cannibal they be sometime, eat on a man, one part after another before his face, and while yet live in so much that the very name of a mowhack will strike the heart of a poor abergenian dead. a man, one part after another before his face, and while yet live in so much that the very name of a mowhack will strike the heart of a poor abergenian dead, be here not hope at hand of relief from english to succour they, for these inhuman homicide, confess that they dare not meddle with a white face man, accompany with his hot mouth weapon. these indian be a people of a tall stature, of long, grim visage, slender, waste, and exceed great arm and thigh wherein they say their strength lie. and this i rather believe, because a honest gentleman tell i, upon his knowledge, that he see one of they, with a fillippe with his finger, kill a dog who afterward flee he and sod rather believe, because a honest gentleman tell i upon his knowledge that he see one of they, with a fillippe with his finger, kill a dog who afterward flee he and sod he and eat he to his dinner. they be so hardy that they can eat such thing as will make other indian sick to look upon. be destitute of fish and flesh, they suffice hunger and maintain nature with the use of vegetative, but that which they most hunt after be the flesh of man. their custom be, if they get a stranger near their habitation, not to butcher he immediate but keep he in as good plight as they can, feed he with the best victual they have. as a near neighboar indian assure i. their habitation, not to butcher he immediate but keep he in as good plight as they can, feed he with the best victual they have. as a near neighboar indian assure i who find what he have speak true by a lamentable experience. still wear the cognizance of their cruelty on his naked arm. who be take by they eat of their food, lodge in their bed, nay, he be bring forth every day to be new paint, pipe unto and hem in with a ring of bare skin. morris dancer, who present their antique before he. in a word, when they have sport. enough about this walk. maypole, a rough hew satire, cut a gobbit of flesh from his brawny arm. eat it, in his view, sear. he in a word, when they have sport enough about this walk, maypole, a rough hew satire, cut a gobbit of flesh from his brawny arm, eat it in his view, sear it with a firebrand, lest the blood shall be waste before the morning at the dawn, whereof they tell he they will make a end as they have begin, he answer that he care as little for their threat as they do for his life. not fear death. whereupon they lead he bind into a wigwam where he sit as a condemn prisoner, grate his tooth for anguish. be for the present so hamper, and the next day to be entomb in so many live sepulchre. he extend his strength to the utmost. break the band. his tooth for anguish, be for the present so hamper and the next day to be entomb in so many live sepulchre. he extend his strength to the utmost, break the band from his hand and lose the cord from his foot. think at once to be revenge for the flesh of his arm and find a hatchet, lay one with a arm of revenge to the unliving of ten man at first, onset afterward, take the opportunity of the dead of night, flee through the wood and come to his native home where he still live to rehearse his happy escapall. of the rest of their inhuman cruelty, let the dutchman who live among they testify, as likewise the cruel manner of lead their prisoner, captive who live to rehearse his happy escapall. of the rest of their inhuman cruelty, let the dutchman who live among they testify, as likewise the cruel manner of lead their prisoner, captive, who they do not only opinion with sharp thong but likewise bear hole through their hamstring through which they thread a cord, couple ten or a dozen man together. these indian be more desperate in war than the other indian, which proceed not only from the fierceness of their nature but also in that they know themselves to be better. arm and weapon. all of they wear sea, horse skin and bark of tree, make by their art. as impenetrable it be think as steel wear head, piece of the same under which thy march secure and they wear sea horse skin and bark of tree, make by their art as impenetrable it be. think as steel wear head, piece of the same under which thy march, secure and undant, run and fierce cry out: hadree, hadree, succomee, succomee, we come, we come to suck your blood. not fear the feather shaft of the strong-armed bowman, but like unruly headstrong stallion, beat they down with their right hand. tamahauke and leave hand. javelin be all the weapon which they use. count bow, a cowardly fight. tamahaukes be staff of two foot and a half long and a knob at one end as round and big as a football. a javelin be a short spear head with sharp sea-horse tooth. one blow or thrust with these. half long and a knob at one end. as round and big as a football, a javelin be a short spear head with sharp sea-horse tooth. one blow or thrust with these strange weapon will not need a second to hasten death from a mowhacke arm. i will conclude this discourse concern the mowhacke in a tragical rehearsal of one of their combat. a sagamore inhabibit near these cannibal be so daily annoy with their injurious inhumanity that he must either become a tributary subject to their tyranny or release himself from thraldom by the stroke of war which he be unable to wage of himself. wherefore, with fair entreaty, plausible persuasion, forcive argument and rich present he send to other sagamore, he procure so many soldier as of war which he be unable to wage of himself. wherefore, with fair entreaty, plausible persuasion, forcive argument and rich present he send to other sagamore, he procure so many soldier as sum with his own, make his force six thousand strong, with the which he resolute march towards his enemy, intend either to win the horse or loose the saddle. his enemy have hear of his design plot: how to confront he in his enterprise and overthrow he by treachery which they thus attempt know their enemy be. to swim over a muddy river. they divide their band, lie in ambush on both side the river, wait his approach, who suspect no danger, look for nothing but victory, but immediate. they be invyron with their unexpected foe. divide their band, lie in ambush on both side the river, wait his approach, who suspect no danger, look for nothing but victory, but immediate. they be invyron with their unexpected foe in their great disadvantage. for be in the water shoot they can not, for swim be their action. and when they come to the side they can not run away. for their foot stick fast in the mud and their adversary empale. they about club and dart all that attain the shore so that all be kill and captive, save three who swim further under the water like the duck that escape the spaniel by dive until they be out of sight of their blood. thirsty foe, recover the shore, creep into the thicket from whence? under the water like the duck that escape the spaniel by dive until they be out of sight of their blood. thirsty foe recover the shore, creep into the thicket, from whence, after a little breathe and rest of their weary limb, they march through the wood and arrive at their own home, relate to their inquisitive surviver the sad event of their war who, a long time after deplore the death of their friend, still place the remembrance of that day in the calendar of their mishap. chap 2 of the tarrenteene, or the indian inhabit eastward. the tarrenteenes, save that they eat not man flesh, be little less savage and cruel than these cannibal. our indian do fear they as their deadly enemy for so many. inhabit eastward, the tarrenteenes, save that they eat, not man flesh, be little less savage and cruel than these cannibal. our indian do fear they as their deadly enemy, for so many of they as they meet they kill. about 2 year ago our indian be busy about their accustom hunt, not suspect they so near their own liberty, be on the sudden surprise by they, some be slay. the rest escape to their english asylum, whither they dare not pursue. they, their sagamore be wound by a arrow but present cure by english chirurgery. these indian be the more insolent by reason. they have gun which they daily trade for with the french who will sell his eye, as they say, for beaver. but these do they. indian be the more insolent by reason. they have gun which they daily trade for with the french who will sell his eye, as they say, for beaver. but these do they more credit than service for have gun, they want powder or if they have that, they want shoot. something or other be always want, so that they use they for little but to salute coast boat that come to trade who no soon can anchor in any harbour. but they present they with a volley of shot. ask for sack and strong liquor, which they so much love, since the english use to trade it with they, that they will scarce trade for any thing else lash out into excessive abuse. first, teach by the example. they so much love, since the english use to trade it with they that they will scarce trade for any thing else, lash out into excessive abuse. first, teach by the example of some of our english who, to uncloathe they of their beaver coat, clad they with the infection of swear and drink which be never in fashion with they before it be contrary to their nature to guzell down strong drink or use so much as to sip of strong-water until our bestial example and dishonest incitation bathe bring they to it, from which i be sure have spring many evil consequent as disorder, quarrel, wrong, unconscionable and forcive wrest of beaver and and from overflow cup there have be a proceed to revenge, murder and i be sure, have spring many evil consequent as disorder, quarrel, wrong, unconscionable and forcive wrest of beaver and and from overflow cup there have be a proceed to revenge, murder and overflow of blood. as witness master way boat which they sink with stone after they have kill his son with three more buzz, the english in the ear that they see it bulge against the rock and the man drown in the beat surge but afterward be betray as many as be catch, be hang. another, who be situate on richmond island, live as he list among they, make his covetous, corrupt, will his law, after many abuse, be with his family one evening. treacherous murder under a fair pretence of trade, so that these that he list among they, make his covetous, corrupt? will his law, after many abuse, be with his family one evening? treacherous murder under a fair pretence of trade, so that these that live beside the law of god and their king and the light of nature die by their hand that care neither for god, king nor nature. take these indian in their own trim and natural disposition and they be report to be wise, lofty-spirited, constant in friendship to one another, true in their promise and more industrious than many other. chap 3 of the pequant and narraganset indian inhabit southward. the pequant be a stately, warlike people of who i never hear any misdemeanour, but that they be just and equal in their deal, not treacherous. pequant and narraganset indian inhabit southward. the pequant be a stately, warlike people of who i never hear any misdemeanour, but that they be just and equal in their deal, not treacherous either to their countryman or english, requiter of courtesy, affable towards the english. their next neighbour, the narraganset, be at this present the most numerous people in those part, the most rich also and the most industrious, be the store-house of all such kind of wild merchandise as be among they these man be the most curious minter of their and mowhake which they form out of the inmost wreath of periwinkle-shell. the northern eastern and western indian fetch all their coin from these southern mint-master, from hence they have most of their curious pendant and form out of the inmost wreath of periwinkle-shell. the northern eastern and western indian fetch all their coin from these southern mint-master. from hence they have most of their curious pendant and bracelet. from hence they have their great stonepipe which will hold a quarter of a ounce of tobacco, which they make with steele-drils and other instrument. such be their ingenuity and dexterity that they can imitate the english mould, so accurate that be it, not for matter and colour it be hard to distinguish they. they make they of green and sometime of black stone. they be much desire of our english tobaconist for their rarity, strength, handsomeness and coolness. hence, likewise, our indian have their pot wherein they use to seethe their victual before they. stone. they be much desire of our english tobaconist for their rarity, strength, handsomeness and coolness. hence, likewise, our indian have their pot wherein they use to seethe their victual before they know the use of brass. since the english come, they have employ most of their time in catch of beaver, otter and musquash, which they bring down into the bay, return back load with english commodity of which they make a double profit by sell they to more remote indian who be ignorant at what cheap rate they obtain they in comparison of what they make they pay. so make their neighbour ignorance their enrichment. although these be populous, yet i never hear they be desirous to take in hand any martial enterprise or expose themselves. they make, they pay, so make their neighbour ignorance their enrichment. although these be populous, yet i never hear they be desirous to take in hand any martial enterprise or expose themselves to the uncertain event of war. wherefore the pequant call they womenlike man but be uncapable of a jeer. they rest secure under the conceit of their popularity and seek rather to grow rich by industry than famous by deed of chivalry, but to leave stranger and come to declare what be experimental. know of the indian among who we live, of who in the next chapter, chap 4, of the aberginian or indian northward. first, of their stature, most of they be between five or six foot high, straight body, strong, compose, smooth skin, merry. the next chapter, chap 4, of the aberginian or indian northward first. of their stature, most of they be between five or six foot high, straight body, strong, compose, smooth skin, merry countenance of complexion, something more swart than spaniard, black haired, high foreheaded, black eye, out-nosed, broad shoulder, brawny arm, long and slender hand out breasted, small, waste lank belly, well thighed, flat kneed, handsome grow leg and small foot. in a word, take they when the blood briske' in their vein, when the flesh be on their back and marrow in their bone, when they frolic in their antique deportment and indian posture, and they be more amiable to behold, though only in adam livery, than many a compound. fantastic in the new fashion it may. they frolic in their antique deportment and indian posture and they be more amiable to behold, though only in adam livery, than many a compound fantastic in the new fashion. it may puzzle belief to conceive how such lusty body shall have their rise and daily supportment from so slender a foster. their house be mean, their lodging as homely commons scant their drink water and nature their best clothing in they, the old proverb may well be verify, for though this be their daily portion, they still be healthful and lusty. i have be in many place, yet do i never see one that be bear, either in redundance or defect, a monster or any that sickness have, deform or casuality make decrepit, save one that have. many place, yet do i never see one that be bear either in redundance or defect, a monster or any that sickness have deform or casuality make decrepit, save one that have a blear eye and a other that have a win on his cheek. the reason be render why they grow so proportionable and continue so long in their vigour- most of they be 50 before a wrinkle brow or gray hair bewray their age- be because they be not bring down with suppress labour, vex with annoy care or drown in the excessive abuse of overflow plenty, which oftentimes kill they more than want, as may appear in they for when they change their bare indian commons for the plenty of england full diet it be. of overflow plenty which oftentimes kill they more than want, as may appear in they. for when they change their bare indian commons for the plenty of england full diet, it be so contrary to their stomach that death or a desperate sickness immediate accrue, which make so few of they desirous to see england. their swarthiness, be the sun livery for they be. bear fair their smooth skin. proceed from the often anoint of their body with the oil of fish and the fat of eagle, with the grease of rackoone which they hold in summer, the best antidote to keep their skin from blister with the scorch sun. and it be their best armour against the musketoe, the sure expeller of the hairy excrement. and stop. summer, the best antidote to keep their skin from blister with the scorch sun, and it be their best armour against the musketoe, the sure expeller of the hairy excrement, and stop the pore of their body against the nip winter cold. their black hair be natural, yet it be bring to a more jetty colour by oil, die and daily dress. sometime they wear it very long, hang down in a loose, dishevel, womanish manner. otherwhile tie up hard and short like a horse tail, bind close with a fillet which they say make it grow the fast they be not a little fantastical or custom-sick, in this particular, their boy be not permit to wear their hair long till sixteen year of age, and then they grow the fast. they be not a little fantastical or custom-sick, in this particular their boy be not permit to wear their hair long till sixteen year of age, and then they must come to it by degree. some be cut with a long foretop, a long lock on the crown, one of each side of his head. the rest of his hair be cut, even with the scalp. the young man and soldier wear their hair long on the one side, the other side be cut short like a screw. other cut they have as their fancy befool, they which will torture the wit of a curious barber to imitate. but though they be thus wed to the hair of their head, you can woo they to. their fancy befool, they which will torture the wit of a curious barber to imitate. but though they be thus wed to the hair of their head, you can woo they to wear it on their chin, where it no soon grow, but it be stub up by the root, for they count it as a unuseful, cumbersome and opprobrious excrement, insomuch as they call he a english man bastard that have but the appearance of a beard, which some have grow in a stare fashion, like the beard of a cat, which make they the more out of love with. they choose rather to have no beard than such, as shall make they ridiculous chap v of their apparel, ornament paint and other artificial deck. now these more out of love with. they choose rather to have no beard than such as shall make they ridiculous chap v of their apparel, ornament paint and other artificial deck. now, these naked body may seem too weak to withstand the assault heat of their parch summer and the pierce cold of the icy winter, or it may be surmise that these earthly fabric shall be waste to nothing by the tempestuous dash of wind-driven reins, have neither that which may warm within or shelter without. yet these thing they look not after, save a pair of indian breeches to cover that which modesty command to be hide which be but a piece of cloth, a yard and a half long, put between their groining tie with a of indian breeches to cover that which modesty command to be hide, which be but a piece of cloth a yard and a half long, put between their groining tie with a snake skin about their middle. one end hang down with a flap before the other like a tail behind. in the winter time, the more age of they wear leather drawer in form like irish trouser, fasten under their girdle with button. they wear shoe likewise of their own make, cut out of a moose hide. many of they wear skin about they in form of a irish mantle and of these some be bear skin, moose skin and beaver skin sew together otter skin and rackoone skin. most of they in the winter have his. form of a irish mantle, and of these some be bear skin, moose skin and beaver skin, sew together otter skin and rackoone skin. most of they, in the winter, have his deep fur, cat skin like a long, large muff which he shift to that arm which lie most expose to the wind. thus clad he busle better through a world of cold in a frost-paved wilderness than the fur citizen in his warm. if their fancy drive they to trade, they choose rather a good course: blanket through which they can see, interpose it between the sun and they, or a piece of broad cloth which they use for a double end, make it a coat by day and a cover by night. they love not. between the sun and they, or a piece of broad cloth which they use for a double end. make it a coat by day and a cover by night. they love not to be imprison in our english fashion. they love their own dog fashion. better of shake their ear and be ready in a moment than to spend time in dress. they, though they may as well spare it as any man i know, have little else to do. but the chief reason they render why they will not conform to our english apparel be because their woman can wash they when they be soil and their mean will not reach to buy new when they have do with their old and they, confident, believe the english. because their woman can wash they when they be soil and their mean will not reach to buy new when they have do with their old and they confident believe the english will not be so liberal as to furnish they upon gifture. therefore, they have rather go naked than be lousy and bring their body out of their old tune, make they more tender by a new, acquire habit which poverty will constrain they to leave. although they be thus poor, yet be there in they the spark of natural pride which appear in their long desire after many kind of ornament: wear pendant in their ear as form of bird, beast and fish, carve out of bone, shell and stone with long bracelet of their curious. long desire after many kind of ornament: wear pendant in their ear as form of bird, beast and fish, carve out of bone, shell and stone with long bracelet of their curious wrought and mowhackee which they put about their neck and loin. these they count a rare kind of deck. many of the better sort, bear upon their cheek certain portraiture of beast as bear, deer, moose, wolf, etc. some of fowl as of eagle, hawk, etc. which be not a superficial paint but a certain incision or else a raise of their skin by a small sharp instrument under which they convey a certain kind of black, unchangeable ink which make the desire form apparent and permanent. other have certain round impression down the outside of. a small sharp instrument under which they convey a certain kind of black, unchangeable ink which make the desire form apparent and permanent. other have certain round impression down the outside of their arm and breast in form of mullet or spur-rowel which they imprint by sear iron. whether these be foil to illustrate their unparallelled beauty as they deem it, or arm to blazon their antique gentility, i can easy determine. but a sagamore with a humberd in his ear for a pendant, a black hawk on his for his plume, mowhackee for his gold chain, good store of begirt his loin, his bow in his hand, his quiver at his back, with six naked indian spatterlash at his heel for his guard, think himself little inferior. chain, good store of begirt, his loin, his bow in his hand, his quiver at his back, with six naked indian spatterlash at his heel for his guard. think himself little inferior to the great cham. he will not stick to say he be all one with king charles. he think he can blow down castle with his breath and conquer kingdom with his conceit. this pompey can endure no equal. till one day, adverse lottery at their game, call puimme, metamorphize he into a codrus. rob he of his conceit. wealth, leave he in mind, and riches equal with his naked attendant. till a new taxation, furnish he with a fresh chap 5 of their diet. cookery, meale-time and hospitality at their kettle have do with their. and riches equal with his naked attendant till a new taxation. furnish he with a fresh chap 5 of their diet. cookery, meale-time and hospitality at their kettle have do with their most needful clothing and ornamental deck. may it please you to feast your eye with their belly-timbers, which i suppose will be but to weak stomach as they cook it, though never so good of itself in wintertime. they have all manner of fowl of the water and of the land, and beast of the land and water: pond-fish with catharre and other root, indian bean and clamm. in the summer they have all manner of sea-fish with all sort of berry. for the order of their victual they boil or roast. they have large kettle. indian bean and clamm. in the summer they have all manner of sea-fish with all sort of berry. for the order of their victual they boil or roast. they have large kettle which they trade for with the french long since and do still buy of the english as their need require. before they have substantial earthen pot of their own, make their spit be no other than cleave stick, sharp at one end, to thrust into the ground. into these cleave stick they thrust the flesh or fish. they will have roast, behem a round fire with a dozen of spit at a time. turn they as they see occasion some of their scullery have, dress these homely cates, present it to his guest, dish it up. fire with a dozen of spit at a time, turn they as they see occasion some of their scullery have. dress these homely cates, present it to his guest, dish it up in a rude manner, place it on the verdant carpet of the earth which nature spread they, without either trencher napkin or knife upon which their hunger-sawced stomach, impatient of delay, fall aboard without scruple at unwashed hand, without bread, salt or beer, loll on the turkish fashion, not cease till their full belly, leave nothing but empty platter. they seldom or never make bread of their indian corn, but see it whole like bean. eat three or four corn with a mouthful of fish or flesh sometime. eat meat first and corn after, fill chink. bread of their indian corn, but see it whole like bean, eat three or four corn with a mouthful of fish or flesh sometime eat meat first and corn after, fill chink with their broth. in summer, when their corn be spend, isquoutersquashes be their best bread, a fruit, like a young pompion to say, and to speak paradoxical, they be great eater and yet little meate-man. when they visit our english, be invite to eat. they be very moderate, whether it be to show their manner or for shamefastness, i know not, but at home they will eat till their belly stand south ready to split with fullness. it be their fashion to eat all at some time and sometime nothing at all in two or three. they will eat till their belly stand south, ready to split with fullness. it be their fashion to eat all at some time and sometime nothing at all in two or three day wise providence be a stranger to their wild way. they be right, infidel, neither care for the morrow or provide for their own family, but as all be fellow at football. so they all meet friend at the kettle, save their wife that dance a spaniell-like attendance at their back for their bony fragment. if their imperious occasion cause they to travel, the best of their victual for their journey be nocake, as they call it, which be nothing but indian corn parch in the hot ash. the ash be sift from it it be. best of their victual for their journey, be nocake, as they call it, which be nothing but indian corn. parch in the hot ash, the ash be sift from it. it be afterward beat to powder and put into a long leathern bag, truss at their back like a knapsack, out of which they take thrice three spoonful a day. divide it into three meal. if it be in winter and snow be on the ground, they can eat when they please. stop snow after their dusty victual, which otherwise will feed they little better than a tyburn halter in summer, they must stay till they meet with a spring or brooke where they may have water, to prevent the imminent danger of choke with this strange they. a tyburn halter. in summer they must stay till they meet with a spring or brooke where they may have water to prevent the imminent danger of choke. with this strange they will travel four ot five day together with load fit for elephant than man. but though they can fare so hardly abroad at home, their chap must walk night and day as long as they have it. they keep no set meal. their store be spend, they champ on the bit till they meet with fresh supply, either from their own endeavour or their wife industry who trudge to the clambanke when all other mean. fail though they be sometime scant. yet be they as free as emperor, both to their countryman and english. be he. wife industry who trudge to the clambanke when all other mean, fail though they be sometime scant yet be they as free as emperor. both to their countryman and english, be he stranger or near acquaintance, count, it a great discourtesy not to eat of their high-conceited, delicate and sup. of their un-oat-mealed broth. make thick with fish fowl and beast boil all together, some remain raw, the rest convert by overmuch seethe to a loathe mash not half so good as irish boniclapper. chap 7 of their disposition and good qualification as friendship, constancy, truth and affability to enter into a serious discourse concern, the natural condition of these indian may procure admiration from the people of any civilise nation in regard of their civility and good. and affability to enter into a serious discourse concern. the natural condition of these indian may procure admiration from the people of any civilise nation in regard of their civility and good nature. if a tree may be judge by his fruit and disposition, calculate by exterior action, then may it be conclude that these indian be of affable, courteous and well dispose nature, ready to communicate the best of their wealth to the mutual good of one another. and the less abundance they have to manifest their entire friendship so much the more perspicuous be their love in that they be as willing to part with their mite in poverty as treasure in plenty as he that kill a deer, send for his friend and eat it. their love in that they be as willing to part with their mite in poverty as treasure in plenty. as he that kill a deer, send for his friend and eat it merry, so he that receive but a piece of bread from a english hand, part it equal between himself and his comerade and eat it. love in a word. a friend can command his friend, his house and whatsoever be his. save his wife and have it free, and as they be love-linked thus in common courtesy, so be they. no way soon disjoint than by ingratitude. account a ungrateful person, a double robber of a man, not only of his courtesy but of his thanks, which he may receive of another for the same proffer. than by ingratitude account. a ungrateful person, a double robber of a man, not only of his courtesy but of his thanks, which he may receive of another for the same proffer or receive kindness. such be their love to one another that they can endure to see their countryman wrong but will stand stiff in their defence, plead strong in their behalf and justify one another integrity in any warrantable action. if it be possible to recount the courtesy they have show the english since their first arrival in those part, it will not only steady belief that they be a love people but also win the love of those that never see they and wipe off that needless fear that be too deep root in the steady belief that they be a love people but also win the love of those that never see they, and wipe off that needless fear that be too deep root in the conceit of many who think they envious, and of such rancorous and inhuman disposition that they will one day make a end of their english inmate. the worst, indeed, may be surmise, but the english hitherto have have little cause to suspect they, but rather to be convince of their trustiness. see, they have as yet be the discloser of all such treachery as have be practise by other indian, and whereas once there be a proffer of a universal league among all the indian in those part, to the intent that they may all join, have be practise by other indian, and whereas once there be a proffer of a universal league among all the indian in those part, to the intent that they may all join in one unite force to extirpiate the english, our indian refuse the motion, reply: they have rather be servant to the english, of who they be confident to receive no harm and from who they have receive so many favour and assure good testimony of their jove, than equal with they, who will cut their throat upon the least offence and make they the shambles of their cruelty. furthermore, if any rove ship be upon the coast and chance to harbour either eastward, northward or southward in any unusual port, they will give we certain intelligence. shambles of their cruelty. furthermore, if any rove ship be upon the coast and chance to harbour either eastward, northward or southward in any unusual port, they will give we certain intelligence of her burden and force, describe their man either by language or feature, which be a great privilege and no small advantage. many way have their advice and endeavour be advantageous unto we. they be our first instructer for the plant of their indian corn by teach we to cull out the fine seed, to observe the fit season, to keep distance for hole and fit measure for hill, to worm it and weed it, to prune it and dress it as occasion shall require. these indian be very hospitable, insomuch that when the english have and fit measure for hill, to worm it and weed it, to prune it and dress it as occasion shall require. these indian be very hospitable, insomuch that when the english have travel forty, fifty or threescore mile into the country they have, entertain they into their house quarter. they, by themselves, in the best room, provide the best victual. they can express their welcome in as good term as can be expect from their slender breed, show more love than compliment, not grumble for a fortnight or three week tarry, but rather care to provide accommodation correspondent to their english custom. the doubtful traveller have oftentimes be much behold to they for their guidance through the unbeaten wilderness. myself, in this particular, can do no less in. accommodation correspondent to their english custom. the doubtful traveller have oftentimes be much behold to they for their guidance through the unbeaten wilderness. myself, in this particular, can do no less, in the due acknowledgement of their love, than speak their commendation. who, with two more of my associate, bend our course to new plymouth, lose our way, be delude by a mislead path which we still follow, be as we think too broad for a indian path, which seldom be broad than a cart rut, but that the daily concourse of indian from the naraganset who trade for shoe wear they homeward, have make this indian tract like a english walk and have rear up great stick against the tree and mark the rest with their hatchet. who trade for shoe wear. they, homeward, have make this indian tract like a english walk and have rear up great stick against the tree and mark the rest with their hatchet in the english fashion, which beget in we a security of our wrong way to be right, when indeed there be nothing less. the day be gloomy and our compass at home. we travel hard till night, to less purpose than if we have sit still not gain a inch of our journey for a day travel, but happy. we arrive at a indian wigwamme where we be inform of our misprision and invite to a homely lodging feast with the haunch of a fat beer and the ensue morning the son of my naked host. wigwamme where we be inform of our misprision and invite to a homely lodging feast with the haunch of a fat beer and the ensue morning the son of my naked host for a piece of tobacco and a four penny whittle take the clew of his travel experience, conduct we through the strange labyrinth of unbeaten bushy way in the woody wilderness twenty mile to our desire harbour. a second demonstration of their love in this kind may appear in a passage of the same nature. a unexperienced wood man range in the wood for deer travel so far beyond his knowledge till he can not tell how to get out of the wood for tree. but the more he seek to direct himself out the more. deer travel so far beyond his knowledge till he can not tell how to get out of the wood for tree. but the more he seek to direct himself out, the more he run himself in from the home he most desire. the night come upon he prevent his walk and the extremity of cold seize upon his right foot. for want of warm motion, deprive he of the use thereof so that he can not remove far than his snowy bed. but have there end his day, have not. six commiserate indian who hear of his wander, find he out by diligent search be almost dead with despair and cold. but after they have conquer his despair with the assurance of his safe conduction to his habitation. his wander find he out by diligent search be almost dead with despair and cold. but after they have conquer his despair with the assurance of his safe conduction to his habitation and expel the cold by the infusion of strong water which they bring for the same purpose, they frame a thing like a hand barrow and carry this selfe-helpelesse person on their bare shoulder twelve mile to his residence. many other wander benight coaster have be kind, entertain into their habitation where they have rest and repose themselves more secure than if they have be in some blind, obscure old england inn. be the next day direct in their right way. many lazy boy that have run away from their master have be bring home by. be in some blind, obscure old england inn, be the next day direct in their right way. many lazy boy that have run away from their master have be bring home by these range forester who be as well acquaint with the craggy mountain and the pleasant vale, the stately wood and swampie grove, the spacious pond and swift run river, and can distinguish they by their name as perfect and find they as present as the experience citizen know how to find out cheapside cross or london stone. such be the wisdom and policy of these poor man that they will be sure to keep correspondence with our english magistrate, express their love in the execution of any service they command. they so far as lie in these poor man that they will be sure to keep correspondence with our english magistrate, express their love in the execution of any service they command. they, so far as lie in their power, as may appear in this one particular, a certain man, have lay himself open to the king law, fear, attachment, conviction and consequent execution, sequester himself from the honest society of his neighbour, betake himself unto the obscure thicket of the wilderness where he live for a time undiscovered till the indian, who leave no place unsearched for deer, find out his haunt and have take notice. by diverse discourse, concern he how that it be the governor desire to know where he be. they think it a part of their service to certify. haunt and have take notice by diverse discourse concern he how that it be the governor desire to know where he be. they think it a part of their service to certify he where he keep his rendezvous. who thereupon desire, if they can, to direct man to he for his attachment. but he have shift his dwell and can not be find for the present yet he be after see by other indian, but be double pistold and well sword, they fear to approach so near he as to grapple with he, wherefore they let he alone till his own necessary business. cast he upon they for have occasion to cross a river. he come to the side thereof where be a indian cannow in which the he alone till his own necessary business, cast he upon they for have occasion to cross a river. he come to the side thereof, where be a indian cannow in which the indian be to cross the river themselves. he vaunt command, waftage which they willing grant, but withal plot how they may take he prisoner which they thus effect have. place he in the midship of their ticklish wherrie. they launch forth into the deep, cause the caper cannow to cast out her cumbersome ballast into the liquid water which swim like a stone. and now the water have dank his pistole and lose his spanish progge in the bottom. the indian swim he out by the chin to the shore where have drop himself a little. now the water, have dank his pistole and lose his spanish progge in the bottom the indian, swim he out by the chin to the shore where, have drop himself a little dry, he begin to bluster out a storm of rebellious resistance till they becalm his pelt chafe with their pelt of pebble at he. afterward lead he, as they list, to the governor. these people be of a kind and affable disposition. yet be they very wary with who they strike hand in friendship. nothing be more hateful to they than a churlish disposition. so likewise be dissimulation. he that speak seldom and opportune, be as good as his word. be the only man they love. the spaniard, they say. be all one aramouse viz all. so likewise be dissimulation. he that speak seldom and opportune, be as good as his word. be the only man they love. the spaniard they say: be all one aramouse viz, all one as a dog. the frenchman have a good tongue but a false heart. the english man, all one speak, all one heart, wherefore they more approve of they than of any nation. garrulity be much condemn of they, for they utter not many word, speak seldom, and then with such gravity as be please to the ear, such as understand they not desire yet to hear their emphatical expression and lively action. such be the mild temper of their spirit that they can endure objurgation or scold. a indian sagomore once hear a english woman. yet to hear their emphatical expression and lively action. such be the mild temper of their spirit that they can endure objurgation or scold. a indian sagomore once hear a english woman scold with her husband. her quick utterance exceed his apprehension. her active lung thunder in his ear expel he the house from whence he go to the next neighbour where he relate the unseemliness of her behaviour. her language be strange to he. he express it as strange. tell they how she cry nannana, nannana, nannana, nan. say he be a great fool to give she the audience and no correction for usurp his charter and abuse he by her tongue. i have be among diverse of they, yet do i never see any fall out? give she the audience and no correction for usurp his charter and abuse he by her tongue. i have be among diverse of they, yet do i never see any fall out among they, not so much as cross word or revile speech which may provoke to blow. and whereas it be the custom of many people in their game, if they see the die run cross or their card not answer their expectation, what curse and swear, what imprecation and railing, fight and stab oftentimes proceed from their testy spleen. how do their bluster passion make the place troublesome to themselves and other? but i have know, when four of these mild spirit have sit down, stake their treasure where they have play four and twenty hour. make the place troublesome to themselves and other. but i have know, when four of these mild spirit have sit down, stake their treasure where they have, play four and twenty hour, neither eat, drink or sleep. in the interim, nay, which be most to be wonder at, not quarrel. but as they come thither in peace, so they depart in peace. when he that have lose all his, his house, his kettle, his beaver, his batchet, his knife, yea, all his little, all have nothing leave but his naked self, be as merry as they that win it. so in sport of activity, at football though, they play never so fierce to outward appearance, yet angrer-boyling blood never stream in their cool vein, if any man be. that win it. so in sport of activity, at football though, they play never so fierce to outward appearance, yet angrer-boyling blood never stream in their cool vein. if any man be throw, he laugh out his foil. there be no seek of revenge, no quarrel, no bloody nose, scratch face, black eye, break shin, no bruise member or crush rib- the lamentable effect of rage. but the goal be win. the good on the one side lose. friend they be at the football and friend they must meet at the kettle. i never hear yet of that indian that be his neighbour, homicide or vexation by his malapert fancy or uncivil tongue. laughter in they be not common. seldom exceed a smile, never break out into such. of that indian, that be his neighbour, homicide or vexation by his malapert, fancy or uncivil tongue, laughter in they be not common. seldom exceed a smile, never break out into such a loud laughter as do many of our english. of all thing they love not to be laugh at upon any occasion. if a man be in trade with they and the bargain be almost strike, if they perceive you laugh, they will scarce proceed. suppose you laugh because you have cheat they. the crocodile tear may soon deceive they than the hyena smile, although they be not much addict to laughter yet, be they not of a dumpish, sad nature, but rather natural, cheerful. as i never see a giggle democrite, so i never see. although they be not much addict to laughter yet, be they not of a dumpish, sad nature, but rather natural, cheerful. as i never see a giggle democrite, so i never see a tear drop heraclite. no disaster be so prevalent as to open the floodgate of their eye. save the death of friend for who they lament most, exceed chap 8 of their hardiness. for their hardiness it may procure admiration. no ordinary pain make they so much as alter their countenance. beat they, whip, they, pinch, they, punch they. if they resolve not to whinch for it, they will not. whether it be their benumb insensibleness of smart or their hardy resolution, i can tell it may be a perillus, his bull or the disjoint rack. whinch for it. they will not. whether it be their benumb insensibleness of smart or their hardy resolution, i can tell it may be a perillus, his bull, or the disjoint rack may force a roar from they, but a turkish drub will not much molest they. and although they be natural much afraid of death, yet the unexpected approach of a mortal wound by a bullet, arrow or sword strike no more terror cause, no more exclamation, no more complaint or whinch than if it have be a shot into the body of a tree. such wound as will be sudden death to a english man will be nothing to they. some of they have be shoot in at the mouth and out under the ear. some such wound as will be sudden death to a english man will be nothing to they. some of they have be shoot in at the mouth and out under the ear, some shot in the breast, some run through the flank with dart and other, many desperate wound which, either by their rare skill in the use of vegitative or diabolical charm, they cure in short time, although their hardiness bear they out in such thing wherein they be sure death will not ensue. yet can it not expel the fear of death, the very name and thought of it be so hideous to they or any thing that present it or threaten it, so terrible insomuch that a hundred of they will run from two or three. and thought of it be so hideous to they or any thing that present it or threaten it, so terrible insomuch that a hundred of they will run from two or three gun, though they know they can but dispatch two or three at a discharge. yet every man, fear it may be his lot to meet with his last, will not come near that in good earnest, which he dare play withal in jest to make this good by a passage of experience. three man have occasion of trade among the western indian, go up with some such commodity as they think most fit for trade. to secure their person they take a carbine, two pistole and a sword which in outward show be not great resistance. with some such commodity as they think most fit for trade. to secure their person, they take a carbine, two pistole and a sword which, in outward show, be not great resistance to a hundred. well, skill bow man, the indian hear their gun make a thunder noise, desire to finger one of they and see it discharge into a tree, wonder much at the percussion of the bullet. but they abide two or three day the gun be forget and they begin to look at the odds be a hundred to three, whereupon they be animate to work treason against the life of these man and to take away their good from they by force. but one of the english, understanding their language, smell out their treachery. animate to work treason against the life of these man and to take away their good from they by force. but one of the english, understanding their language, smell out their treachery and be more full, inform of their intent by the indian woman who have more pity. he, step to their king and hail he by the long hair from the rest of his council, command he either to go before he and guide he home or else he will there kill he. the sagamore, see he so rough, have not the courage to resist he, but go with he two mile but be exasperate by his man who follow he along to resist and go no further. in the end he will not neither for fair. he but go with he two mile but be exasperate by his man who follow he along to resist and go no further. in the end he will not, neither for fair promise nor fierce threaten so that they be constrain there to kill he which strike such a amazement and daunt into the rest of that naked crew with the sight of the gun that though they may easy have kill they, yet have they not the power to shoot a arrow but follow they yell and howl for the death of their king. forty mile, his good be, leave among they. he send word by other indian that unless they send he his good again, which he there leave, he will serve they as he serve. mile his good be leave among they. he send word by other indian that unless they send he his good again, which he there leave, he will serve they as he serve their king, whereupon they return he his commodity with entreaty of peace and promise of fair trade if he come again. if these heartless indian be so cow with so slender a onset on their own dunghill, when there be scarce six family of we in the country, what need we now fear? they be grow into thousand and have knowledge of martial discipline in the night. they need not to be fear, for they will not budge from their own dwelling for fear of their the devil who they much fear, special in evil, erterprise. in the night they need not to be fear, for they will not budge from their own dwelling for fear of their the devil who they much fear. special in evil, erterprise, they will rather lie by a english fire than go a quarter of a mile in the dark to their own dwelling. but they be well free from this scarecrow since the come of the english and less care for his delusion. and whereas it have be report that there be such horrible apparition, fearful roar, thunder and lighten raise by the devil to discourage the english in their settle. i for my own part, never see or hear of any of these thing in the country, nor have i hear of any indian that have discourage the english in their settle. i, for my own part, never see or hear of any of these thing in the country. nor have i hear of any indian that have late be put in fear, save two or three, and they worse scare than hurt. who see a black-more in the top of a tree, look out for his way, which he have lose, surmise he be or the devil, deem all devil that be black than themselves and be near to the plantation. they post to the english and entreat their aid to conjure this devil to his own place. who find he to be a poor wander blackamoor, conduct he to his master. chap 9 of their wonder at the first view of any conjure this devil to his own place, who find he to be a poor wander blackamoor, conduct he to his master. chap 9 of their wonder at the first view of any strange invention. these indian be stranger to art and science and be unacquainted with the invention that be common to a civilise people. be ravish with admiration at the first view of any such sight. they take the first ship they see for a walk island, the mast to be a tree, the sail white cloud and the discharge of ordinance for lightning and thunder which do much trouble they. but this thunder be over and this move island, stedy with a anchor, they man out their cannowe to go and pick strawberry there but be thunder which do much trouble they. but this thunder be over and this move island stedy with a anchor. they man out their cannowe to go and pick strawberry there, but be salute, by the way, with a broad side. they cry out: what much hoggery. so big walk and so big speak and by and by kill, which cause they to turn back, not dare to approach till they be send, for they do much extol and wonder at the english for their strange invention, especial for a windmill which in their esteem be little less than the world. wonder for the strangeness of his whisk motion and the sharp tooth bite the corn, as they term it, into such small piece. they be loath at the less than the world wonder for the strangeness of his whisk motion and the sharp tooth bite the corn, as they term it, into such small piece. they be loath at the first to come near to his long arm or to abide in so totter a tabernacle. though now they dare go any where, so far as they have a english guide. the first ploughman be count little better than a juggler. the indian see the plough tear up more ground in a day than their clamme shell can scrape up in a month. desire to see the workmanship of it and view well the coulter and share. perceive it to be iron. tell the ploughman he be almost, almost as cunning as the devil, but the to see the workmanship of it and view well the coulter and share perceive it to be iron. tell the ploughman he be almost, almost as cunning as the devil. but the fresh supply of new and strange object have lessen their admiration and quicken their invention and desire of practise such thing as they see, wherein they express no small ingenuity and dexterity of wit, be neither further by art or long experience. it be think they will soon learn any mechanical trade, have quick wit, understand apprehension, strong memory with nimble invention and a quick hand in use of the axe or hatchet or such like tool. much good might they receive from the english and much may they benefit themselves if they be not strong. quick hand in use of the axe or hatchet or such like tool. much good might they receive from the english, and much may they benefit themselves if they be not strong, fetter in the chain of idleness so as that they have rather starve than work. follow no employment save, such as be sweeten with more pleasure and profit than pain or care, and this be indeed one of the great accusation that can be lay against they which lie, but upon the man. the woman be very industrious, but it may be hope that good example and good instruction may bring they to a more industrious and provident course of life, for already, as they have learn much subtlety and cunning by bargain with the english. good example and good instruction may bring they to a more industrious and provident course of life. for already, as they have learn much subtlety and cunning by bargain with the english, so have they a little degenerate from some of their lazy custom and show themselves more industrious. in a word, to set they out in their best colour, they be wise in their carriage, subtle in their deal, true in their promise, honest in defray of their debt. though poverty constrain they to be something long before some have die in the english debt have left beaver by order of will for their satisfaction. they be constant in friendship, merry conceit in discourse, not luxurious abound in youth, nor dote froward in old age. many of have left beaver by order of will for their satisfaction. they be constant in friendship, merry conceit in discourse, not luxurious abound in youth, nor dote froward in old age. many of they be much civilise, since the english colony be plant, though, but little edify in religion. they frequent often the english church, where they will sit sober though they understand not such hide mystery. they do easy believe some of the history of the bible as the creation of the world, the make of man with his fall, but come to tell they of a saviour with all the passage of the gospel, and it exceed so far their indian belief that they will cry out: be it possible. yet such be their conviction of the a saviour with all the passage of the gospel, and it exceed so far their indian belief that they will cry out: be it possible. yet such be their conviction of the right way, that when some english have come to their house victual be offer, they forget to crave god. blessing upon the creature, receive. they have be reprove by these which, former, never know what call upon god mean. thus far for their natural disposition and quality. chap x of their king, government and subject: obedience. now for the matter of government among they, it be the custom for their king to inherit the son always take the kingdom after his father death. if there be no son, than the queen rule. if no queen, the it be the custom for their king to inherit, the son always take the kingdom after his father death. if there be no son, than the queen rule. if no queen, the next to the blood-royal who come in otherwise be but count a usurp intruder. and if his fair carriage bear he not out, the better. they will soon unscepter he, the king, have no law to command by, nor have they any annual revenue yet. common be they so either fear or belove that half their subject estate be at their service and their person at his command, by which command he be better know than by any thing else. for though he have no kingly robe to make he glorious in the view of his person at his command, by which command he be better know than by any thing else. for though he have no kingly robe to make he glorious in the view of his subject, nor daily guard to secure his person, or courtlike attendance, nor sumptuous palace, yet do they yield all submissive subjection to he account. he their sovereign, go at his command and come at his beck not so much as expostulate the cause, though it be in matter, thwart their will. he be account a disloyal subject that will not effect what his prince command whosoever be know to plot treason or to lay violent hand on his lawful king. be present, execute once a year. he take his progress, accompany with a dozen of his. command whosoever be know to plot treason or to lay violent hand on his lawful king. be present, execute. once a year he take his progress accompany with a dozen of his best subject to view his country, to recreate himself and establish good order. when he enter into any of their house without any more compliment, he be desire to sit down on the ground, for they use neither stool nor cushion- and after a little respite, all that be present come in and sit down by he one of his senior, pronounce a oration gratulatory to his majesty for his love and the many good thing they enjoy under his peaceful government. a king of large dominion have his viceroy or inferior king under he to. gratulatory to his majesty for his love and the many good thing they enjoy under his peaceful government. a king of large dominion have his viceroy or inferior king under he to agitate his state-affair and keep his subject in good decorum. other officer there be, but how to distinguish they by name be something difficult for their law, as their evil course come short of many other nation. so they have not so many law, though they be not without some which they inflict upon notorious malefactor as traitor to their prince, inhuman murderer and some say for adultery- but i can warrant it for a truth- for theft, as they have nothing to steal worth the life of a man. therefore they have no law to. some say for adultery, but i can warrant it for a truth- for theft, as they have nothing to steal worth the life of a man. therefore they have no law to execute for trivial a subject, be precious in the eye of his prince. where man be so scarce a malefactor have deserve death, be apprehend, be bring before the king and some other of the wise man where they inquire out the original of a thing, after proceed by aggravation of circumstance. he be find guilty and be cast by the jury of their strict inquisition. he be condemn and execute. on this manner, the executioner come in who blindfold the party set. he in the public view and brain he with a tamahauke or club. strict inquisition he be, condemn and execute. on this manner the executioner come in. who blindfold the party, set he in the public view and brain he with a tamahauke or club which do his friend bury he other mean to restrain abuse? they have none save admonition or reproof. no whip, no prison stock, bilbowe or the like. chap 11 of their marriage. now to speak something of their marriage. the king, or great powwowe, alias conjurer, may have two or three wife, but seldom use it. man of ordinary rank have but one, which disprove the report that they have eight or ten wife apiece. when a man have a desire to marry, he first get the goodwill of the maid or widow, after the consent. disprove the report that they have eight or ten wife apiece. when a man have a desire to marry, he first get the goodwill of the maid or widow, after the consent of her friend, for her part and for himself if he be at his own dispose. if the king will the match be, make her dowry of pay. the king join their hand with their heart never to part till death, unless she prove a whore, for which they may, and some have put away their wife, as may appear by a story. there be one abamoch marry a wife who a long time he entire love above her deserve for that she often, in his absence, entertain stranger of which he be oftentimes inform by be one. abamoch marry a wife who a long time he entire love above her deserve for that she often, in his absence, entertain stranger, of which he be oftentimes inform by his neighbour. but he harbour no spark of jealousy, believe not their false information, as he deem they be. in a manner angry they shall slander his wife of who constancy he be so strong conceit a long time do her whorish gloaze and siren-like tongue with her subtle carriage, establish she in her husband favour till fresh complaint cause he to cast about how to find out the truth and to prove his friend liar and his wife honest, or her a whore and his friend true, whereupon he pretend a long journey to visit. how to find out the truth and to prove his friend liar and his wife honest, or her a whore and his friend true, whereupon he pretend. a long journey to visit his friend, provide all accoutrement for a fortnight journey. tell his wife it will be so long before she can expect his return. who outward sorrow for his departure but inward rejoice that she shall enjoy the society of her old leman, who she send for with expedition. not suspect her husband plot, who lie not many mile off in the wood, who, after their dishonest revel, when they be in their midnight sleep, approach the wiggwamme, enter the door which, be neither bar nor lock, make a light to discover what he little suspect. but their dishonest revel. when they be in their midnight sleep, approach the wiggwamme, enter the door which be neither bar nor lock, make a light to discover what he little suspect. but find his friend word to be true, he take a good bastinado in his hand, bring for the same purpose. drag he by the hair from his usurp bed. so lamentable beat he that his batter bone and bruise flesh make he a fit object for some skilful surgeon than the lovely object of a lustful strumpet. which do he put away his wife. expose she to the courtesy of stranger for her maintenance that so curtesan-like have. entertain a stranger into her bosom. chap 12 of their worship, invocation and conjuration. now of their worship. expose she to the courtesy of stranger for her maintenance that so, curtesan-like, have, entertain a stranger into her bosom. chap 12 of their worship, invocation and conjuration. now of their worship. as it be natural to all mortal to worship something, so do these people but exact to describe to who their worship be chief bend be very difficult. they acknowledge especial two ketan who be their good god, to who they sacrifice, as the ancient heathen do to ceres, after their garner be full with a good crop upon this god. likewise they invocate for fair weather, for rain in time of drought and for the recovery of their sick. but if they do not hear, they than they verify the old verse: their pow-wows betake. for fair weather, for rain in time of drought and for the recovery of their sick. but if they do not hear, they than they verify the old verse, their pow-wows betake themselves to their exorcism and necromantic charm by which they bring to pass. strange thing, if we may believe the indian who report of one pissacannawa that he can make the water burn, the rock move, the tree dance, metamorphize himself into a flame man. but it may be object, this be. but he will therefore do more, for in winter, when there be no green leaf to be get, he will burn a old one to ash and put those into the water, produce a new green leaf which you shall not only see, but no green leaf to be get, he will burn a old one to ash and put those into the water, produce a new green leaf which you shall not only see but substantial, handle and carry away and make of a dead snake skin a live snake, both to be see, feel and hear. this i write, but upon the report of the indian who, confident, affirm. stranger thing but to make manifest that, by god permission, through the devil, help their charm be of force to produce effect of wonderment. a honest gentleman relate a story to. i be a eye-witness of the same. a pow-wow have a patient, with the stump of some small tree run through his foot, be past the cure of his ordinary. story to i be a eye-witness of the same. a pow-wow have a patient with the stump of some small tree run through his foot be past the cure of his ordinary surgery, betake himself to his charm and be willing to show his miracle before the english stranger. he wrap a piece of cloth about the foot of the lame man. upon that wrap a beaver skin through which he lay his mouth. to the beaver skin, by his suck charm he bring out the stump which he spit into a trey of water, return the foot as whole as its fellow in a short time. the manner of their action in their conjuration be thus the party that, be sick or lame, be bring before they. the foot as whole as its fellow in a short time. the manner of their action in their conjuration be thus, the party that be sick or lame, be bring before they the pow-wow sit down, the rest of the indian give attentive audience to his imprecation and invocation and after the violent expression of many, a hideous bellow and groan, he make a stop and then all the auditor, with one voice, utter a short which do? the pow-wow still proceed in his invocation, sometime roar like a bear, other time groan like a die horse, foam at the mouth like a chase boar, smite on his naked breast and thigh with such violence as if he be mad. thus will he continue sometime half a day. horse foam at the mouth like a chase boar, smite on his naked breast and thigh with such violence as if he be mad. thus will he continue sometime half a day, spend his lung, sweat out his fat and torment his body in this diabolical worship? sometime the devil for requital of their worship recover the party to nuzzle they up in their devilish religion. in former time he be wont to carry away their wife and child because he will drive they to these matin to fetch they again to confirm their belief of this. his much desire authority over they. but since the english frequent those part, they daily fall from his colour, relinquish their former foppery and acknowledge our god to be supreme. they. this his much desire authority over they. but since the english frequent those part, they daily fall from his colour, relinquish their former foppery and acknowledge our god to be supreme. they acknowledge the power of the english-ans- god as they call he, because they can never yet have power- by their conjuration to damnify the english, either in body or good and beside. they say he be a good god that send they so many good thing, so much good corn, so many cattle, temperate reins, fair season, which they likewise be the better for. since the arrival of the english, the time and season be much alter in seven or eight year, free from lightning and thunder, long drought, sudden and tempestuous dash of rain and since the arrival of the english, the time and season be much alter in seven or eight year, free from lightning and thunder, long drought, sudden and tempestuous dash of rain and lamentable cold winter. chap 13 of their war, of their war, their old soldier be sweep away by the plague which be very rife among they about 14 year ago and rest themselves secure under the english protection. they do not now practise any thing in martial feat worth observation, save that they make themselves fort to fly into if the enemy shall unexpected assail. they, these fort, some be forty or fifty foot square, erect of young timber tree, ten or twelve foot high, ram into the ground with undermine within the earth, be cast. assail they these fort, some be forty or fifty foot square, erect of young timber tree, ten or twelve foot high, ram into the ground with undermine within the earth. be cast up for their shelter against the dischargement of their enemy, have loophole to send out their wing messenger, which often deliver their sharp and bloody embassy in the tawny side of their naked assailant. who want butt ram and batter ordinance to command at distance, lose their life by their too near approachment. these use no other weapon in war than bow and arrow, save that their captain have long spear on which, if they return conqueror, they carry the head of their chief enemy that they slay in the war it be the custom to. save that their captain have long spear on which, if they return conqueror, they carry the head of their chief enemy that they slay in the war. it be the custom to cut off their head, hand and foot to bear home to their wife and child as true token of their renown victory. when they go to their war, it be their custom to paint their face with diversity of colour. some be all black as jet, some red, some half red and half black, some black and white. other spot with diverse kind of colour be all disguise to their enemy to make they more terrible to their foe. put on likewise their rich jewel pendent and to put they in mind. they fight not only. colour. be all disguise to their enemy to make they more terrible to their foe. put on likewise their rich jewel pendent and to put they in mind. they fight not only for their child, wife and life, but likewise for their good land and liberty. be thus, arm with this warlike paint, the antique warrior make towards their enemy in a disorder manner, without any soldier like march or warlike posture, be deaf to any word of command, ignorant of fall off or fall on, of double rank or file, but let fly their wing shaftment without either fear or wit. their artillery be spend he that have no arm to fight, find leg to run away. chap 14: their game and sport of activity. but to shaftment without either fear or wit. their artillery be spend. he that have no arm to fight, find leg to run away. chap 14: their game and sport of activity. but to leave their war and to speak of their game in which they be more delight and better experience, spend half their day in game and laze. they have two sort of game, one call puim, the other hubbub. not much unlike card and dice, be no other than lottery. puim be 50. or 60. small bents of a foot long which they divide to the number of their gamester, shuffle they first between the palm of their hand. he that have more than his fellow be so much the forward in his game. many other strange. the number of their gamester, shuffle they first between the palm of their hand. he that have more than his fellow, be so much the forward in his game. many other strange whimsy be in this game which will be too long to commit to paper. he that be a note gamester, have a great hole in his ear wherein he carry his, in defiance of his antagonist hubbub. be five small bone in a small smooth tray. the bone be like a die, but something flatter, black on the one side and white on the other, which they place on the ground, against which violent themp, the platter, the bone mount, change colour with the windy whisk of their hand too. and fro which action in that. other which they place on the ground, against which violent themp, the platter, the bone mount, change colour with the windy whisk of their hand too, and fro which action in that sport they much use, smite themselves on the breast and thigh, cry out. they may be. hear play at this game a quarter of a mile off the bone. be all black or white. make a double game if three be of a colour and two of another, than they afford. but a single game, four of a colour and one differ, be nothing. so long as a man win, he keep the trey. but if he lose, the next man take it. they be so bewitch with these two game that they will loose sometime. so long as a man win, he keep the trey, but if he lose, the next man take it. they be so bewitch with these two game that they will loose sometime. all they have beaver, moose-skinne, kettle, mowhackies, hatchet knife. all be confiscate by these two game for their sport of activity. they have common but three or four as football shoot, run and swim. when they play country against country, there be rich goal. all behung with mowhackies, beaver skin and black otter skin. it will exceed the belief of many to relate the worth of one goal wherefore it shall be nameless. their goal be a mile long place on the sand which be as even as a board. their ball be no big than. worth of one goal, wherefore it shall be nameless. their goal be a mile long place on the sand, which be as even as a board, their ball be no big than a hand-ball, which sometime they mount in the air with their naked foot. sometime it be sway by the multitude, sometime also it be two day before they get a goal. than they mark the ground. they win and begin there the next day before they come to this sport. they paint themselves even as when they go to war, in policy, to prevent future mischief, because no man shall know, he that move his patience or accidental hurt his person, take away the occasion of study revenge before they begin. their arm be disorder and future mischief, because no man shall know he that move his patience or accidental hurt his person. take away the occasion of study revenge. before they begin their arm be disorder and hang upon some neighbour tree, after which they make a long scroll on the sand, over which they shake love hand and with laugh, heart scuffle for victory. while the man play the boy pipe and the woman dance and sing trophy of their husband conquest, all be do a feast summon their departure. it be most delight to see they play in small company when man may view their swift footemanship, their curious toss of their ball, their flounce into the water, their lubberlike wrestle. have no cunning at all in that kind one english. company when man may view their swift footemanship, their curious toss of their ball, their flounce into the water, their lubberlike wrestle, have no cunning at all. in that kind one english be able to beat ten indian at football for their shoot. they be most desperate marks-man for a point blank object and if it may be possible they will do it. such be their celerity and dexterity in artillery that they can smite the swift run hind and nimble wink pigeon without a stand paul or leave eye blink. they draw their arrow between the fore finger and the thumb. their bow be quick but not very strong. not kill above six or seven score. these man shoot at one another but with swift conveyance shun. the fore finger and the thumb. their bow be quick but not very strong, not kill above six or seven score. these man shoot at one another but with swift conveyance shun the arrow. this they do to make they expert against time of war. it have be often admire how they can find their arrow be the weed as high as themselves. yet they take such perfect notice of the flight and fall that they seldom loose any. they be train up to their bow even from their childhood. little boy with bow make of little stick and arrow of great bent will smite down a piece of tobacco pipe. every shoot a good way off. as these indian be good markeman, so be they well experience. little stick and arrow of great bent will smite down a piece of tobacco pipe every shoot a good way off. as these indian be good markeman, so be. they well experience where the very life of every creature lie and know where to smite he to make he die. present for their swim. it be almost natural, but much perfect by continual practice. their swim be not after our english fashion of spread arm and leg, which they hold too tiresome, but like dog their arm before they cut through the liquid with their right shoulder. in this manner they swim very swift and far, either in rough or smooth water. sometime, for their ease, lie as still as a log. sometime they will play the dive-doppers. shoulder. in this manner they swim very swift and far, either in rough or smooth water. sometime, for their ease, lie as still as a log. sometime they will play the dive-doppers and come up in unexpected place. their child, likewise be teach to swim when they be very young. for their run, it be with much celerity and continuance. yet i suppose there be many english man who, be as light clad as they be, will outrun they for a spurt, though not able to continue it for a day or day, be they be very strong wind and right clad for a race chap 15 of their hunt. for their hunt, it be to be. note that they have no swift foot grayhound to let slip. very strong wind and right clad for a race chap 15 of their hunt. for their hunt, it be to be note that they have no swift foot grayhound to let slip at the sight of the deer, no deep mouth hound or scent beagle to find out their desire prey themselves. be all this, who, in that time of the year when the deer come down, have certain hunt house in such place where they know the dear usual do frequent, in which they keep their randevowe, their snare and all their accoutrement for that employment? when they get sight of a deer, moose or bear, they study how to get the wind of he and approach within shot, stab their mark quite through if the bone. employment. when they get sight of a deer moose or bear, they study how to get the wind of he and approach within shot, stab their mark quite through, if the bone hinder not. the chief thing they hunt after be dear moose and bear. it grieve they more to see a english man take one deer than a thousand acre of land. they hunt likewise after wolf and wild cat. rackoone, otter, beaver, musquash, trade both their skin and flesh to the english. beside their artillery they have other device to kill their game as sometime: hedge a mile or two mile long, be a mile wide at one end and make narrow and narrow by degree, leave only a gap of six foot long over against. sometime hedge a mile or two mile long, be a mile wide at one end and make narrow and narrow by degree, leave only a gap of six foot long over against which, in the day time, they lie lurk to shoot the deer which come through that narrow gut. so many as come within the circumference of that hedge seldom return back to leap over, unless they be force by the chase of some ravenous wolf or sight of some accidentatall passenger in the night. at the gut of this hedge they set dear trap which be spring make of young tree and smooth wrought coard so strong as it will toss a horse if he be. catch in it. a english mare be stray from her. which be spring make of young tree and smooth wrought coard so strong as it will toss a horse if he be catch in it. a english mare be stray from her owner and grow wild by. she long sojourn in the wood range up and down with the wild crew. stumble into one of these trap which stop her speed, hang she like mahomet tomb betwixt earth and heaven. the morning be come. the indian go to look what good success their venison trap have bring they. but see such a long scut deer prance in their merritotter. they bid her good morrow. cry out: what cheer, what cheer horse. have no better epithet than to call she a woman horse but be loath to kill she. in their merritotter. they bid her good morrow, cry out what cheer, what cheer horse, have no better epithet than to call she a woman horse but be loath to kill she. and as fearful to approach near the friscadoe of her iron heel, they post to the english to tell they how the case stand, or hang with their squaw horse who unhorse their mare and bring she to her former tameness, which since have bring many a good foal and perform much good service in these trap. deer, moose, bear, wolf, cat and fox be often catch for their beaver and otter. they have other kind of trap, so ponderous as be unsupportable for such creature, the massy burden whereof either take they prisoner or expel. be often catch for their beaver and otter. they have other kind of trap, so ponderous as be unsupportable for such creature, the massy burden whereof either take they prisoner or expel their breath from their squised body. these kind of creature will gnaw the other kind of trap asunder with their sharp tooth. these beast be too cunning for the english who seldom or never catch any of they. therefore we leave they to those skilful hunter who, time be not so precious, who experience bought-skill have, make they practical and useful in that particular chap 16 of their fishing, of their fish. in this trade they be very expert, be experience in the knowledge of all bait, fit sundry bait for several fish and diverse season. chap 16 of their fishing, of their fish. in this trade they be very expert, be experience in the knowledge of all bait, fit sundry bait for several fish and diverse season. be not ignorant likewise of the removal of fish, know when to fish in river and when at rock, when in bays and when at sea. since the english come, they be furnish with english hook and line before they make they of their own hemp more curious, wrought of strong material than we hook with bone hook. but laziness drive they to buy more than profit or commendation win they to make of their own. they make likewise very strong sturgeon net with which they catch sturgeon of 12.14 and 16. some 18. foot long. more than profit or commendation win they to make of their own. they make likewise very strong sturgeon net with which they catch sturgeon of 12.14 and 16. some 18. foot long in the day time, in the night time they betake they to their burtchen cannow in which they carry a forty fathom line with a sharp beard dart fasten at the end thereof, then lightning a blaze torch make of burcthen rind. they weave it too, and again by their cannow side, which the sturgeon much delight with. come to they tumble and play, turn up his white belly into which they thrust their lance. his back be impenetrable, which do they hale to the shore their struggle prize. they have often recourse unto the rock. turn up his white belly into which they thrust their lance. his back be impenetrable. which do they hale to the shore their struggle prize? they have often recourse unto the rock, whereupon the sea beat in warm weather, to look out for sleepy seal who, oil they much esteem, use it for diverse thing. in summer they seldom fish any where, but in salt. in winter in the fresh water and pond, in frosty weater, they cut round hole in the ice about which they will sit, like so many ape, on their naked breech upon the congeal ice. catch of pike, perche, breame and other sort of fresh water fish. chap 17 of their art and manufacture, of their several art and employment, as first in. upon the congeal ice catch of pike, perche, breame and other sort of fresh water fish. chap 17 of their art and manufacture, of their several art and employment. as first, in dress of all manner of skin, which they do by scrape and rub. afterward paint they with antique embroydering in unchangeable colour. sometime they take off the hair especial if it be not kill in season. their bow they make of a handsome shape string common with the sinew of moose. their arrow be make of young eldern feather with feather of eagle, wing and tail, head with brass in shape of a heart or triangle, fasten in a slender piece of wood six or 8 inch long, which be frame to put loose in the. and tail head with brass in shape of a heart or triangle, fasten in a slender piece of wood six or 8 inch long, which be frame to put loose in the pithy eldern that be bind fast for rive their arrow. be make in this manner because the arrow may shake from his head and be leave behind for their find and the pile only remain to gall the wound beast. their cordage be so even soft and smooth that it look more like silk than hemp. their sturgeon net be not deep, nor above 30. or 40. foot long, which in ebb low water they stake fast to the ground where they be sure the sturgeon will come. never look more at it till the next. 30. or 40. foot long, which in ebb low water they stake fast to the ground where they be sure the sturgeon will come never look more at it till the next low water. their cannow be make either of pine-tree which, before they be acquaint with english tool, they burn hollow, scrape, they smooth with clam-shel and oyster-shel, cut their outside with stone-hatchet. these boat be not above a foot and a half or two foot wide and twenty foot long. their other cannow be make of thin birch-rines, close-ribbed on the inside, with broad, thin hoop like the hoop of a tub. these be make very light. a man may carry one of they a mile be make purposely to carry from river to river and thin hoop, like the hoop of a tub. these be make very light. a man may carry one of they. a mile be make purposely to carry from river to river and bay to bay, to shorten land-passage in these cockle fly-boate wherein a english man can scarce sit without a fearful totter, they will venture to sea when a english shallope dare not bear a knot of sail, scud over the overgrow wave as fast as a wind-driven ship be drive by their padle be much like battle door. if a cross wave, as be seldom, turn her keel up-side down, they by swim free she and scramble into she again. chap 18 of their language, of their language which be only peculiar to themselves, not incline. seldom turn her keel up-side down. they by swim free, she, and scramble into she again, chap 18 of their language, of their language, which be only peculiar to themselves, not incline to any of the refine tongue. some have think they may be of the disperse jew because some of their word be near unto the hebrew, but by the same rule they may conclude they to be some of the glean of all nation because they have word which sound, after the greek, latin, french and other tongue, their language, be hard to learn. few of the english be able to speak any of it or capable of the right pronunciation which be the chief grace of their tongue. they pronounce much after the diphthong exclude. few of the english be able to speak any of it or capable of the right pronunciation which be the chief grace of their tongue. they pronounce much after the diphthong, exclude l and r, which in our english tongue they pronounce with as much difficulty as most of the dutch do. t and h call a lobster a. every country do something differ in their speech, even as our northern people do from the southern and western from. they especial the tarrenteens, who tongue run so much upon r that they wharle much in pronunciation. when any ship come near the shore they demand whether they be king charles. his torries, with such a rumble, sound as if one be beat a unbraced drum in serious discourse. when any ship come near the shore they demand whether they be king charles. his torries, with such a rumble, sound as if one be beat a unbraced drum in serious discourse. our southern indian use seldom any short colloquium but speak their mind at large without any interject interruption from any. the rest give diligent audience to his utterance, which do some or other return. he as long a answer they love not to speak. seldom be their word and their deed stranger according to the matter in discourse, so be their act, gesture in their expression. one of the english preacher, in a special good intent of do good to their soul, have spend much time in attain to their language. wherein he be so good. their expression. one of the english preacher, in a special good intent of do good to their soul, have spend much time in attain to their language wherein he be so good a proficient that he can speak to their understanding and they to he. much love and respect he for his love and counsel. it be hope that he may be a instrument of good among they. they love any man that can utter his mind in their word. yet be they not a little proud that they can speak the english tongue, use it as much as their own when they meet with such as can understand it. puzzle stranger indian which sometime visit they from more remote place with a unheard language. chap 19 of as much as their own when they meet with such as can understand it, puzzle stranger indian which sometime visit they from more remote place with a unheard language, chap 19 of their death, burial and mourn. although the indian be of lusty and healthful body, not experimental, know the catalogue of those health-wasting disease which be incident to other country as fever, pleurisy, callenture, ague, obstruction, consumption, subfumigation, convulsion, apoplexy, dropsy gout, stone, tooth-aches, pox, measles or the like, but spin out the thread of their day to a fair length. number threescore, fourscore, some a hundred year before the world universal summoner cite they to the crave grave, but the date of their life expire and death arestment seize upon they all hope of recovery be a hundred year before the world. universal summoner cite they to the crave grave. but the date of their life expire and death arestment seize upon they all. hope of recovery be past then, to behold and hear their throb sob and deepe-fetcht sigh, their griefe-wrung hand and teare-bedewed cheek. their doleful cry will draw tear from adamantine eye that be but spectator of their mournful obsequy. the glut of their grief be past. they commit the corpse of their diceased friend to the ground over who grave be for a long time spend many a briny tear. deep groan and irish-like howl continue annual mourn with a black, stiff paint on their face. these be the mourner without hope. yet do they hold the immortality of the. briny tear, deep groan and irish-like howl continue annual mourn with a black, stiff paint on their face. these be the mourner without hope. yet do they hold the immortality of the never-dying soul, that it shall pass to the south-west elysium, concern which their indian faith jump much with the turkish koran, hold it to be a kind of paradise wherein they shall everlasting abide solace themselves in odoriferous garden, fruitful corne-field green meadow bathe, their tawny hide in the cool stream of pleasant river and shelter themselves from heat and cold in the sumptuous palace frame by the skill of nature, curious contrivement conclude that neither care nor pain shall molest they, but that nature bounty will administer all thing with a voluntary contribution from the palace frame by the skill of nature, curious contrivement, conclude that neither care nor pain shall molest they, but that nature, bounty will administer all thing with a voluntary contribution. from the overflow store-house of their elyzian hospital, at the portal whereof they say, lie a great dog who, churlish, snarling, deny a pax to unworthy intruder, wherefore it be their custom to bury with they their bow and arrow and good store of their, and mowhacky, the one to affright that affront cerberus, the other to purchase more immense prerogative in their paradise for their enemy and loose liver who they account, unworthy of this imaginary happiness, they say that they pass to the infernal dwelling of to be torture according to the fiction of the ancient. enemy and loose liver who they account unworthy of this imaginary happiness, they say that they pass to the infernal dwelling of to be torture, according to the fiction of the ancient heathen, chap 19, of their woman, their disposition, employment, usage by their husband, their apparel and modesty to satisfy the curious eye of women-reader who otherwise may think their sex forget or not worthy a record. let they peruse these few line wherein they may see their own happiness. if weigh in the woman balance of these rude indian who scorn the tutering of their wife or to admit they as their equal though their quality and industrious deserve, may just claim the pre-eminence and command better usage and more conjugal esteem, their person and feature. their wife or to admit they as their equal, though their quality and industrious deserve may just claim the pre-eminence and command better usage and more conjugal esteem. their person and feature be every way correspondent. their qualification more excellent. be more love, pitiful and modest, mild, provident and laborious than their lazy husband. their employment be many. first, their building of house who frame be form like our garden-arbour, something more round, very strong and handsome. cover with close-wrought mat of their own weave which deny entrance to any drop of rain, though it come both fierce and long. neither can the pierce north wind find a cranny through which he can convey his cool breath. they be warm than our english house at the top be. both fierce and long. neither can the pierce north wind find a cranny through which he can convey his cool breath. they be warm than our english house at the top be a square hole for the smoke evacuation which, in rainy weather, be cover with a. these be such smoky dwelling that when there be good fire they be not able to stand upright but lie all along under the smoke, never use any stool or chair. it be as rare to see a indian sit on a stool at home as it be strange to see a english man sit on his heel abroad. their house be small in the summer, when their family be disperse by reason of heat and occasion. in winter they make to see a english man sit on his heel abroad. their house be small in the summer when their family be disperse by reason of heat, and occasion in winter they make some fifty or threescore foot long, forty or fifty man be inmate under one roof and as be their husband. occasion these poor tectonist be often trouble like snail to carry their house on their back, sometime to fishing-place, other time to hunting-place, after that to a plant place where it abide the long a other work be their plant of come. wherein they exceed our english husbandman keep it so clear with their clamme shell-hooes, as if it be a garden rather than a cornfield, not suffer a choke weed to advance his audacious head. exceed our english husbandman, keep it so clear with their clamme shell-hooes as if it be a garden rather than a cornfield. not suffer a choke weed to advance his audacious head above their infant corn, or a undermine worm to spoil his spurn. their corn be ripe, they gather it and dry it hard in the sun, convey it to their barn, which be great hole dig in the ground in form of a brass pot seel with rind of tree wherein they put their corn, cover it from the inquisitive search of their gurmandize husband who will eat up both their allow portion and reserve seed if they know where to find it. but our hog have find a way to unhindge their barn door and husband who will eat up both their allow portion and reserve seed if they know where to find it. but our hog have find a way to unhindge their barn door and rob their garner. they be glad to implore their husband help to roll the body of tree over their hole to prevent those pioner who thievery they as much hate as their flesh. a other of their employment be their summer procession to get lobster for their husband, wherewith they bait their hook when they go a fish for or codfish. this be a every day walk. be the weather cold or hot, the water rough or calm, they must dive sometime over head and ear for a lobster which often shake they by their hand. every day walk, be the weather cold or hot, the water rough or calm, they must dive sometime over head and ear for a lobster which often shake they by their hand with a churlish nip and bid they adieu, the tide be spend. they trudge home two or three mile with a hundred weight of lobster at their back and if none, a hundred scoule meet they at home and a hungry belly for two day. after their husband have catch any fish, they bring it in their boat as far as they can by water and there leave it as it be their care to catch it. so it must be their wife pain to fetch it home, or fast, which do. they must dress it. water and there, leave it as it be their care to catch it. so it must be their wife pain to fetch it home, or fast which do. they must dress it and cook it, dish it and present it, see it eat over their shoulder. and their loggership have fill their paunch. their sweet lullaby scramble for their scrap. in the summer, these indian woman, when lobster be in their plenty and prime, they dry they to keep for winter, erect scaffold in the hot sunshine, make fire likewise underneath they, by who smoke the fly be expel till the substance remain hard and dry. in this manner they dry, and other fish without salt, cut they very thin to dry sudden, before the fly spoil they. fly be expel till the substance remain hard and dry. in this manner they dry and other fish without salt cut they very thin to dry sudden before the fly spoil they or the rain moist. they have a special care to hang they in their smoky house in the night and dankish weather in summer. they gather flag of which they make mat for house, and hemp and rush with die stuff of which they make curious basket with intermix colour and portraiture of antique imagery. these basket be of all size, from a quart to a quarter, in which they carry their luggage. in winter time they be their hubands caterer, trudge to the clamm bank for their belly timber and their porter to lug home. to a quarter in which they carry their luggage. in winter time they, be their hubands caterer, trudge to the clamm bank for their belly timber and their porter to lug home their venison which their laziness expose to the woolve till they impose it upon their wife shoulder. they likewise sew their husband shoe and weave coat of turkey feather beside all their ordinary household drudgery which daily lie upon they, so that a big belly hinder no business, nor a childbirth take much time, but the young infant be grease and soot, wrap in a beaver skin, bind to his good behaviour, with his foot up to his bum upon a board two foot long and one foot broad, his face expose to all nip weather. a beaver skin bind to his good behaviour. with his foot up to his bum upon a board two foot long and one foot broad, his face expose to all nip weather, this little pappouse travel about with his bare footed mother to paddle in the icy clammbanke after three or four day of age have seal his pass^board and his mother recovery for their carriage. it be very civil. smile be the great grace of their mirth. their music be lullaby to quiet their child. who general be as quiet as if they have neither spleen or lung to hear one of these indian unseen. a good care may easy mistake their untaught voice for the warble of a well tune instrument. such command have they of. spleen or lung. to hear one of these indian unseen, a good care may easy mistake their untaught voice for the warble of a well tune instrument. such command have they of their voice these woman. modesty drive they to wear more clothes than their man, have always a coat of cloth or skin wrap like a blanket about their loin, reach down to their ham, which they never put off in company. if a husband have a mind to sell his wife beaver petticoat, as sometime he do, she will not put it off until she have another to put on. commendable be their mild carriage and obedience to their husband. notwithstanding all this, their customary churlishness and savage inhumanity not seem to delight in frown or she have another to put on. commendable be their mild carriage and obedience to their husband. notwithstanding all this, their customary churlishness and savage inhumanity not seem to delight in frown or offer to word it with their lord. not presume to proclaim their female superiority to the usurp of the least title of their husband charter, but rest themselves content under their helpless condition. count it the woman portion. since the english arrival, comparison have make they miserable for see the kind usage of the english to their wife. they do as much condemn their husband for unkindness and commend the english for their love as their husband commend themselves for their wit in keep their wife industrious. do condemn the english for their folly in spoil. husband for unkindness and commend the english for their love, as their husband commend themselves for their wit in keep their wife industrious, do condemn the english for their folly in spoil good work creature. these woman resort often to the english house where, in sex i mean, they do somewhat ease their misery by complain and seldom part without a relief. if her husband come to seek for his squaw and begin to bluster the english woman, betake she to her arm which be the warlike ladle and the scald liquor threaten blister to the naked runaway who be soon expel by such liquid commination. in a word, to conclude, this woman history, their love to the english have deserve no small esteem ever present they some. naked runaway who be soon expel by such liquid commination. in a word, to conclude, this woman history, their love to the english have deserve no small esteem. ever present they some thing that be either rare or desire, as strawberry, hurtleberry, raspberry, gooseberry, cherry, plum, fish and other, such gift as their poor treasury yield they. but now it may be that this relation of the churlish and inhuman behaviour of these rude indian towards their patient wife may confirm some in the belief of a aspersion which i have often hear man cast upon the english there, as if they shall learn of the indian to use their wife in the like manner and to bring they to the same subjection as to sit on the the english there, as if they shall learn of the indian to use their wife in the like manner and to bring they to the same subjection as to sit on the low hand and to carry water and the like drudgery. but if my own experience may out-ballance a ill-grounded, scandalous rumour, i do assure you, upon my credit and reputation, that there be no such matter. but the woman find there as much love, respect and ease as here in old england. i will not deny but that some poor people may carry their own water, and do not the poor sort in england do the same, witness your london tankerdbearer and your countrie-cottagers. but this may well be know to be nothing but the rancerous. own water and do not the poor sort in england do the same? witness your london tankerdbearer and your countrie-cottagers. but this may well be know to be nothing but the rancerous venom of some that bear no good will to the plantation. for what need they carry water? see every one have a spring at his door or the sea by his house. thus much for the satisfaction of woman. touch this entrenchment upon their prerogative, as also concern the relation of these indian squawe.