a encouragement to colony. the send forth of colony seem a novelty, be esteem now to be a strange thing, as not only be above the courage of common man but altogether alienate from their knowledge. which be no wonder, since that course though both ancient and usual have be by the intermission of so many age, discontinue yea be impossible to be practise so long as there be no vast ground howsoever man have be willing, whereupon plantation may have be make. yet there be none who will doubt but that the world in her infancy and innocency be first people. after this manner, the next generation succeed: shem plant in asia, cham in africa and laphet in europe. abraham and lot be captain of colony. the land then be as free as the sea be now, since they part, they, in every part where they pass, not take notice of native without impediment. that memorable troop of jew which moses lead from egypt to cana^^ be a kind of colony, though miraculous conduct by god who intend thereby to advance his church and to destroy the reject ethnike salmanezer, king of ash^r. be remark for the first who do violate the natural ingenuity of this commendable kind of policy by too politic a intention for have transport the ten tribe of israel to the end that transplant and disperse they. he may either weaken their strength or abolish their memory. by incorporate of they with his other subject, he to prevent the danger. incident among remote vassal do send a colony to inhabit samaria, of a purpose thereby to secure his late and questionable conquest. who can imagine, by this industrious course of plantation, what a unexpected progress from a despise beginning have be sudden make to the height of greatness? the phoenician quick found sidon, and so much renown both by sacred and human writer, and a few tirian, build carthage, which have first no more ground allow she than can be compass by the extend dimension of a bull hide which, for acquire of the more ground they divide in as many sundry part as be possible. yet in end, that town become the mistress of afr^ke and the rival of rome and rome itself, that great lady of. the world and terror to all nation, ambitious claim for her first founder. a few scandalized fugitive that flee from the ruin of troy do rise from small appearance to that exorbitancy of power which, at this day be remember with admiration, though the wall of it at that time be very low. when the one brother do kill the other for jump over they, either jealousy already prevail above natural affection, or else unadvised anger construct that which may have be casual or careless, do in a sinistrous sense to the hateful behaviour of insolency or scorn. their number, then be not only very small, but they want woman, without which they can not increase nor subsist till they ravish the daughter of the sabine by a. violent match at first portend their future rapine, and what a furious offspring they be likely to engender. and when that haughty city begin to suffer the misery which she have so long be accustom to inflict upon other, the venerable city of venice keep for so many age a spotless reputation. be first begin by a few discourage person who flee from the fury of the barbarous nation that then encroach upon italy. be distract with fear and seek for their safety. do stumble upon a commodious dwell. the grecian be the first at least of all the gentile who join learning with arm. do both do and write that which be worthy to be remember, and that small parcel of ground who greatness be, then only. value by the virtue of the inhabitant. do plant trapizonde in the east and many other city in asia, the less the protect of who liberty be the first cause of war between they and the persian monarch. then, beside all the adjacent isle, they plant siracusa in sicily, most part of italy which make it to be call graecia mayor and marseills in france. o. what a strange alteration that this part, which do flourish thus, while it be possess by vigorous spirit who be capable of great enterprise, do so many brave thing, shall now the seat of base servile people, become the most abject and contemptible part of all the territory. belong to the barbarous ottoman who, insolent janissary as the praetorian guard do with their emperor, and mamaluke of egypt with their sultan, presume at this time to dispose of the regal power. upbraid the miserable folly of christian who, dangerous, embark in intestine war though invite by a encounter, occasion, neglect. so great, so glorious and so easy a conquest, the come to command a well people world have no use of colony, but only thereby to reward. such old deserve soldier as age and merit. plead a immunity from any further constrain. travel have brave, exceed the ordinary course of time. appoint for military service, which custom be use in germany, france, spain and britain, and likewise that the town erect in this sort may serve for citadel. impose upon every conquer province, whereof some do flourish at this day and of other, nothing do remain but the very name only their ruin. be so ruin that we can hardly condescend upon what solitary part to bestow the fame of their former be. i be loath, by disputable opinion, to dig up the tomb of they that, more extenuate than the dust, be bury in oblivion and will leave these disregard, relic of greatness to. continue as they be the scorn of pride. witness the power of time. neither will i, after the common custom of the world, overualue thing past, disualue the present, but consider serious of that which be late. do in ireland, do find a plantation there inferior to none that have be heretofore? the babylonian have conquer the israelite. do transplant they as expose to ruin in a remote country, send other of their own nation that they may be utter extirpate to inhabit samuria in their place and our king have only divide the most seditious family of the irish by. disperse they in sundry part within the country, not to extinguish but to dissipate their power. who now neither have nor give cause of fear? the roman. do build some town, which they do plant with their own people by all rigour to curb the native next adjacent thereunto. and our king have incorporate some of his best briton with the irish plant in sundry place, without power to oppress but only to civilize they by their example. thus ireland, which heretofore be scarce, discover and only irritate by other prove to the english, as the lowe-country do to spain, a mean whereby to waste their man and their money be now real conquer, become a strength to the state and a glory to his majesty government, who have, in the settle thereof, excel all that be commend in any ancient colony, as all first be encourage to plantation by the largeness of the conquest. that be propose unto. they fear only want of people and not of land. so in after age, when all know part become people, they be quick entangle with the other extremity, grudge to be bound within their prospect and jar with their neighbour for small parcel of ground. a strife for limit limit. the life of many who enter first in controversy upon a point of profit, though with the loss of ten time more value, their honour by the opinion of other, behoove to proceed as engage for the safety of their reputation. then richesse be acquire by industry and glory by employment. these two do beget avarice and ambition which, lodging in some subtle head upon a politic consideration to unite intestine division do transfer. their spleen to foreign part, not seek to rectify the affection, but to busy they abroad, where least harm be fear and most benefit expect. so that where they have first, in a peaceable sort, seek for land only wherewith to furnish their necessity. which conveniency or sufficiency do easy accommodate, now aim at greatness. the desire of man grow infinite, make they stranger to contentment and enemy to rest. some nation seek to exchange for better seat, other to command their neighbour. there be for many age no speech but of wrong and revenge, conquest and revolt, raze and ruine of state. a continual revolution determine the period of time by the misery of mankind and in regard of the populousness of these age, during the monarchy. of the assyrian, persian, grecian and roman. the world can not have subsist if it have not be purge of turbulent humour by let out the blood of many thousand, so that war be the universal chirurgeon of these. distemper time and thereafter, o what monstrous multitude of people be slay by huge deluge of barbarous army that overflow italy, france and spain, and the christian have long be subject to the like calamity, want a commodity. how they may not wrong other, in a christian manner, employ the people that be more chargeable than necessary at home, which be the cause of much mischief among themselves. till at that time when spain be strive with france. how to part italy as italy have former do with carthage. how to part spain, then it please god, have pity of the christian who, for purpose of small importance, do prodigal prostitute the life of they who he have purchase with so precious a ransom, as it be, for divert, that violent kind of vanity to discover a new world which, it will seem, in all reason shall have. transport they, with design of more moment, whereby glory and profit with a guiltless labour be to be attain, with less danger, whereunto they be, as it be, invite and provoke with so many eminent advantage. palpable expose to any clear judgement that i think this obvious facility vilify that which. a further difficulty. may the more endear the easiness of the prey have blunt the appetite when christopher columbus have in vain propound this enterprise to diverse christian prince isabel of castille, against the opinion of her husband. though so much renown for wit, yet not reach this mystery, do first furnish he for a voyage, as if it be fatal that that nation shall owe the great part of their greatness to the female sex. and if the spaniard will, sincere and grateful, have bestow the benefit whereby god do allure they to possess this land for the plant of it, with christian incline to civility and religion, it have at this day, consider the excellency of the soil for all the perfection that nature can afford. be the most singular accomplish place of the world, but it have infortunat fall out far otherwise that the treasure that be draw from thence mine to blow up mind and rock to ruin faith, do prove the seed of dissension, the sinew of the war and nursery of all the trouble among christian. the spaniard that be so happy as to chance first upon this new world, be of all other, have but a vast mountainous country, in regard of their scarcity of people most unfit for plant thereof and can not but soon have abandon the same if they have not so quick encounter with the rich mine of mexico, new spain and peru, which be once likely to have be lose for lack of wood. till the way be. invent of refine silver by quicksilver, which may be easy, do out of any oar that be free from lead. and all the spaniard disdain work as a servile thing below their ability. their great trouble be the want of workman. for the native that be extant, survive many vexation if they become civil, out of a indulgency to liberty and ease whereunto all the american like better of a penurious life. thus, then, to have plenty with, take pain, be natural incline that they may have a secure ease warrant by a order: do betake themselves to cloister so that they have no mean to prosecute these work, but by draw yearly a great number of negro from angola and other part, which be but a unnatural merchandise, be buy at a dear rate and maintain with danger for they, once of late, as i have hear from one that be there at that time- design to murder their master by a plot which shall have be put in execution upon a good-friday when all be exercise at their devotion, be least apt to apprehend such a wicked course, and it be always fear that to revenge, what of. necessity they must suffer and to procure their liberty, hate most what they feel for the present and hope for better by a change they will join with any strong enemy that land there dare attempt the conquest of that country. i will not here insist in set down the manner how the spaniard make themselves master of so many rich and pleasant country, but do leave that to their own history, though, i confess, like wiseman they be very spare to report the estate of these part and do bar all stranger from have access thereunto, wish to enjoy that which they love in private and not inconsiderate, vaunt by the vanity of praise to procure unto themselves the vexation that they may suffer by the earnest. pursuit of emulate rival. but as they do brave begin and resolute, prosecute their discovery in america, so have it just recompense their courage, prove the ground of all that greatness which, at this time, not without cause, do make they as able or willing to conquer other, if not both, so much suspect by every jealous state. and henry the seven, the solomon of england, have his judgement only condemn for neglect that good occasion which be first offer unto he by columbus. yet do he present seek to repair his error by send forth sebastian chabot, a venetian who do discover. the i will of newfoundland and this part of the continent of america now intend to be plant by his majesty subject under the name. of new england and new scotland, so that the fruit of his happy reign still grow to a great perfection and now ripe to be gather by this age. as he make way by the marriage of his elder daughter for unite these two nation at home, so do he the same, likewise by this discovery abroad. but the accomplishment of both be reserve for his majesty now reign, and no prince in the world may more easy effectuate such a purpose, since his dominion afford abundance of brave man, singular value for able body and active spirit, whereof the english have already give good proof of their sufficiency in foreign plantation. but before i proceed further in that which do concern they, i must observe what the french have do in this kind, all such adventurous design, out of ignorance or envy, either contemn or doubtful censure be, never approve nor imitate till they be justify by the success. and then, many who have first be too distrustful, fall in the other extremity of a implicit confidence to redeem their former neglect, do precipitate themselves in needless danger. after that, the spaniard be know to prosper, and that it be conceive by the voyage of chabot what a large vastness this new continent be likely to prove. francis the first do furnish forth john verrizzon, a florentine who do discover that part of america which be first and most. just call new france and now terra florida, and upon his return he affirm it to be, as it be indeed, for all the excellency of nature, one of the most pleasant part of the world. this be the cause that, after a long delay, during the space of two prince whole, reign some new discovery. revive the memory of this in the year of god 1562.. charles the nine have a haughty mind and be so ravish with a desire of glory that he be sometime tempt by sinistrous suggestion in seek after it to go upon wrong ground. be quick enamour with the eminency of such a singular design, wherein he do employ john riba^t, who come to florida, be kind receive by the native there. and have, make choice of a place where to build a fort. after he have stay a time, give direction for such thing as be necessary to be. do he leave forty man therein when he come away with one, captain albert, to command? they who after that he have with difficulty be free from the danger of famine and of fire, unreasonable affect the disuse, austerity of the ancient do, for a small offence, hang one of his company with his own hand, so lose both the dignity of his place and the heart of his people at one time, which he shall have be extreme, studious to preserve. esteem they as fellow of his suffering and coheir of his hope. at least the quality of the offence and necessity of his death shall have be make so clear that, as import a common good, all, if not urge it shall at least have condescend thereunto. but this error of his be acquit in as rude a manner for his company. put he to death. do make choice of another captain and despair of a new, though want skilful workman for such a purpose necessity. sharpen their wit. they build a little bark which they calfat and make fit for the sea with the gum of tree which they find there in stead of pitch, and in place of sail, they furnish she with such linen as they have upon their bed and be thus set forth, courageous, overcome a number of admirable difficulty. do return to france after a desperate manner, the dangerless return and plausible hope of ribaut, assist by the serious persuasion of the admiral, the receive opinion of who not question wisdom, be enough to warrant any thing that have his approbation. do move the french king to send out a great number of man with a competent provision of all thing requisite, under the charge of monsieur laudonier, who have a prosperous voyage and a congratulate arrival at the french fort by the savage in florida. but immediate thereafter he be extreme perplex with the unexpected mutiny and factious offer of some who he have carry with he who have not go thither, intend what they pretend out of a clear resolution, to inhabit that bound, but do only flee from some inconvenience that have vex they at home, such man as hate labour. they can not industrious serve by their endeavour in a mechanike trade. so be they not capable of generous inspiration that provoke magnanimity but habitual. breed to vice, be natural enemy to virtue which make thirty of. they take away a bark that belong to the plantation, betake themselves to the sea in hope, continue, as they have be accustom, in naughty course, to seize upon a prize whereby they may, incontinent be, make rich and their design in some measure have the project issue. but in place of raise their fortune, the lord never bless they that abandon such a worthy work, much less with a mind to do mischief. it prove in end, away to work their confusion, and laudoniere be happy to have his company purge of such pestiferous fellow. do carry himself brave as become a commander, advise, inquire, concern the savage. what their force be, what relation they? have one to another, where they be friend or foe, how their pleasure be place and by what account they reckon their gain or loss, so that he be always ready, as may stand best with the good of his affair, to assist or oppose, to divide or agree any party. thus, by show power, purchase authority, till he draw the balance of all business to be sway where he will, as be master of the country. hereupon, the umbragious aspersion of envy so darken reason that it can not discern merit, at least out of a deprave opinion with a derogatory censure cancel all natural ingenuity, can not or will not acknowledge what be due. thereunto, a report be spread in france by some that laudoniere live. like a prince, disdain the condition of a subject and the french, out of a preposterous policy, fear what they shall have. wish that one of their own nation can be too great abroad, they send back ribaut with a new commission to succeed he in his charge, shake thereby the first foundation of a grow greatness. who seek to steal private upon he to prevent advertisement that he may take he at unaware, do hardly escape to have be sink at his first entry. immediate after that ribaut, be admit governor laudoniere have, show himself as dutiful to obey as he have be skilful in command, intelligence be. give they that six spanish ship be ride at a anchor not far from thence, and he, ambitious, aspire. to grace his beginning with some great matter, against the advice of all the rest, with a obstinate resolution, will needs: go and pursue. they. take the best of the company with he, and so leave the fort, weak guard which make it to prove a easy prey for the spaniard of who the most part. leave their ship a mind transport with hope, not think of pain. do march through the wood whence no peril be expect, and in a marvelous, stormy night, as if the very heaven accessary culpable have conspire with the malice of man for the work of mischief, when the frenchman too much affect their own ease, have neglect their watch. surprise their fort. do, put they all to the sword. which extreme. cruelty of they be brave. revenge by one captain gorgue, a gentleman of bordeaux who, out of a generous disposition, be sensible of this public injury whereby all his nation be interest, as if it have only, in particular, import the ruin of his own fortune. go of purpose to this part and, secret before his come be know, contract a great friendship with the savage who do hate the austere countenance and rigorous government of the spaniard when it come to be compare with the insinuate form of the french, he find the mean by a stratagem that he use to entrap the spaniard by the death of. they all expiate that which they have, make his countryman former to suffer. yet, after the manner of many being more apt to acquire, then to preserve, act. great thing when carry with the impetuosity of a present fury than he can confirm with the constant progress of a well settle resolution, he make no more use of his victory but return back to france, flatter himself with the hope of a triumphal welcome in place, whereof, by some mean, make court he be proclaim a rebel as a sacrifice, appoint to appease spain. this be the last thing that the french do in florida. the next foreign adventure be likewise procure by the admiral, a worthy man who will glad have divert the vindictive disposition of his countryman from the bloody civil war wherewith they be then entangle to prosecute. some brave enterprise abroad whereby they may not be make guilty and yet have glory. the man that do offer himself for conductor of the voyage be one villegagnon, a knight of malta, who then pretend to be of the reform religion, as all do who affect to appear what they be not, indeed make show of extraordinary remorse and zeal, and that he have a desire to retire himself from the vanity, corruption and vexation of their part to some remote place in america where, profess himself such as he be, he may, free from all kind of impediment, begin a new life and where he hope to found such a colony as shall serve for a retreat to all those of the reform religion who weary. of the persecution at home will go where they may live with safety and enjoy the liberty of their conscience. by this mean he get a great number to accompany he, among who be john de lerie, their minister, a learned man who write a discourse of all that pass in this voyage, and there be sundry other that come from the town of geneva, so that have a reasonable number and well provide. he embark and sail towards brasile, make choice of a place fit for a plantation, where they find the soil excellent, the native well incline towards they and a supply come in due time. all thing so concur for their contentment that they may have begin a great work, happy and hopeful for their posterity. if uillagagnon have be the man that he make, they believe he be, but he apparent never love, they of the religion in his heart have counterfeit to do so for a time only, angle their affection by this mean to draw a supply from they. for as soon as he be settle in his government that he find himself strong enough by catholic and other of his friend that he have with he to do as he think what he will straight remove the mask that hypocrisy have put upon he. he discharge all exercise of the reform religion which no man with more fervency have. profess, then himself command all to conform themselves to the order that he have set down. but in place of fear, which he purpose to give, receive, but contempt this base kind of carriage, do quite overthrow his authority, and they make a party among themselves. do remove with their minister john de lerie, which division of their colony in two be the cause that neither can subsist, so that villagagnon abandon that country. all after many, several design, return unto france. have find no impediment to so good a purpose, but the perverseness of such mind as they have carry with they a very worthy gentleman. do of late enterprise the like course in the same bound and be cross in the same manner by the difference. of religion. disputation, quicken they to contravert who will not be convert. that distract his company with several opinion. yet at this time, a long continuance, make that less strange among the french than it be wont to be. the gentleman do command with such judgement and discretion that what ever private dislike be it, never burst forth in any open insurrection and for the space of four or five year be befriend by the native, though continual oppose, both by the spaniard and by the portugal. yet he always prevail, live as himself, tell i, with more contentment than ever he have do in his time, either before or since. he can never discern any winter there by the effect, see no stormy weather at all and find a continual greenness to beautify the field which do afford such abundance and variety of all thing necessary for the maintenance that they be never in any danger of famine, but in end find no more. people come from france and fear that time shall wear away they that be with he then be flatter with the love of his native soil, long to see his friend, and tempt by the hope of a present gain which, as he imagine, might the better enable he for some such purpose in a other part, he capitulate with the spaniard to surrender the place. have assurace, give he for a great sum. of money which shall have be deliver in spain, but come to receive the same. it be more easy to pay debt by revenge, a pretend injury, then with money which some will rather keep then their faith. he be cast in prison where he remain long till at last he be deliver by the mediation of our king ambassador and come here, where i speak with he of purpose, to give his majesty thanks. i hear that for the present he be now at rochel with a hope to repair his error, ready to embark for some such like enterprise. this be all that the frenchman have do in the south part of america, and now i will make mention of their proceed in these part that be next unto we francis. the first of france, a brave prince and natural give to great thing, after the voyage make by john verrizan chabot, have discover the continent for henry the seven, do send forth james quartier, one of saint malo, who by two several voyage do discover the river of cannada and by his relation, do commend it, exceed as be fertile in variety of fish and border with many pleasant meadow and stately wood. have in sundry part abundance of vine grow wild, chief in one isle which he have call by the name of the i. will of orleans, this man never make any plantation at all, but only discover and traffic with the savage. neither be there any further do by roberwall, who do live one winter at cape breton, the marquis de la roche, by a commission from henry the four intend a voyage for cannada. happen, by the way, upon the i will of sablon, which be now comprehend within the patent of new scotland, and there trust to the strength of the place where there be no savage at all. land, some of his man till he shall have find a convenient place within the main land fit for habitation. promise then to return for they, but it be his fortune, by reason of contrary wind, never to find the. main land be blow back to france without see of they where he be in the time of the civil war, such be the uncertainty of worldly thing, produce unexpected effect, take prisoner by the duke of mercoeur and short after die so that his people, who he have, leave at sablon furnish, but for a short time have quick spend their provision and take for their maintenance only such thing as the place itself do, without labour, free afford, which have a race of kowe as be think first transport thither by the portugal that have long continue there and sundry root fit to be eat with abundance of fish, fowle and venison, and have no mean to live but by sport. as for their apparel, they clothe themselves with the skin of such creature as they can kill by land or sea, so that live there for the space of twelve year when they be present to henry the four who have hire a fisherman to bring they home, as i have hear from they that do see they at first, before the king, they be in very good health and look as well as if they have live all that time in france but have be abuse by the fisherman who, cunning, conceal that he have be direct by the king, do bargain with they to have all their skin for transport they home, which be of great value, some of they be of black fox, which be sell at fifty pound sterling a piece and above. for the recovery thereof they intend a process against he before the court of parliament at paris wherein by the equity of their cause or by the compassion of the judge they prevail. gain by that mean a stock wherewith to traffic in these part. again, procure a patent from henry the four of cannada from the 40. degree eastward, comprehend all the bound that be now both within new england and new scotland. after that queen elizabeth have former give one thereof as belong to this crown by chabots discovery. do set forth with a hundred person fit for a plantation, carry in two ship of small burden which part from france on several day. do appoint their meeting at the port of campseau, but the ship wherein have place himself go first and fear the huge mountain of ice that dissolve from the far northern part, come alongst the coast of newfoundland during the spring time, do take her course more to the south and arrive at port mutton, a bay now in the fore-land of new scotland, from whence one of the native of the country, either out of courtesy or to gain a reward, leave his wife and child as a pledge or else to be nourish with. they go to campseau and within a week bring they news from their other ship that have arrive there, which come to they and who have go in a shallop to discover. the coast be return. they sail together westward to cape sable and from thence northwards to bay saint, where towards the south side thereof they find good meadow and arable ground fit to be plant upon, and towards the north, a mountainous and mineral bound. have discover one vein of metal that do hold silver and two of iron stone. after this have see port royal, they go to the river, call by they sante croix, but more fit now to be call tweed because it do divide new england and new scotland bound, the one of they upon the east and the other upon the westside thereof. here they make choice of a i will that be within the middle of the same where to winter build. house sufficient to lodge their number there. beside other sort of wood, they have store of cedar tree and find the ground very fertile, as it do prove afterward bring forth that which they do sow with a extraordinary increase. yet during the winter time, when they can not convenient go to the main land, they find it a very incommodious dwelling special. for want of fresh spring and the soil be of itself humid and obnoxious to water, they have not be so industrious as to cast a ditch wherewith to dry the ground whereupon their house stand, and in end find that a little isle be but a kind of large prison. they resolve to return unto port royal, whereof i will give a particular description. because it be the place of their residence, as i intend it to be for the chief colony of the scottish nation, ground that which i be to deliver, upon such discourse as the frenchman have write and upon that which i have hear report by sundry other who have see the same. the entry in port royal be from the south side of a great bay which do make the south part of new scotland almost a i will, and have the passage at first so narrow, with a current so violent that ship can hardly enter if they take not the tide right and may easy be command by any ordnance that be plant on either side where there be part fit for that purpose. as soon as they be within the bay, it do enlarge itself to the breadth of seven or eight mile and do continue so as if it be square for the like bound in length. there be within the same two isle, every one of they extend itself about three mile in circuit, and both be well garnish with tree and grass. diverse river and brook do fall within this large bosom, on every side of which the chief be one that do come from the south, be discover to be above forty mile portative, and it have all alongst, on every side, for the bound of a mile or half a mile at least, very fair meadow which be subject to be overflow at high tide, and there be land fit to be labour lie between they and the wood which do compass all about with very fair tree of sundry sort as oak, ash, playnes, maple, beech, birch, cypress, pinc and fir. the great river do abound, exceed in salmon and smelt during their season, and every little brook in trout, one lake within this bay, have yearly. a great quantity of herring which, by reason of a strict way which they pass, be easy to be take, and all the year over. they never want shellfish such as lobster, crab, cockle and mussel, the chief beast that inhabit the wood. there be ellans, hart, hind and fallow deer, with store of other wild beast such as wolf, bear, fox and otter, but the most useful of all be the beaver, both for his flesh that be esteem to be very delicate for eat and for the skin that be of good value. as for wild foul, there be great variety and store of partridge, plover, woodcock, lark, wild goose, wild duck, heron and crane, with many other sort peculiar to that part of the world. and not know. here, upon the east side of this port, the french do entrench themselves, build such house as may serve to accommodate their number, and a little from thence, monsieur champlein, do cut a walk through the wood where they delight to repair in summer to shroud themselves from the heat and the rather that they have a sweet melody which be make by the variety of voice of sing bird which, without any affectation, do afford they natural music. some six mile further up that side of the river, they build a barn and labour ground for wheat, over against which they make a water-mill upon a river that do fall in, on the west side, the dam of it be there where the herring. haunt most. and they do likewise try some ground near by for wheat, whereas their own writer make mention they reap above forty for one. but what they do be rather try the nature of the soil to satisfy their curiosity, then to have a qantitie fit for their maintenance, which they trust to be send unto they by two merchant from the rochel and be that way well furnish, so long as they keep their skin to give they in exchange. but the merchant, either by some private conveyance or by the come in of some fleming to traffic, be disappoint by the planter as soon as they miss their present commodity, do likewise frustrate they of the provision that they expect, whereupon monsieur betake himself to. trade for fur, poutrincourt resolve to prosecute the plantation at that place and send for his son, biencourt, to france to bargain with some that will send they a supply such as be requisite for establish of that colony. the first that embrace his proposition be the jesuit who, as they have ordinary good wit which make they the rather capable of so advantageous a project, so they be the more animate thereunto by upbraid the laziness of our clergy to show with what fervency they travel to propagate the gospel in do whereof, whither it be ambition or devotion that provoke, they spare no pain. they have travel both to the east and west indies, and to that admire kingdom of china. their society in france prevail. with all that have any inclination either to religion or to virtue, do easy gather a voluntary contribution for the further of so commendable a purpose. thereafter, they send away two father of their company with a new supply of all thing necessary to the plantation at port royal. but short after their arrival, their predominant disposition hardly yield to any superior special if it be a secular power. they be-beganne to contradict poutrincourt in the execution of these decree which have be give forth by he as civil magistrate of that place. whereupon the gentleman, extreme discontent and weary of contest with they have, say that it be his part to rule they upon earth and they only to guide he the way to heaven. he return. back to france, leave his son, biencourt, in his place, who be a youth at that time, of more courage than circumspectness, disdain to be control by they who he have, invite thither and scorn their insupportable presumption and imperious kind of carriage. use spiritual arm for temporal end who spleen have, excommunicate and brand he with a spiritual censure. he threaten they by his temporal power with a more palpable punishment so that, after much controversy, resolve to separate themselves. the two jesuit take a part of the company with they go from thence to a place in new england, call by. they mount desert where they seat themselves and have a supply from the queen mother do plant sundry fruit tree of the most delicate kind. in france, such as apricocke and peach, never intend to remove from thence at this time. sir samuel argall, who have be governor of virginia coast alongst new england, to traffic, discover or to acquire thing necessary for the southern colony, in these part where the land be repute to be more fertile and the sea more frequent, do conceive, by a description make unto he by the savage, that there be some come from this part of the world to inhabit there and be jealous of any thing that may derogate from the honour or prove prejudicial to the benefit of his nation, whereof their interest in this be easy to be apprehend. he go, whereas he be, inform that they be, and his unexpected arrival, as it will seem, not only amaze the mind of the french but likewise prevent their preparation and resolution. he approach so near to a ship that lay before their fort that he beat they all that be within with musket, shoot from, make any use of their ordnance and kill one of the two, jesuit, who be give fire to a piece have, take the ship he land and go before the fort, summon they that be within to yield themselves, who at the first make some difficulty, ask a time to advise, but that be refuse. they private, abandon the fort, steal out by some back way into the wood where they stay. one night and the next day come back, render themselves, give up the patent they have from the french king to be cancel he use. they, courteous as their own writer do make mention, suffer, such as have a mind to go for france to seek out fisher ship wherein they may be, transport the rest that be willing to go for virginia go thither alongst with he. no man have lose his life, but only that one, jesuite, who be kill while they make resistance during the time of the conflict. thereafter, father biard, the other of the jesuit, come back from uirginia with sir samuel argall. out of the indigestable malice that he have conceive against biencourt, do inform he where he have plant himself offering. as he do to conduct. he thither. as soon as they be enter within the port near the uppermost of the land, sir samuel direct the ship to ride at a reasonable distance to attend occasion before the fort. do land himself with forty of the best of his man, upon a meadow where immediate they hear a piece of ordnance from the fort and he conceive, since it be shoot. whilst it can do no harm, that it be do either. but to give terror to they or to warn some that may happen to be abroad, do make the great haste towards the fort where he present, enter, find it, abandon without any man at all, leave for the defence thereof, he go up the river. side, five or six mile, where he see their barn and the ground where a great quantity of wheat have grow which he carry with he to serve for seed in virginia. he see likewise their corn mill, very convenient place, which, together with the barn, he leave stand untouched. as for the fort itself, he destroy it down to the ground, raze the french arm and leave no monument remain that may witness their be there. after this, biencourt, who have be some where abroad, travel through the country, come home, desire to confer with sir samuel argall, who do meet with he apart from the company upon a meadow, and after they have expostulate a space for what have past. controvert concern: the french and english. title to these bound. at last, biencourt offer, if he may have a protection, to depend upon our king and to draw the whole fur of that country to one port where he will divide they with he, as likewise he will show he good metal whereof he give he piece, but the other refuse to join in any society with he protest that his commission be only to displant he and that if he find he there after that time he will use he as a enemy. biencourt labour earnest to have have the jesuit, as he confess, with a purpose to hang he. whilst they be discourse together, one of the savage come sudden forth from the wood and licentiate to come near do after his. manner earnest mediate a peace, wonder why they that seem to be of one country shall use other with such hostility and that with such a form of habit and gesture as make they both to laugh. after this biencourt, remove from thence to some other part who have live long here, do carry a company with he from france, of some forty person or thereabouts, up the river of canada, who he plant on the north side thereof with a purpose to serve for a factory. draw all the trade of that far run river, which a plantation will have disperse in many part within the hand of a few who he do command. otherwise, if his desire have be bend that way, he may have plant. many people. there ere now the place be call k^beck, where the french do prosper well, have corn by their own labour which may furnish themselves for food and likewise for a stock to traffic with the savage, with sundry fruit, root, vine, grape and turkey wheat. champlein have discover the river of canada from the gulf upward, above twelve hundred mile, find in it sometime such fall as to escape the same. he must carry his boat a little way by land, and then he do many time, come to great lake, at the end whereof he do always find a river again, and the last lake where he come be a very huge one, judge to be three hundred mile in length by the report of some savage who do affirm unto he that at the further end thereof they do find salt-water and that they have see great vessel, which make champlein believe that a passage may be there to the bay of california or to some part of the south sea, which will prove a inestimable benefit for the inhabitant of those part, open a near way to china, which have be so many sundry way with. so great charge, so long sought-for howsoever. in regard of the season and for want of necessary provision, champlein do return back at that time with a purpose to go again another year, which if he have do be not yet know. but this be most certain: that the river of canada have a long course and through many goodly country, some of these great lake, by send forth or by receive great river, do afford mean of commerce as far as to some part of terra, florida, as may be gather by champlein discovery. and now have give a breviary of all that be do by the french in america. i will next report of that which have be do by some other. i will not here. make mention of the many and brave voyage that at the sea have happy be perform by the english, which, fame by eternal record, have recommend to be applaud by the best judgement of every age. but i will only short touch that which they have attempt, by way of plantation, begin with the new-found land which be first discover and do lie near to this country. sir humphrey gilbert, have a commission from queen elizabeth, do take possession of it in her name at saint john harbour, and thereafter purpose to have see canada but encounter with some unexpected cross as he be return from thence, seek to condemn a opinion. malice or envy, ordinary tax, all aspire spirit who virtue, by way of reflection, do upbraid. the baseness of other that have be conceive of he as want courage, he precipitate himself upon a other extremity. not to seem fearful, prove desperate, for, in the tune of a storm, out of a needless bravery, to show a contempt of danger, be in a little small pinnace and refuse to come to his best ship that be of a large burden, he be sudden swallow up by the wave, near to the i will of sablon and his death do overthrow great hope of a plantation that, by the generousness of his mind, may just have be expect from he. but long before his time and ever since, the english have use to fish upon the bank and within the bay of newfound land, and the sweetness of the benefit arise from thence. do persuade a company compose of londoner and west-country man to join together for send some to inhabit there where before howsoever, the summer be large, as hot as here, the winter be think unsufferable. the first house for a habitation be build in cupid cove within the bay of conception, where people do dwell for sundry year together and some well satisfy both for pleasure and profit. be dwell there. still find small difference between the season of the year in that climate. and here there be another plantation, begin at harbour, a grace. within the same bay by the city of bristol, call bristol hope, whereas by the sow and rea^ing of some corn of sundry sort do appear. what further may possible be expect? and within these three year master secretary caluert have plant a company at ferriland who both for building and make trial of the ground have do more than ever be perform before by any in so short a time, have already there a brood of horse, kowe and other beastial, and by the industry of his people. he be beginning to draw back yearly some benefit from thence. already, which course, howsoever, at first it prove good or bad for his particular, be by example beneficial for the public. last i hear that my lord viscount falkland, now lord deputy of ireland, have this last year send a company to inhabit at renome, a place lie south-west from ferriland where the soil be esteem to be the best whereupon any have settle there as yet. and he have the short way and best opportunity of any within his majesty dominion for transport of people and cattle to that part from ireland which, if his course be right, direct as all have reason to wish, may promise he a good success. the first patentee for newfoundland, have give i a grant of that part thereof, which do lie northwest from the bay of placentia to the great gulf of canada, over-against new scotland, where i have make a plantation. ere now, if i have not be divert by my design for new scotland, but i purpose to do it as soon as convenient, i may the most part of the bound whereupon any have plant as yet in newfound land be find to be rocky and not fit to be manure. it may be these that make choice thereof, neglect the land, have only a regard to dwell commodious for, make use of the sea. the present profit whereof do recompense the loss of that which may be expect. by the other. but there can be no hope of any constant dwell where the people that inhabit do not take a course to maintain themselves by their own corn and pasture, as all there may do if they will respect their posterity more than the present time. before i come to the continent, i must remember the isle of the bermuda who discovery and plantation be procure by so strange a mean for a ship happen to perish upon their coast. her passenger seek the next land for a refuge. they be compel to do that out of necessity, whereunto in good reason, both for honour and profit, they may more warrantable have be invite. thus do benefit flow from loss, safety from ruin and the plantation. of a land, from the desolation of a ship they find at the first store of hog, which in all appearance have their beginning from some such a accident as they be, and the fowl be there in abundance, so easy to be take that they can scarce be fright away, these first people, by repair of their ship which be cast away upon the land, or by build some other vessel out of her ruin, come back to england and report what be past. some join together in a company after they have take a patent thereof from the king and do send people of purpose to inhabit there who trust too much to the goodness of the soil and neglect their own industry or not govern. that well which be carry with they be reduce to a great distress for want of victual, so that if they have not be confine within a island more sensible of a present suffering, then capable of future hope, they will willing have retire from thence. but a great quantity of ambergris have be find by one, by chance, and send back in a ship that be go for london. their merchant find it to be of a great value, be so encourage by such a substantial argument that they present dispatch away a new supply of person and all provision necessary. who arrive there and have consider what a gulf of famine be likely to have swallow their fellow, they improve their judgement by the other experience. by betake themselves to labour in time do prevent the like inconvenience. there be no land where man can live without labour, nor none so barren whence industry can draw some benefit. all adam posterity be appoint to work for their food, and none must dream of a absolute ease which can no where subsist. positive but only comparative, according to the occasion. more or less, this plantation of the bermuda, a place not know when the king come to england, have prosper so in a shore time that at this present, beside their ordinary and too extraordinary value commodity of tobacco, they have grow there orange, fig and all kind of fruit that they please to plant and do now intend to have a sugar work. these isle be about twenty mile in breadth, can only be enter into but by one passage, which be fortify and easy command by ordnance, so that have no savage within and fear no force, without it be esteem to be impregnable and the number of the inhabitant there be near three thousand person, be sufficient for the ground that they possess. this part may prove exceed steadable to this state, if ever it happen to have, as it have heretofore have, any design for service in these sea. the first plantation that ever the english intend abroad be in uirginia, which be first discover and name so by sir walter raleigh who, in the time of queen elizabeth, do place some person to inhabit there, who not. be supply in time, or out of ignorance or laziness, not use the ordinary mean, the usual fault of all beginner be bring by famine to a great extremity. and sir francis drake come by chance that way, do transport they back with he to england, while at the same time there be another company, furnish forth by sir walter raleigh, who miss they who they expect to have find there do, remain still themselves. but what do become of they if they do remove to some other part, perish, disperse or incorporate with the savage no monument of they remain, be altogether unknown. this noble work have so hard a begin after a long discontinuance, be reviue again in the king time by a company compose of nobleman, gentleman and merchant who join private purse with public supply. do send thither a sufficient colony, well furnish with all thing necessary, who, after their first come, have a continual war with the native, till it be reconcile by a marriage of their king sister with one of the colony who have come to england, as she be return back, die and be bury at gravesend. thus, even among these, savage liberty be value above life, as they be induce to contest in time before that power which they suspect can come to such a height that it may have a possibility of. depress they, so be their malice with their fear. quick calm by the mean of a marriage. lawful allyance thus, by admit equality, remove contempt and give a promiscuous offspring, extinguish the distinction of person which, if that people become christian, be in some sort tolerable. for it be the only course that, unite, mind free from jealousy, can first make stranger confide in a new friendship which, by communicate their blood with mutual assurance be leave hereditary to their posterity this. long for peace, though it breed a great contentment for the time be attend by wrap they that apprehend no further danger too common a inconvenient, up in the lazy remissness of improvident security for a number. leave the seat of the main colony, do disperse. themselves to live apart, as if they have be into a well inhabit country which, as perchance it have embolden the savage to embrace the first occasion of a quarrel. so do it, give they a easy way for execute the mischief that they intend by kill two or three hundred person before they can advertise one another, far less join to oppose they in a company together, which course may not only then have make they able to resist, but prevent the other resolution have, keep they from be pursue. yet i hear of late that they have revenge, this injury, though, as some report, not after a commendable manner, by kill their king with a great number of the chief of they who they suspect most. this plantation of uirginia, if it have not be cross by the incursion of the savage abroad and by the division of their owner at home, have attain to a great perfection. ere now have have inhabitant from hence to the number of near three thousand person, and if some of they who be there be lord of reasonable proportion of ground and have people of their own, owe nothing but due obedience to a superior power and the lead of a life conform to the law, have no care but make their land to maintain themselves, how to build, plant and plenish in such sort as might best establish a fortune for their posterity. they may quick make up a new nation, but it be a great. discouragement unto they who dwell there that they must labour like the servant of a family, purchase their food and raiment from england in exchange of tobacco, as they be direct by their master, many whereof be stranger to the estate of that bound and intend to settle none of their race. there have no care but how the best benefit may present be draw back from thence. the number of voice at their assembly prevail more than the soundness of judgement. otherwise that country, before this time for wine, oil, wheat and other thing necessary for the life of man, may have equal for the like quantity, any bound within europe to which the soil of itself lack nothing but the like industry be no way inferior. and it be to be exceed wish by all his majesty subject that the plantation of virginia may prosper well, which lie near to the part from whence danger may come, may prove a bulwark for the safety of all the rest. that which be now call new england be first comprehend within the patent of virginia, be the north-east part thereof. it be undertake in a patent by a company of gentleman in the west of england, one of who be sir john popha^, then lord chief justice, who send the first company that go of purpose to inhabit there near to segadahoek. but those that go thither be press to that enterprise as endanger by the law or by their own necessity. no enforce thing prove. pleasant discontent person suffer while as they act can seldom have good success and never satisfaction. they, after a winter, stay, dream to themselves of new hope at home, return back with the first occasion and to justify the suddenness of their return they do coin many excuse: burden the bound where they have be with all the aspersion that possible they can devise, seek by that mean to discourage all other who provident forwardness importune. a good success may make their base sluggishness for abandon the beginning of a good work to be the more condemn about a four year since a ship go for virginia come by chance to harbour in the south-west part of new england, near cape cod. the company who she carry for plantation, be weary of the sea and enamour with the beauty of the bound that first offer itself unto. they, gorgeous, garnish with all wherewith pregnant nature ravish the sight with variety, can grace a fertile field, do resolve to stay and seat themselves in that place, which be now call new plymouth, where they have build good house and, by their own industry, have provide themselves in such sort as they be likely to subsist. keep a good correspondency with the captain of the savage, who have do nothing hitherto that may offend they, and after this though they will dare attempt nothing to their prejudice- who be now above two hundred person and do increase their number yearly. they find both the land and the sea there abound in all thing needful for the use of man and do govern themselves after a very civil and provident manner. sir ferdinando gorge, have be a chief man for the furtherance of all thing that may tend to the advancement of new england have be at great charge. these many year pass for the discovery thereof, in do which a good intention bend for other end, casual bring forth this effect the fish there. not seek for be find which do prove now so profitable as forty or fifty sail be employ there from england yearly and all that have go thither have make advantageous voyage. this last year he send his son, captain robert gorge, with a colony to be plant in messasuat bond and as i hear out of a generous desire by his example to encourage other for the advancement of so brave a enterprise, he be resolve short to go himself in person and to carry with he a great number well fit for such a purpose, and many nobleman in england who name and proportion as they be marshal by lot may appear upon the map, have interress themselves in that bound be to send several colony. who may quick make this to exceed all the other plantation, have sundry time, exact, weigh that which i have already deliver and be so exceed inflame to do some good in that kind that i will rather bewray the weakness of my power, then conceal the greatness of my desire. be much () age hereunto by sir ferdinando gorge and some other, of the undertaker for new england, i ^hew th^m that my countryman will never adventure in such a enterprise, unless it be as there be a new france, a new spain and a new england, that they may likewise have a new scotland and that for that effect they may have bound with a correspondency in proportion, as other have, with the country whereof it. shall bear the name which they may hold of their own crown and where they may be govern by their own law. they wise consider that either uirginia or new england have more bound, then all his majesty subject be able to plant, and that this purpose of i, by breed a virtuous emulation among we, will tend much to the advancement of so brave a work. do yield to my desire, de^^^^ing the bound for i in that part which have be question by the french, and leave the limit thereof to be appoint by his majesty pleasure, which be express in the patent grant unto i under his great seal of his kingdom of scotland, match upon the west towards the river of saint croix now. tweed, where the frenchman do design their first habitation with new england, and on all other part it be compass by the great ocean and the great river of canada, so that though sundry other prepare patent be imaginarily limit by the degree of the heaven. i think that i be the first national patent that ever be clear, bound within america by particular limit upon the earth. as soon as my patent be pass, resolve to take possession of the land that be grant unto i, i provide myself of a ship at london in the month of march in 1622.. but that the business may begin from that kingdom, which it do concern, whereby some of my countryman may be persuade to go, and other by conceive a good opinion thereof to depend, by expectation, upon the report of such of their acquaintance as be to adventure in that voyage. i directedher to go about by s george channel to kirkenbright, where she arrive in the end of may some gentleman of that country, upon who friendship i repose most, happen at that time to be out of the kingdom. i encounter with sundry unexpected difficulty the prize of victual be, within the space of three month, since i have part before from scotland, sudden triple and yet so scarce as i can hardly in haste be well. furnish. yet since i be so far advance, lest i shall loose that which be do if i do not the rest, i use the best diligence i can to provide the ship with all thing necessary. then the very people, special artizen of who i stand in need, be at first loath to embark for so remote a part, as they imagine this to be some scarce, believe that there can be any such bound at all. and no wonder, since never any in that part have ever travel thither and all novelty be disinherit or disualued. few of good sort will go, and ordinary person be not capable of such a purpose. at last, in the end of june, they part from thence to the i. will of man, and after some stay there in the begin of august, leave the sight of his majesty dominion, do betake themselves to the sea, though, by reason of the lateness of their set forth, they have the wind very contrary. about the midst of september they discover saint peter land and be near to cape bretton, but yet be beat back again by a great storm to newfoundland, and, as they pass by the bay of placentia, neglect the occasion to place themselves in some part of my bound there as they may have. do they go into saint john harbour, where they conclude to stay that winter, and send the ship home for a new supply of such thing as be needful though it may. have discourage i much that they have. retire to newfoundland, foresee that what they have with they may be waste and that it will be as chargeable and difficult to furnish they forth from thence as if they be to go of new from scotland. yet rather than they shall be in danger for want of provision, make i any way guilty of their loss. that have adventure their life trust to my care. i fraught a ship of purpose furnish with such thing as be require in a note which they send home with their messenger. this ship be dispatch by i from london in the end of march 1623.. but she happen to stay so long at plymouth, first upon some necessary occasion and last by contrary wind, it be the eight and twenty of april before she part from thence, have no good wind at all, that they arrive not at saint john harbour till the five of june at their come. they find the company not fit for a plantion which have first, by a unexpected cause, be divide in two during the winter and in may, some doubt of a supply, have engage themselves to serve fisherman, by which mean they gain their maintenance and some mean beside, so that they can hardly be gather together again and their minister and smith, both for spiritual and temporal respect, the two most necessary member, be both dead so that see no hope to plant themselves in any good fashion. that year ten of the principal person conclude to go alongst with the ship to new scotland to discover the country and to make choice of a fit place for a habitation against the next year. consider very well that. they can not do so much good by stay there with so few a number, as they may do at their return by report the truth to their friend of that which they have see, whereby a new colony may be encourage to set forth, well furnish and instruct according to that which may be learn by their experience. the three and twenty of june they loose from saint john harbour and sail towards new scotland where for the space of fourteen day they be by fog and contrary wind, keep back from spy land till the eight of july that they see the west part of cape bretton, and till the thirteen day they sail alongst the coast till they run the length of port mutton, where they discover three very pleasant harbour and go ashore in one of they, which, after the ship name, they call luke bay, where they find a great way up a very pleasant river, be three fathom deep, at a low water. at the entry thereof, and on every side of the same, they do see very delicate meadow have. rose, white and red grow thereon, with a kind of wild lily which have a dainty smell. the next day they resolve coast alongst the land to discover the next harbour, which be but two league distant from the other, where they find a more pleasant river than the first, be four fathom deep at a low water with meadow on both side thereof. have rose and lily grow thereon as the other have. they find within this river a very fit place for a plantation, both in regard that it be natural apt to be fortify and that all the ground between the two river be without wood and very good fat earth. have several sort of berry grow thereon, as gooseberry, strawberry, hind-bery, rasbery and a. kind of red wine berry, as also some sort of grain as pease, some ear of wheat, barley and rye grow there wild. the pease grow in abundance alongst the coast, very big and good to eat, but do taste of the fitch. this river be call port jolly, from whence they coast alongst to port negro, be twelve league distant, where all the way as they sail alongst they spy a very pleasant country. have grow every where such thing as be observe in the two harbour where they have be before. they find likewise in every river, abundance of lobster, cockle and other shelfish and also, not only in the river but all the coast alongst, number of several sort of wildfowl as wild-goose, black duck. woodcock, crane, heron, pigeon and many other sort of fowl which they know not, they do kill as they sail alongst the coast. great store of cod with several other sort of great fish. the country be full of wood not very thick and the most part oak. the rest be fir, spruce, birch, with some sicamore and ash and many other sort of wood which they have not see before. have discover this part of the country. in regard of the voyage their ship be to make to the strait with fish, they resolve to coast alongst from luke bay to port the mutton be four league to the east thereof, where they encounter with a frenchman that, in a very short time, have make a great voyage, for, though he have furnish one ship away with a great number of fish, there be never so many ready as to load himself and other after they have take a view of this port which, to their judgement, they find no way inferior to the rest they have see before. they resolve to retire back to newfoundland, where their ship be to receive her load of fish the 20. of july. they loose. from thence and the seven and twenty thereof, they arrive at saint john harbour and from thence sail alongst to the bay of conception, where they leave the ship and dispatch themselves home in several ship that belong to the west part of england. this be no wonder that the french be, so slight plant, do take no deep root in america, for they, as only desirous to know the nature and quality of the soil and of thing that be likely to grow there, do never seek to have they in such quantity as be requisite for their maintenance. affect more by make a needless ostentation that the world shall know they have. be there, then, that they do contiwe still to inhabit there like. they that be more in love with glory then with virtue, then be always subject to division among themselves. it be impossible that they can subsist, which proceed sometime from emulation or envy and at other time from the laziness of the disposition of some who loathe labour can be command by none who will impose more upon they, then be agreeable with the indifferency of their affection and superficial endeavour. the english be free from these mutiny and want not industry enough, but either out of a custom they have to travel more for the benefit that do flow from grass, then by manure of the ground for corn, or otherwise if they be force so to do by their owner at london, who enforce a speedy. return by their labour will needs be. trust with furnish of they victual. they apply themselves to tobacco and such thing as may import a present commodity. neglect the time that may have be employ for building, plant and husbandry. do live, but like hire servant labour for their master and not like father. provide for their family and posterity, which can never be avoid till the ground be inhabit by they that be owner thereof, will trust it with their maintenance and do content themselves with the delight of that which may give glory to they and profit to their heir. the plantation in america do approach near to the purity of these that, by a industrious diligence in the infancy of the first age, do extend. the mutiply generation of mankind to people, the then desert earth, for here they may possess themselves, without dispossess of other, the land either want inhabitant or have none that do appropriate to themselves any peculiar ground, but in a straggle company, run like beast after beast, seek no soil but only after their prey and where, of old, the dane, gaul, goth, hun, uandal, longobard, and thereafter sarazen, turk and tartarian do, with a inundation of people, encroach upon these place of europe which be most civil and where the gospel be best plant, out of a ambitious envy to draw unto themselves the glory that any nation have former gain, or out of a exorbitant avarice to swallow up their substance and to usurp if they. have power, challenge right. any land that be better than their own, as the most part do in greece, hungar^, spain, italy and france. we here go to cause, preach the gospel where it be never hear, and not to subdue but to civillize the savage, for their ruin can give to we neither glory nor benefit, since in place of fame, it will breed infamy and will defraud we of many able body that hereafter, beside the christian duty in save their soul by themselves or by their posteritic, may serve to many good use when, by our mean they shall learn lawful trade and industry. the author whereof, though, prevent the like superstition, may acquire no less reverence from they, nor in like case of old. saturn, bacchu^, ceres and pallas by teach to plant corn, wine and oil do get from the credulous ignorance of they with who they communicate their knowledge. when i do consider with myself what thing be necessary for a plantation, i can but be confident that my own countryman be as fit for such a purpose as any man in the world have dare mind that, upon any probable appearance, do despise danger and body able to endure as much as the height of their mind can undertake natural love to make use of their own ground and not trust to traffic. then scotland, by reason of her populousness, be constrain to disburden herself like the painful bee do every year send forth swarm, whereof great number do. haunt pole with the most extreme kind of drudgery, if not die under the burden, scrape a few crumb together till now of late that they be compel, abandon their ordinary call to betake themselves to the war against the russian, turk or sweden, as the polonian be please to employ. they other, of the better sort, be breed in france in regard of the ancient league, do find the mean to force out some small fortune there till of late, that the french, though not altogether, violate yet not value as heretofore that friendship, which be so religious, observe by their predecessor and with so much danger and loss, deserve by we have alter the estate of the guard and do derogate from our former liberty, which this king now reign, we hope will restore to the first integrity, the necessity of ireland be near supply and that great current which do transport so many of our people be wear dry the low country, have spend many of our man but have enrich few and though raise their flight with such borrow feather, till they be check by a present danger. do too much vilipend these favourable spring by which their weakness be chief refresh. but howsoever, some particular man may prosper under a foreign prince. all that adventure so do either perish by the way, or if they attain unto any fortune, do lose the same by some colour. that strict law urge against a stranger can easy afford, or else naturalise themselves where they be. they must disclaim their king and country, to which, by time, the object of their affection alter be bind, to have a care of that part where there posterity must live. they turn every way stranger, which necessity impose upon they to take this course, and inconvenience follow thereupon. may be prevent by this new plantation and where the scottish merchant before have no trade but by transport, commodity that may have be employ at home and oftentimes money to bring back wine from france and pitch, tar and timber from the easter sea. now, only by export of man, corn and cattle they may, within a little time, be able to furnish back in exchange. these thing before name as likewise a great benefit of fish, fur, timber and metal, draw forth our people to foreign traffic where with they never have be accustom before, and that, to the great increase of the custom, help hereby to enrich that ancient kingdom which of all the rest have only lose by his majesty. greatness be hereby not. only defraud of his own presence and of the comfort that his countenance do continual afford, but likewise of many commodity arise to any country where a court be resident, as the universallpovertie thereof have few rich, unless it be some judge and their clerk, by a common complaint, do too sensible testify. i have never remember any thing with more admiration than america. consider how it have, please the lord, to lock it up so long amid the depth, conceal it from the curiosity of the ancient that it may be discover in a fit time for their posterity. they be so far of old from apprehend it by any reach of reason that the most learned man, as they think by infallible ground in regard of. the degree of the heaven do hold that these zone can not be inhabit, which now be know to include the most pleasant part in the word. this never come to the knowledge of any hebrew, greek or roman who have the most able mind to have find out such a mystery, and howsoever, some will gloze upon that fable of plato, atlantic island. i have never observe any thing among the ancient writer tend to such a purpose, if it be not these line of seneca, the tragedian, whereby he may, if not with a prophetic yet with a poetic rapture, deliver that which he have a mind to make the posterity expect and be in possibility to happen, ocean^^ and orb thule, and it be a. thing not yet comprehend, by the course of natural reason, how these part of the world come first to be people, we must grant, according to the ground of divinity, their people to be descend from noah, and it be not long since that the loadstone be find out the best sailor scorn, as in fome time to be only coaster, have bring the art of navigation to that perfection that they dare resolute adventure to search the most remote part in the ocean, and if any have go thither of purpose to inhabit, they will have carry with they the most useful kind of tame cattle, such as horse, cowes and sheep, whereof never any be find in these part till they be transport thither of late. year, but only such wild beast as of themselves may have wander any where through vast forest and desert. so that i do think there must be some narrow passage upon the east towards- not yet discover, from whence people by time may have come, cross the strait of magelane to inhabit brasile, chile and peru. or rather, i shall think that there be some continent or narrow sea towards the north, about the strait of anien, from whence the first inhabitant in america may have come, because the wild beast that be there be creature most peculiar to the north, such as elke bear and beaver, which be know to be ordinary with the russian and tartarian. and i be the more confirm in this opinion when i remember of the mountain of ice that come float every spring alongst the coast of newfoundland, which, as it be likely, may dissolve from some sea that have be freeze during the winter time, over which people and wild beast may have commodity to pass, but this be a matter that can hardly be determine. by demonstration or reason. therefore, all man form that which they know, not according to the square of their own conceit. we must leave this to the unlimited liberty of the imagination of man. but the thing most wonderful of all, be this though: now it be clear, discover that so few be willing to make use thereof. this do, chief, proceed from want of knowledge. few be willing to adventure upon that wherewith they be not acquaint by their own experience. and yet those who have not make trial themselves if they will trust other may be abundant satisfy by the report of a number who, to plant and traffic, do yearly haunt these part, if the true estate of that which may be do at this. time by the join of some reasonable company together. be right, understand, then so many will not live at home as they do lose their time where they can make no benefit and burdenable to they, to who they be not useful. rather admit, then welcome the one think that their service shall deserve a reward and the other that their maintenance be a unnecessary charge. neither gain and both discontent. then will not so many adventure their life for the defence of stranger, whereby they, scarce, can acquire that which do defray their own charge and howsoever. the hope of honour may flatter a generous spirit. there be no great appearance by this mean to provide for a family or for a posterity. and if we right consider the benefit that may arise by this enterprise abroad, it be not only able to afford a sufficient mean for their maintenance, who can convenient live at home, by disburden the country of they, but it be able to enable they to deserve of their country by bring unto it both honour and profit. where be ever ambition bait with great hope than here, or where ever have virtue so large a field to reap the fruit of glory? since any man who do go thither of good quality, able at first to transport a hundred person with he furnish with thing necessary, shall have as much bound as may serve for a great man, whereupon he may build a town of his. own, give it what form or name he will, and be the first founder of a new estate which a please industry may quick bring to a perfection, may leave a fair inheritance to his posterity who shall claim unto he as the author of their nobility there, rather than to any of his ancestor that have precede he, though never so noble, bear elsewhere. and if the vastness of their hope can be bound within their first limit, as soon as they have strengthen themselves for such a design, either by sea or by land. in regard of the large country next adjacent hereunto, there do always rest a fair possibility of a further increase, either for they or for their successor, and so every one of inferior sort may expect proportionable, according to his adventure, the merchant that be give to trade. where can they have a fair ground for gain then? here and that, beside that which may be expect from so fertile a land by industry or husbandry hereafter in present, commodity such as cod, fish and herring in the sea, salmond in the river, fur, pype-stave, pot-ash and all that may arise from the plenty of good wood, mineral and other thing, though not know to stranger, that only coast alongst the land that may be discover hereafter by they that be to inhabit the bound here. those that be so dispose, without make a monastical retreat free from a multitude of trouble, may enjoy the pleasure of contemplation, be solitary when they will, and yet accompany when they please, and that not with such company as press. by importunity. they must discontent, admit, but only by they, of who they have make choice and who they have carry with they, with who as partner of their travel. by mutual discourse they may remember their former danger and communicate their present joy. here be all sort of object to satisfy the variety of desire. i may speak of the sport that may be have by hunt, hawk, fish and fowl, where all these creature have have so long a time for increase without be destroy or fright, as likewise of the great contentment that must come by daily discovery of new field and river, with the diversity of thing not see before that may happen to be find in they. but i will rather have all at first. to think of the pain they must endure in bring of so notable a work to perfection, since no good thing can be have with ease and all the son of man be bear to labour, but leave these worldly respect, the great encouragement of all for any true christian, be this: that here be a large way for advance: the gospel of jesus christ, to who church may be build in place where his name be never know. and if the saint of heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, what exceed joy will it be to they to see many thousand of savage people who do now live like brute beast, convert unto god. and i wish, leave these dream of honour and profit, which do intoxicate the brain and impoison the mind with transitory pleasure, that this may be our chief end: to begin a new life. serve god more sincere than before to who we may draw more near by retire ourselves further from hence, as i will have no man that have a mind for this course, to abuse his judgement by trust too much to the fertility of the bound where he be to go and too little to his own providence and industry, whereby he may be make to neglect the prepare himmselfe for this voyage after such a manner as be requisite. so i altogether dislike they that possess with the preposterous apprehension of fear, like the lazy man of who solomon speak, that pretend difficulty to prevent travel will say there be a lion in the way will needs. imagine the worst that be in possibility to happen for such a man, too ingenious, subtle in conjecture, danger, do both, by preiudicate opinion, disable himself and discourage. they who not be due inform, be confirm by the confidence of other undertaker that profess to have knowledge. there be no man at home where he be bear, so free from the accident of fortune, who may not, quick by a public or by a private calamity, be bring in some measure to suffer, and much rather shall we arm ourselves. with a high resolution against all inconvenience that can occur in such a foreign enterprise, be circumspect, provident, but not confound with a deject fear, where the greatness of so well ground hope for we and for our posterity shall make we hope for pleasure to digest any present pain with a courage great than can be brave by any apprehend trouble. and because the lord in such eminent exploit do common glorify himself by a few number, i wish that all such, who heart do misgive they portend any disaster, like they of gideon troop that bow down like beast to the water, shall retire in time, ere the contagiousness of their infirmity come to infect they that be more sound dispose there be no just cause. for a reasonable man to fear any worldly thing, but only disgrace and want of necessary maintenance. a man can hardly fall in the first here, since a honourable intention, what ever the success prove, must acquire praise, and the other, by ordinary mean, be easy to be avoid. but i be so far from paint out a, suppose, facility to snare weak mind that i will have none with who it be not fit to communicate more than they be capable of to embark in this business, but only such as do resolve against the worst. for i profess, as cato do when he be to enter the desert of arabia animus at and last. shall not these memorable exploit of late perform in the east and west indies by the fleming inflame. we, with a generous ardour to equal, or rather to exceed, they who penurity of people, even at home, must be supply by the superfluity of we they have, not only in the east indies, by several habitation, appropriate large territory to themselves, but likewise, to the great prejudice of their neighbour, improove their own profit have engross the general commerce by consequence depend thereupon. and if they seat themselves, as it be likely they will do in brasill provident, prosecute the good beginning that they have get by spare people. of their own or by interest stranger who they dare trust for sound of a sufficient colony that be strong enough to defend and command the inhabitant, secure, exact a due obedience, may enable they, for great matter, then, confine with the very spring, whence the stream flow that entertain the power of their enemy, exhaust their substance, both by sea and land. they have a marvelous, fair occasion. offer to advance, then self by depress of the oppose party who, prosperous and desire success, while the add to one do derogate from another, if not emulate in time, will be envy hereafter. i know that many of my nation, if they have be as willing as they be able, have be more fit than i be for this purpose. but yet it have oftentimes please god to do the great matter by the mean instrument, and as no one man can accomplish such a work by his own private fortune, so if it shall please his majesty, as he have ever be, dispose for the further of all good work, more for the benefit of his subject, then for his own particular, to give his help accustom for matter of less moment hereunto make it appear to be a work of his own that other of his subject may be induce to concur in such a common cause. no man can have have my charge that with more affection and sincerity shall have use his endeavour for discharge of the same, but i must trust to be supply by some public help, such as have be have in other part, for the like cause. whereunto, as i doubt not, but many will be willing, out of the nobleness of their disposition for the advance of so worthy a work. so i hope will some other the rather out of their private respect to i who shall continue, as i have heretofore do both to do and write in so far as so mean a ability, as i may reach what i conceive may prove for the credit or benefit of my nation, to who i wish. all happiness.