to the honourable sir walter ralegh, knight captain of her majesty guard, lord warden of the stannery, lieutenant of cornwall and governor of the isle of jersey. honourable sir, be earnest request by a dear friend to put down in writing some true relation of our late perform voyage to the north part of virginia. at length, i resolve to satisfy his request, who also embolden i to direct the same to your honourable consideration, to who, indeed, of duty it pertain. may it please your lordship, therefore, to understand that upon the six and twenty of march 1602, be friday, we go from falmouth, be in all two and thirty person in a small bark of dartmouth, call the concord, hold a course for the north part. of march 1602, be friday, we go from falmouth, be in all, two and thirty person in a small bark of dartmouth, call the concord, hold a course for the north part of virginia and although by chance, the wind favour we not at first, as we wish, but enforce we so far to the southward they fall with s marry, one of the acores, as we fall with s marry, one of the island of the acores, which be not much out of our way, but hold our course direct from thence. we make our journey short than hitherto accustom, by the better part of a thousand league, yet be we long in our passage than we expect, which happen for that our bark be weak. we. journey short than hitherto accustom by the better part of a thousand league. yet be we long in our passage than we expect, which happen for that. our bark be weak, we be loath to press she with much sail. also, our sailor be few, and they none of the best we bear, except in fair weather. but low sail beside our go upon a unknown coast, make we not overbolde to stand in with the shore, but in open weather, which cause we to be certain day in sound. before we discover the coast, the weather be by chance somewhat foggy. but on friday, the fourteen of may, they discover land. the 14. of may, early in the morning, we make the land be full of fair. weather be by chance somewhat foggy. but on friday, the fourteen of may they discover land, the 14. of may. early in the morning we make the land be full of fair tree, the land somewhat low, certain hummock or hill lie into the land, the shore full of white sand but very stony or rocky, and stand fair alongst by the shore about twelve of the clock. the same day eight indian come aboard. of they we come to a anchor where eight indian in a baskeshallop with mast and sail, a iron grapple and a kettle of copper come bold aboard we. one of they, apparel with a waistcoat and breech of black serdge make after our sea-fashion hose and shoe on his foot. all the a kettle of copper, come bold aboard, we, one of they apparel with a waistcoat and breech of black serdge, make after our sea-fashion hose and shoe on his foot. all the rest, save one that have a pair of breech of blue cloth. be naked. the description of they, these people, be of tall stature, broad and grim visage, of a black, swart complexion, their kickshaw paint white. their weapon be bow and arrow. it seem. by some word and sign they make that some bask or of saint john de luz have fish or trade in this place. be in the latitude of 43. degree, but ride here in no very good harbour and withal doubt the weather about three of the clock the same day. trade in this place be in the latitude of 43. degree but ride here in no very good harbour and withal doubt the weather. about three of the clock the same day in the afternoon we weigh and stand southerly off into sea. the rest of that day and the night follow with a fresh gale of wind. in the morning we find ourselves embay with a mighty headland, but come to a anchor about nine of the clock the same day. within a league of the shore we hoist out the one half of our shallop and captain bartholomew gosnold their first land. myself and three other go ashore, be a white, sandy and very bold shore and march all that afternoon with our musket on our shallop and captain bartholomew gosnold their first land. myself and three other go ashore, be a white, sandy and very bold shore and march all that afternoon with our musket on our neck on the high hill which we see, the weather very hot at length. we perceive this headland to be parcel of the main and sundry island lie almost round about it. so return towards evening to our shallop for by that time the other part be bring ashore and set together. we espy a indian, another indian, a young man of proper stature and of a please countenance, and after some familiarity with he, we leave he at the sea side and return to our ship where, in five or six hour absence we have and of a please countenance, and after some familiarity with he, we leave he at the sea side and return to our ship where in five or six hour absence we have pester our ship so with cod fish, anexcellent codfish that we throw number of, they overboard again, and sure i be persuade that in the month of march, april and may there be upon this coast better fish, and in as great plenty as in newfoundland, for the skull of mackerel, herring, cod and other fish that we daily see as we go and come from the shore be wonderful and beside the place where we take these cod and may, in a few day have lade our ship be, but in seven fathom water and come from the shore be wonderful. and beside the place where we take these cod and may, in a few day, have lade our ship be, but in seven fathom water and within less than a league of the shore where in newfoundland they fish in forty or fifty fathom water. and far off from this place, we sail round about this headland, a great headland, almost all the point of the compass. the shore very bold, but as no coast be free from danger, so i be persuade this be as free as any. the land somewhat low, full of goodly wood, but in some place plain at length. we be come among many fair island, many fair island, which we have partly discern at our first. land somewhat low, full of goodly wood, but in some place plain at length. we be come among many fair island, many fair island which we have partly discern at our first land. all lie within a league or two one of another and the outermost not above six or seven league from the main. the first island call martha vineyard, but come to a anchor under one of they, which be about three or four league from the main, captain gosnold, myself and some other go ashore and go round about it. we find it to be four english mile in compass, without house or inhabitant, save a little old house, make of bough, cover with bark, a old piece of a wear of the indian to to be four english mile in compass, without house or inhabitant, save a little old house make of bough, cover with bark, a old piece of a wear of the indian to catch fish and one or two place where they have make fire. the chief tree of this island be beech, beech and cedar. cedar, the outward part all overgrow with low bushy tree three or four foot in height which bear some kind of fruit as appear by their blossom: strawberry, red and white, as sweet and much big than we in england, rasbery, gooseberry, hurtlebery, and such a incredible store of vines, vines in abundance aswell in the woody part of the island where they run upon every tree, as on the outward part that. gooseberry, hurtlebery and such a incredible store of vines, vines in abundance aswell in the woody part of the island where they run upon every tree, as on the outward part that we can not go for tread upon. they also many spring spring of excellent sweet water and a great stand lake, a lake of fresh water near the sea side, a english mile in compass, which be maintain with the spring run, exceed pleasant, through the woody ground which be very rocky. here be also in this island, great store of dear, dear which we see, and other beast, other beast as appear by their track, as also diverse fowl as crane, crane, hernshawe, hernshawe, bitter, bitter goose, goose, mallards, mallards, teal, teal and other fowl. we see, and other beast, other beast as appear by their track, as also diverse fowl as crane, crane, hernshawe, hernshawe, bitter, bitter goose, goose, mallards, mallards, teal, teal and other fowl in great plenty. also great store of pease which grow in certain plot, all the island over. on the north side of this island we find many huge bone and rib of whale. this island, as also all the rest of these island, be full of all sort of stone fit for building the sea side, all cover with stone. many of they glister and shine like mineral stone and very rocky. also. the rest of these island be replenish with these commodity and upon some of they inhabitant, as upon as island to the northward. and shine like mineral stone and very rocky. also. the rest of these island be replenish with these commodity and upon some of they inhabitant as upon as island to the northward and within two league of this, yet we find no town, nor many of their house, although we see many indian which be tall, big bone man, all naked save they cover their privy part with a black tewed skin, much like a black smith apron tie about their middle and between their leg behind. they give we of their fish, ready boil, which they carry in a basket, make of twig, not unlike our osier, whereof we do eat and judge they to be fresh water fish. they give we also of their tobacco, tobacco. they carry in a basket make of twig, not unlike our osier, whereof we do eat and judge they to be fresh water fish. they give we also of their tobacco, tobacco which they drink green but dry into powder, very strong and pleasant and much better than any i have taste in england. the neck of their pipe be make of clay, hard, dry, whereof in that island be great store, both red and white. the other part be a piece of hollow copper, very fine, close and sement together. we give unto they certain trifle as knife point and such like, which they much esteem. from hence we go to another island, elizabeth island, to the northwest of this and within a league or two of trifle as knife point and such like, which they much esteem. from hence we go to another island, elizabeth island, to the northwest of this and within a league or two of the main, which we find to be great than before, we imagine be 16.. english mile at the least, in compass for it contain many piece or neck of land which differ nothing from several island, save that certain bank of small breadth. do like bridge, join they to this island. on the outside of this island, be many plain place of grass, abundance of strawberry and other berry. before mention in mid may, we do sow in this island for a trial, in sundry place, wheat barley, oat and pease, wheat barley and oat sow. of strawberry and other berry before mention. in mid may we do sow in this island for a trial, in sundry place, wheat, barley, oat and pease. wheat, barley and oat sow come up nine inch in fourteen day, which in fourteen day be spring up nine inch and more. the soil be fat and lusty, the upper crust of gray colour but a foot or less in depth, of the colour of our hempe-land in england, and be thus apt for these and the like grain. the sow or set after the ground be cleanse, be no great labour than if you shall set or sow in one of our best prepare garden in england. this island be full of high timber oak oakes, their leaf thrice. be no great labour than if you shall set or sow in one of our best prepare garden in england. this island be full of high timber, oak, oakes, their leaf thrice so broad as we, cedar, cedar, straight and tall beech, beech, elm, elm, holly, holly, walnut tree, walnut tree in abundance. the fruit, as big as we, as appear by those we find under the tree which have lie all the year ungathered haslenut tree, cherry tree, cherry tree, the leaf, bark and bigness not differ from we in england, but the stalk bear the blossom or fruit at the end thereof, like a cluster of grape, forty or fifty in a bunch. sassafras tree, sassafras tree, great plenty all the island over a tree of. the blossom or fruit at the end thereof, like a cluster of grape, forty or fifty in a bunch. sassafras tree. sassafras tree, great plenty all the island over a tree of high price and profit. also diverse other fruit tree, diverse other tree, some of they with strange bark of a orange colour in feel, soft and smooth like velvet in the thick part of these wood you may see a furlong or more round about on the northwest side of this island, near to the sea side, be a stand lake of fresh water, almost three english mile, a lake three mile about in compass, in the midst whereof stand a plot of woody ground, a acre in quantity or not, above this lake be full. almost three english mile, a lake, three mile about in compass, in the midst whereof stand a plot of woody ground, a acre in quantity or not. above this lake be full of small tortoise. small tortoise and exceed, frequent, with all sort of fowl before rehearse, which breed, some low on the bank and other on low tree about this lake, in great abundance, who, young one of all sort, we take and eat at our pleasure. but all these fowl be much big than we in england, abundance of fowl much big than we in england. also, in every island and almost in every part of every island, be great store of ground nut, ground nut, forty together on a string, some of they as big. in england also, in every island and almost in every part of every island, be great store of ground nut, ground nut, forty together on a string, some of they as big as hen egg. they grow not two inch under ground, the which nut we find to be as good as potato. also diverse sort of shellfish, shell fish as scalops, muscle cockle, lobster, crab, oyster and wilks exeede. good and very great. but not to cloy you with particular rehearsal of such thing as god and nature have bestow on these place, in comparison, whereof the most fertile part of all, england, be of itself but barren. we go in our light-horsman from this island to the main, right against this island, some two league off. whereof the most fertile part of all, england, be of itself but barren. we go in our light-horsman from this island to the main, right against this island, some two league off, where come ashore, we stand a while, like man, ravish at the beauty, the exceed beauty of the main land and delicacy of this sweet soil. for beside diverse, clear lake, great lake of fresh water, whereof we see no end, modowe, large meadow, very large and full of green grass. even the most woody place i speak only of, such as i see do grow so distinct and apart one tree from another, upon green grassy ground somewhat high than the plain, as if nature will show herself above her power, artificial, hard by we. do grow so distinct and apart, one tree from another, upon green grassy ground somewhat high than the plain, as if nature will show herself above her power, artificial hard by. we espy seven indian, seven indian, and come up to they. at first they express some fear, but be embolden by our courteous usage and some trifle which we give they. they follow, we, to a neck of land which we imagine have be sever from the main, but find it otherwise. we perceive a broad harbour or river, a broad river mouth which run up into the main and because the day be far spend, we be force to return to the island from whence we come. leave the discovery of this harbour, a good harbour. up into the main and because the day be far spend, we be force to return to the island from whence we come, leave the discovery of this harbour, a good harbour for a time of better leisure. of the goodness of which harbour, as also of many other thereabouts, there be small doubt. consider that all the island, as also the main where we be, be all rocky ground and break land. now, the next day, we determine to fortify ourselves in a little plot of ground in the midst of the lake. above mention the english house, where we build a house and cover it with sedge which grow about this lake in great abundance, in building whereof we spend three week and more but the the english house where we build a house and cover it with sedge which grow about this lake in great abundance in building, whereof we spend three week and more. but the second day after our come from the main, we espy 11 canoe or boat with fifty indian in. they eleven canoe with fifty indian in. they come towards we from this part of the main where we two day before land and be loath they shall discover our fortification. we go out on the sea side to meet they and come somewhat near they. they all sit down upon the stone, call aloud to we, as we right guess to do the like a little distance from they. have sit a while in this order, captain. they all sit down upon the stone, call aloud to we, as we right guess, to do the like a little distance from they. have sit a while in this order, captain gosnold, will i to go unto they to see what countenance they will make. but as soon as i come up unto they, one of they to who i have give a knife two day before in the main know i, who i also very well remember and smile upon, i speak somewhat unto their lord or captain, their captain, which sit in the midst of they who present, rise up and take a large beaver skin from one that stand about he and give it unto i, which i requite for that time the best. midst of they who present, rise up and take a large beaver skin from one that stand about he and give it unto i, which i requite for that time the best i can- but i point towards captain gosnold- make sign unto he that he be our captain and desirous to be his friend and enter league with he, which as i perceive he understand- and make sign of joy, whereupon captain gosnold with the rest of his company, be twenty in all, come up unto they and after many sign of gratulation, captain gosnold present their lord with certain trifle which they wonder at. and high esteem, we become very great friend and send for meat aboard our shallop and give they such meat as we present their lord with certain trifle which they wonder at and high esteem, we become very great friend and send for meat aboard our shallop and give they such meat as we have then ready dress, whereof they mislike nothing but our mustard, whereat they make many a sour face while we be thus merry, one of they have convey a target of we into one of their canoe, which we suffer only to try whether they be in subjection to this lord, to who we make sign by show he another of the same likeness and point to the canow what one of his company have do, who sudden express some fear and speak angry to one about he, as we perceive by his countenance, cause it. and point to the canow what one of his company have do, who sudden express some fear and speak angry to one about. he, as we perceive by his countenance, cause it present to be bring back again. so the rest of the day we spend in trade with they for fur, several sort of fur which be beaver, luzerne, marterns, otter, wild-cat skin, very large and deep fur, black, fox, coney skin of the colour of our hare but somewhat less dear skin, very large seal skin and other beast skin to we unknown. they have also great store of copper, red copper in abundance, some very red and some of a pale colour. none of they but have chain earring or collar of this mettle. they. have also great store of copper, red copper in abundance, some very red and some of a pale colour. none of they but have chain earring or collar of this mettle. they head some of their arrow herewith, much like our broad arrow head. very workmanly make their chain chain be many hollow piece, sement together each piece of the bigness of one of our reed, a finger in length, ten or twelve of they together on a string which they wear about their neck. their collar collar they wear about their body like bandeliere, a handful broad, all hollow piece like the other, but somewhat short, four hundred piece in a collar, very fine and even set together. beside these they have large drink cup, drink cup. handful, broad, all hollow piece like the other, but somewhat short, four hundred piece in a collar, very fine and even set together. beside these they have large drink cup. drink cup of copper, make like skull, and other thin plate of copper make much like our boar-spear blade, all which they so little esteem as they offer their fair collar or chain for a knife or such like trifle, but we seem little to regard it. yet i be desirous to understand where they have such store of this mettle and make sign to one of they, with who i be very familiar, who take a piece of copper- mine of copper- in his hand, make a hole with his finger in the ground and withal point. of they, with who i be very familiar, who take a piece of copper- mine of copper in his hand, make a hole with his finger in the ground and withal point to the main. from whence they come they strike fire in this manner. every one carry about, he in a purse of tewd leather, a mineral stone- mineral stone which i take to be their copper- and with a flat emerie stone, emerie stone wherewith glazier cut glass and cutler glaze blade tie fast to the end of a little stick. gentle. he strike upon the mineral stone and within a stroke or two a spark fall upon a piece of touchwood, much like our sponge in england, and with the least spark he make a upon the mineral stone and within a stroke or two a spark fall upon a piece of touchwood, much like our sponge in england, and with the least spark he make a fire. present we have also of their flax, flax wherewith they make many string and cord, but it be not so bright of colour as we in england, i be persuade they have great store grow upon the main, as also mine and many other rich commodity which we want both time and mean can not possible discover. thus they continue with we three day, every night retire themselves to the furthermost part of our island, two or three mile from our fort, but the four day they return to the main point, five or six. day, every night, retire themselves to the furthermost part of our island, two or three mile from our fort. but the four day they return to the main point, five or six time to the sun and once to the main, which we understand that within five or six day they will come from the main to we again, but be in their canoe a little from the shore. they make huge cry and shout of joy unto we and we with our trumpet and cornet and cast up our cap into the air. make they the best farewell we can. indian apt for service. yet six or seven of they remain with we behind bear we company every day into the wood and help we to cut. the best farewell we can. indian, apt for service. yet six or seven of they remain with we behind, bear we company every day into the wood and help we to cut and carry our sassafras, sassafras, and some of they lay aboard our ship. these people, as they be, exceed courteous, a goodly people and of good condition, gentle of disposition and well condition, excel all other that we have see. so for shape of body and lovely favour, i think they excel all the people of america of stature much high than we, of complexion or colour much like a dark olive, their kickshaw and hair black, which they wear long, tie up behind in knot whereon they prick feather of fowl in fashion of a. complexion or colour, much like a dark olive. their kickshaw and hair black, which they wear long, tie up behind in knot whereon they prick feather of fowl in fashion of a crownet. some of they be black, thin beard. they make beard of the hair of beast and one of they offer a beard of their make to one of our sailor for his, that grow on his face which, because it be of a red colour, they judge to be none of his own. they be quick eye and steadfast in their look, fearless of other harm as intend none themselves. some of the mean sort give to filch which the very name of savage not weigh. their ignorance in good or evil may easy excuse. of other harm as intend none themselves. some of the mean sort give to filch which the very name of savage not weigh their ignorance in good or evil may easy excuse. their garment be of dear skin and some of they wear fur round and close about their neck their apparel. they pronounce our language with great facility for one of they. one day sit by i upon occasion i speak, smile to he these word. how now, sirrah, be you so saucy with my tobacco? which word, without any further repetition, he sudden speak, so plain and distinct, as if he have be a long scholar in the language. many other such trial we have, which be here needless to repeat their woman, their woman, such so plain and distinct as if he have be a long scholar in the language. many other such trial we have, which be here needless to repeat their woman, their woman such as we see, which be but three in all, be but low of stature, their kickshaw, hair, apparel and manner of wear like to the man, fat and very well favour and much delight in our company. the man be very dutiful towards they and true, the wholesomeness and temperature of this climate do not only argue this people to be answerable to this description, but also of a perfect constitution of body, active, strong, healthful and very witty as the sundry toy of they cunning wrought may easy witness for the agree of this climate. description, but also of a perfect constitution of body, active, strong, healthful and very witty, as the sundry toy of they cunning wrought. may easy witness for the agree of this climate, the goodness or the climate with we- i speak of myself and so i may just do for the rest of our company- that we find our health and strength all the while we remain there. so to renew and increase, as notwithstanding our diet and lodging be none of the best, yet not one of our company, god be thank. feel the least grudge or inclination to any disease or sickness, but be much fat and in better health than when we go out of england but after our bark have take in so much. grudge or inclination to any disease or sickness, but be much fat and in better health than when we go out of england. but after our bark have take in so much sassafras, cedar, fur, skin and other commodity as be think convenient. some of our company that have promise captain gosnold to stay, have nothing but a save voyage in their mind. make our company of inhabitant, which be small enough before, much small so as captain gosnold see his whole strength to consist, but of twelve man, and they but mean provide, determine to return their return for england. leave this island, which he call elizabeth island, which as many true sorrowful eye as be before desirous to see it. so the 18. of june be. return, their return for england, leave this island, which he call elizabeth island, which as many true sorrowful eye as be before desirous to see it. so the 18. of june be friday. we weigh and with indifferent fair wind and weather, come to anchor. the 23 of july be also friday in all bear, five week. before exmouth your lordship to command john brereton, a brief note of such commodity as we see in the country, notwithstanding our small time of stay: tree, sassafras tree, the root whereof at 3. s the pound be 336. l the ton. cedar, tall and straight in great abundance, cypress tree, oakes, walnut tree, great store, elmes, beech, holly, haslenut tree, cherry tree, cotten tree, other fruit tree to we unknown. l the ton, cedar, tall and straight in great abundance, cypress tree, oakes, walnut tree, great store, elmes, beech, holly, haslenut tree, cherry tree, cotten tree, other fruit tree to we unknown. the finder of our sassafras in these part be one master robert, meriton, fowl, eagle, hernshawe, crane, bitter mallards, teal goose, pengwin, ospreis and hawk, crow, raven, mew, dove, sea-py, blackbird with carnation, wing, beast, dear in great store, very great and large bear, luzerne, black fox, beaver, otter, wild-cat, very large and great dog, like fox, black and sharp nosed, coney, fruit plant and herb tobacco. excellent, sweet and strong vine, in more plenty than in france, ground-nut, good meat and also medicinable. strawberry, raspeberry, gooseberry, hurtleberry, pease grow, natural flax, iris, florentina, whereof apothecary. and herb. tobacco, excellent sweet and strong vine in more plenty than in france, ground-nut, good meat and also medicinable. strawberry, raspeberry, gooseberry, hurtleberry, pease grow, natural flax, iris, florentina, whereof apothecary make sweet ball sorrell and many other, herb wherewith they make salad. fish, whales, tortoise, both on land and sea, seal, cod, mackerel, breames, herring, thornbacke, hakes, rockefish, doggefish, lobster, crab, muscle wilks, cockle, scallop, oyster, snake, four foot in length and six inch about, which the indian eat for dainty meat, the skin whereof they use for girdle colour to die with red, white and black metal and stone. copper in great abundance, emerie stone for glazier and cutler. alabaster, very white stone, glister and shine like mineral stone, stone of a blue, mettalline colour. white and black metal and stone: copper in great abundance, emerie stone for glazier and cutler, alabaster, very white stone glister and shine like mineral stone, stone of a blue mettalline colour which we take to be steel, oar stone of all sort for building, clay, red and white which may prove good. a brief note of the send another bark this present year, 1602.. by the honourable knight, sir walte ralegh, for the search out of his colony in virginia. samuel mace of weimouth, a very sufficient mariner, a honest, sober man, who have be at virginia twice before, be employ thither by sir walter ralegh to find those people which be leave there in the year 1587.. to who succour? he have send five, several time. at virginia twice before, be employ thither by sir walter ralegh to find those people which be leave there in the year 1587.. to who succour? he have send five several time at his own charge. the party by he set forth perform nothing. some of they follow their own profit elsewhere. other return with frivolous allegation. at this last time, to avoid all excuse, he buy a bark and hire all the company for wage by the month who depart from weimouth in march last 1062, fall forty league to the southwestward of hatarask in thirty four degree or thereabouts and have there spend a month. when they come along the coast to seek the people, they do it not pretend that the extremity of weather and thirty four degree or thereabouts and have there spend a month. when they come along the coast to seek the people, they do it not pretend that the extremity of weather and loss of some principal ground-tackle force and fear they from search the port of hatarask to which they be send. from that place, where they abide, they bring sassafras or the china root, benjamin cassia and a rind of a tree more strong than any spice as yet know, with diverse other commodity which hereafter, in a large discourse, may come to light a treatise, contain important inducement for the plant in these part and find a passage that way to the south sea and china. the voyage which we intend be to plant christian people. treatise contain important inducement for the plant in these part and find a passage that way to the south sea and china. the voyage which we intend be to plant christian people and religion upon the northwest country of america, in place temperate, temperate climate and well agree with our constitution, which, though the same do, lie between 40. and 44. degree of latitude, under the parallel of italy and france. yet be not they so hot by reason that the sun heat be qualify in his course over the ocean, before he arrive upon the coast of america, attract much vapour from the sea, which mitigation of his heat we take for a benefit to we that intend to inhabit there, because under the climate of 40, coast of america attract much vapour from the sea, which mitigation of his heat we take for a benefit to we that intend to inhabit there, because under the climate of 40 degree the same will be too vehement else for our body to endure. these land be never yet actual possess by any christian prince or people. her majesty title yet often intend to be by the french nation which long sithence have inhabit there. if domestical war have not withhold, they notwithstanding the same be the rightful inheritance of her majesty, be first discover by our nation in the time of king henry the seven, under the conduct of john cabot and his son. by which title of first discovery, the king of portugal and spain. by our nation in the time of king henry the seven, under the conduct of john cabot and his son, by which title of first discovery, the king of portugal and spain do hold and enjoy their ample and rich kingdom in their indies, east and west, and also late plant in part by the colony send thither by the honourable knight sir walter ralegh. the course unto these country a commodious and safe course. be through the ocean altogether free from all restraint by foreign prince to be make whereunto other our accustom trade. be subject apt for most wind that can blow, to be perform common in 30 or 35 day. the coast fair, with safe road and harbour for ship rivers. many river these land. subject: apt for most wind that can blow to be perform common in 30 or 35 day. the coast fair, with safe road and harbour for ship rivers, many river. these land be fair and pleasant, fertile land, resemble france, intermeddle with mountain, valley, meadow woodland and champion the soil be exceed strong by reason. it be never manure and will be therefore most fit to bear. at first. rape-seeds, hemp, flax and whatsoever else require such strong soil. rape-oile, rape oil and all sort of oil will be very commodious for england, which spend oil abundant about clothe and leather-dressing in like sort. hemp and flax be profitable whether the same be send into england or wrought there by our people. woad also will grow there aswell. abundant about clothe and leather-dressing in like sort. hemp and flax be profitable, whether the same be send into england or wrought there by our people. woad also will grow there aswell, or better then in tercera, the savage wear fair colour in some of their attire whereby we hope to find rich die and colour for paint. the tree be for the most part cedar, pine, spruce, fir and oak. to the northward of these tree will be draw tar and pitch, rosen, turpentine and soape-ash. they will make mast for the great ship of the world, excellent timber of cedar and board for curious build. the cliff upon the coast and mountain every where show great likelihood of mineral mineral, a very rich mine of copper. the world. excellent timber of cedar and board for curious build, the cliff upon the coast and mountain, every where, show great likelihood of mineral mineral, a very rich mine of copper, copper be find, whereof i have see proof and the place describe, not far from which there be great hope also of a silver. i there be fair quarry of stone of beautiful colour for building the ground. bring forth, without industry, pease, rose, grape, grape, hemp, beside other plant, fruit, herb and flower, who pleasant view and delectable smell do demonstrate sufficient the fertility and sweetness of that soil and air. beast, beast of many kind, some of the bigness of a ox who hide, make good buff dear, both red and of other sort. fertility and sweetness of that soil and air. beast, beast of many kind, some of the bigness of a ox who hide, make good buff dear, both red and of other sort in abundance: lucern, marterns, sable, beaver, bear, otter, wolf, fox and squirrel, which to the northward be black and account very rich, fur fowl, fowl, both of the water and land, infinite store and variety, hawk, both short and long, wing, partridge in abundance, which be very great and easy. take bird, great and small, some like unto our blackbird, other like canary-bird and many as well. bird as other creature strange and differ from we of europe, fish, namely cod, which, as we incline more unto the south, be more large and vendible for england. many as well bird as other creature, strange and differ from we of europe, fish, namely cod, which, as we incline more unto the south, be more large and vendible for england and france than the newland fish, whale and seal in great abundance, oil of they be rich commodity for england, whereof we now make soap beside many other use item tunney, anchovy, bonit, salmon, lobster, oyster, have pearl and infinite other sort of fish which be more plentiful upon those northwest coast of america than in any part of the know world. salt be report to be find there, which else may be make there to serve sufficient for all fish so as the commodity, commodity in general, there to be raise both of the sea. report to be find there, which else may be make there to serve sufficient for all fish, so as the commodity, commodity in general there to be raise, both of the sea and land. after that we have plant, our people skilful and industrious, will be fish, whale and seal oil, soap, ash and soap, tar and pitch, rosen and turpentine, mast, timber and board of cedar, firre and pine, hemp, flax, cable and rope, saile-clothe, grape and raisin and wine, corn, rape-seeds and oil, hide, skin, fur, die and colour for paint, pearl, metal and other mineral. these commodity before rehearse employment of our people and repair decay port, albeit for the most part they be gross, yet be the same profitable for the state of england. other mineral. these commodity, before rehearse employment of our people and repair decay port, albeit for the most part they be gross, yet be the same profitable for the state of england, special aswell in regard of the use of such commodity as for the employment also of our people and ship the want whereof do decay our town and port of england and cause the realm to swarm full with poor and idle people. these commodity, in like sort, the trade to newfoundland shall be remove to we be of great use and estimation in all the south and western country of europe, namely italy, france and spain, for the which all nation that have be accustom to repair, unto the newfoundland for the commodity of fish. all the south and western country of europe, namely italy, france and spain, for the which all nation that have be accustom to repair unto the newfoundland for the commodity of fish and oil alone, will henceforward forsake the newfoundland and trade with we when, once we have plant people in those part, by who industry shall be provide for all comer, both fish and oil and many commodity beside of good importance and value. then will the spaniard and portugal bring unto we, in exchange of such commodite, before mention spanish commodity, wine, sweet oil, fruit, spice, sugar, silk, gold and silver, or whatsoever that europe yield to supply our necessity and to increase our delight. for which spanish commodity and other sort, likewise english commodity, our? fruit, spice, sugar, silk, gold and silver or whatsoever that europe yield to supply our necessity and to increase our delight, for which spanish commodity and other sort likewise english commodity, our merchant of england will bring unto we again cloth, cattle for our store and breed and every thing else that we shall need or that england shall haply exchange for such commodity. by this intercourse vent of our cloth, our habitation will be make a staple of all vendible commodity of the world and a mean to vent a very great quantity of our english cloth into all the cold region of america extend very far. this intercourse also will be soon draw together by this reason intercourse will soon be have with other nation that english cloth into all the cold region of america extend very far. this intercourse also will be soon draw together by this reason intercourse will soon be have with other nation that near adjoin, upon the same coast of newfoundland, be the great fish of the world, whether do yearly repair about 400 sail of ship for no other commodity than fish and whale-oile. then, forasmuch as merchant be diligent, inquisitor after gain, they will soon remove their trade from newfoundland unto we near at hand for so great increase of gain as they shall make by trade with we in commodity in the newland trade, for whereas the voyage unto the newfoundland be into a more cold and intemperate place not to be trade nor frequent at. by trade with we, in commodity in the newland, trade for, whereas the voyage unto the newfoundland be into a more cold and intemperate place, not to be trade nor frequent at all time, nor fortify for security of the ship and good oft spoil by pirate or man of war. the charge great for salt, double man and double victual their ship, in regard that the labour be great and the time long before their lade can be make ready, they carry outward no commodity for freight and after six month voyage their return be make but of fish and oil, contrariwise commodity by have trade with we, by trade with we at our intend place. the course shall be in a manner as short into a make, but of fish and oil, contrariwise commodity, by have trade with we, by trade with we, at our intend place, the course shall be in a manner as short, into a more temperate and healthful climate at all time of the year, to be trade, harbour fortify, to secure ship and good charge, abridge of salt victual and man ship double, because lade shall be provide unto their hand at a more easy rate than themselves can make it. they shall carry freight also outward to make exchange with we and so get profit both way, and then every four month they may make a voyage and return of both fish and oil and many other commodity of good worth. these reason, advise, weigh, note, shall make. way and then every four month they may make a voyage and return of both fish and oil and many other commodity of good worth. these reason, advise, weigh, note, shall make our enterprise appear easy and the most profitable of the world for our nation to undertake. the reason we chief rely upon be these, namely: 1- those land which we intend to inhabit shall minister unto our people the subject and matter of many notable commodity. 2- england shall afford we people, both man, woman and child, above 10000, which may very happy be spare from hence to work those commodity there. 3- newfoundland shall minister ship to carry away all our commodity and to bring other unto we again for our supply. now, two of spare from hence to work those commodity there. 3 newfoundland, shall minister ship to carry away all our commodity and to bring other unto we again for our supply. now two of these reason be already effect unto our hand. a easy enterprise and great reward, that be to say the place where we shall find rich commodity and ship to vent they. it remain only for our part to carry and transport people with their provision from england, where the misery and necessity of many cry out for such help and relief. this consider the english nation most fit for discovery. no nation of christendom be so fit for this action as england, by reason of our superfluous people, as i may term they, and of our english nation most fit for discovery, no nation of christendom be so fit for this action as england, by reason of our superfluous people, as i may term they, and of our long domestical peace. and after that we be once 200 man strong, victual and fortify, we can not be remove by as many thousand. for beside that, we have see both in france and the low-countries where 200 man, well fortify and victual, have keep out the force both of the french and spanish king, even within their own kingdom. it shall be also a matter of great difficulty to transport a army over the ocean with victual and munition and afterward to abide long siege abroad against we fortify within, where the very element and a matter of great difficulty to transport a army over the ocean with victual and munition and afterward to abide long siege abroad against we fortify within, where the very element and famine shall fight for we, though. we shall lie still and defend only the savage. neither in this attempt shall hurt we. they be simple, the savage, unable to defend or offend, naked and unarmed, destitute of edge-tool or weapon whereby they be unable either to defend themselves or to offend we. neither be it our intent to provoke, but to cherish and win they unto christianity by fair mean. yet not to trust they too far, but to provide against all accident. then, to conclude, as we of all other nation be most fit for, they unto christianity by fair mean, yet not to trust they too far, but to provide against all accident. then, to conclude, as we of all other nation be most fit for a discovery and plant in remote place, even so, under the heaven there be no place to be find, so convenient for such a purpose, by reason of the temperature commodity, apt site for trade and repair, thither already, of so many ship which in any other frequent country can not be procure in a man age, nor with expense of half a million. so, as the only difficulty now, this action, but set on foot, will go forward of itself, be in our first preparation to transport some few people at the beginning, the charge. so as the only difficulty now, this action, but set on foot, will go forward of itself, be in our first preparation to transport some few people at the beginning, the charge whereof shall be defray by our first return of fish and some commodity of sassafras hides, skin and fur, which we shall also have by trade with the savage, the proof of which commodity shall encourage our merchant to venture large. in the next, the supply shall, easy and continual, be send by ship which yearly go from hence unto the newfoundland, and we, and the intercourse and exchange we shall have with all nation repair, thither shall store we, with abundance of all thing for our necessity and delight. oversight in choice of a new. and the intercourse and exchange we shall have with all nation. repair, thither shall store we, with abundance of all thing for our necessity and delight, oversight in choice of a new habitation. which reason, if they have be foresee of, they that plant in the south part of virginia, which be a place destitute of good harbour and far from all trade, no doubt. but if they have settle near unto this frequent trade in the newfoundland, they have by this time be a flourish state and plentiful in all thing. who also may then have make way into the bowel of that large continent where assure we shall discover very goodly, and rich kingdom and city. it may also seem a matter of great consequence, for have make way into the bowel of that large continent where assure we shall discover very goodly and rich kingdom and city. it may also seem a matter of great consequence for the good and security of england that out of these northerly region we shall be able to furnish this realm of all manner of provision for our navy, namely pitch rosen, cables- a matter of importance for england- rope, mast and such like, which shall be make within those her majesty own dominion, by her own subject, and bring hither through the ocean, free from restraint of any other prince, whereby the custom and charge bestow by our merchant to the enrich of foreign estate shall be lessen and turn to the benefit of her highness. from restraint of any other prince, whereby the custom and charge bestow by our merchant to the enrich of foreign estate shall be lessen and turn to the benefit of her highness and her deputy in those part, which also shall deliver our merchant from many trouble and molestation which they now unwilling endure in our east trade, and shall make we the less to doubt the malice of those state who now we may not offend, lest we shall be intercept of the same provision to the weaken of our navy, the most royal defence of this noble realm of a convenient passage and trade into the south sea, under temperate region, part by river and some part over land in the continent of america. neither upon of this noble realm of a convenient passage and trade into the south sea, under temperate region, part by river and some part over land in the continent of america, neither, upon the discovery of jaques noel, who have pass beyond the three saults where jaques carrier leave to discover, find the river of s laurence passable on the other side, or branch and afterward understand of the inhabitant that the same river do lead into a mighty lake which at the entrance be fresh but beyond be bitter or salt, the end whereof be unknown. omit therefore these hope. i will ground my opinion upon reason and nature, which will not fail for this. we know already that great river have be discover a thousand english mile. omit therefore these hope. i will ground my opinion upon reason and nature, which will not fail for this. we know already that great river have be discover a thousand english mile into that continent of america, namely that of s laurence or canada, but not regard mile more or less. most assure that, and other know river there do descend from the high part or mountain or middle of that continent into our north sea and, like as those mountain do, cast from they a large course of a river through a mighty continent, produce a portable river stream into our north sea even so, the like they do into the south sea which be on the back of that continent for all mountain have their descent. a portable river stream into our north sea. even so, the like they do into the south sea, which be on the back of that continent, for all mountain have their descent towards the sea about. they, which be the low place and proper mansion of water, and water which be contain in the mountain, as it be in cistern, descend natural, do always resort unto the sea environ those land. for example, from the alps confine germany, france and italy, the mighty river danubie do take his course east and discharge into the pontic sea, the rhine north, and fall into the german sea, the west, and go into the mediterran sea, the po south be empty into the adriatic or gulf of venice. other instance may the rhine north and fall into the german sea, the west, and go into the mediterran sea, the po south, be empty into the adriatic or gulf of venice. other instance may be: produce to like effect in africa, yea at home among the mountain in england. see then in nature. this can not be deny and by experience elsewhere be find to be so. i will show how a trade may be dispose more commodious into the south sea through these temperate and habitable region than by the freeze zone in the suppose passage of northwest or north-east where, if the very moment be omit of the time to pass, then be we like to be freeze in the sea or force to winter in extreme cold. northwest or north-east, where, if the very moment be omit of the time to pass, then, be we like to be freeze in the sea or force to winter in extreme cold and darkness like unto hell, or in the midst of summer, we shall be in peril to have our ship overwhelm or crush in piece by hideous and fearful mountain of ice float upon those sea. therefore, four staple-place must be erect when the most short and passable way be find, that be to say two upon the north side at the head and fall of the river, and two other on the south side at the head and fall also of that other river, provide that ship may pass up those river unto the staple. fall of the river and two other on the south side at the head and fall also of that other river, provide that ship may pass up those river unto the staple, so far as the same be navigable into the land, and afterward that boat with flat bottom may also pass so high and near the head of the river unto the staple as possible they can, even with less than two foot water, which can not then be far from the head, as in the river of chagre. that neck or space of land between the two head of the say river, if it be 100 league, which be not like the commodity from the north and from the south sea bring thither, may well be. between the two head of the say river, if it be 100 league, which be not like, the commodity from the north and from the south sea bring thither, may well be carry over the same upon horse, mule or beast of that country, apt to labour as the elk, or or by the aid of many savage accustom, to burden who shall stead we great in these affair. it be, moreover, to be consider that all these country do yield, so far as be know, cedar, pine, fir, tree and oak to build mast and yard ship, wherefore we may not doubt, but that ship may be build on the south sea, then, as ship on the south side may go and return to and from cathay. yard ship, wherefore we may not doubt, but that ship may be build on the south sea, then, as ship on the south side may go and return to and from cathay, china and other most rich region of the east world, in five month or thereabouts, even so, the good be carry over unto the north side, ship may come thither from england to fetch the same good and return by a voyage of four or five month usual, so as in every four month may be return into england the great riches of cathay, china, japan and the rest, which will be spice, drug, musk, pearl, stone, gold, silver, silk, clothes of gold and all manner of precious thing which shall recompense the time and labour. china, japan and the rest, which will be spice, drug, musk, pearl, stone, gold, silver, silk, clothes of gold and all manner of precious thing which shall recompense the time and labour of their transportation and carriage, if it be as far and dangerous as the moor trade be, from fess and morocco, over the burn and movable sand in which they perish many time and suffer common great distress, unto the river call niger in africa, and from thence up the say river, many hundred mile afterward, over-land again, unto the river nilus, and so unto cairo in egypt, from whence they return the way they come, or, if it be a voyage so far as our merchant have make, into persia, even to ormus, by the unto cairo, in egypt, from whence they return the way they come, or if it be a voyage so far as our merchant have make, into persia, even to ormus, by the way of the north, through russia, into the caspian sea and so forth, with payment of many toll. but this passage over and through the continent of america, as the same shall be, always under temperate and habitable climate and a pleasant passage after it have be a little frequent even so, it must fall out much short than it seem by false description of that continent which do not extend so far into the west as by late navigation be find and describe in more exquisite charts. beside that, the sea extend itself into the. of that continent which do not extend so far into the west as by late navigation be find and describe in more exquisite charts. beside that, the sea extend itself into the land very far in many place on the south side, whereby our access unto the south ocean shall be by so much the short inducement to the like of the voyage intend towards virginia in 40. and 42. degree of latitude. write 1585.. by m richard hakluyt, the elder, sometime student of the middle temple, the glory of god by plant of religion among those infidel. 2. the increase of the force of the christian. 3. the possibility of the enlarge of the dominion of the queen most excellent majesty and consequent of her honour revenue. those infidel. 2. the increase of the force of the christian. 3. the possibility of the enlarge of the dominion of the queen most excellent majesty and consequent of her honour, revenue and of her power by this enterprise. 4. a ample vent, in time to come, of the woollen clothes of england, especial those of the coarse sort, to the maintenance of our poor that else starve or become burdensome to the realm. and vent also of sundry our commodity upon the tract of that firm land and possible in other region from the northern side of that main. 5. a great possibility of further discovery of other region from the north part of the same land by sea and of unspeakable honour and benefit that may. side of that main. 5- a great possibility of further discovery of other region from the north part of the same land by sea, and of unspeakable honour and benefit that may rise upon the same by the trade to ensue in japan, china and cathay, etc. 6- by return thence this realm shall receive, by reason of the situation of the climate and by reason of the excellent soil, woad, oil, wine, hops, salt and most or all the commodity that we receive from the best part of europe, and we shall receive the same, better, cheap than now we receive they as we may use the matter. 7- receive the same, thence the navy, the human strength of this realm, our merchant and their good shall better, cheap than now we receive, they as we may use the matter. 7 receive the same, thence the navy, the human strength of this realm, our merchant and their good shall not be subject to arrest of ancient enemy and doubtful friend, as of late year they have be. 8: if our nation do not make any conquest there but only use traffic and change of commodity, yet by mean the country be not very mighty but divide into petty kingdom, they shall not dare to offer we any great annoy but such as we may, easy revenge with sufficient chastisement to the unarmed people there. 9: whatsoever commodity we receive by the steelyard merchant or by our own merchant from eastland, be it flax, hemp, pitch, may easy revenge, with sufficient chastisement, to the unarmed people there. 9: whatsoever commodity we receive by the steelyard merchant or by our own merchant from eastland, be it flax, hemp, pitch, tar, mast, clapboord, wainscot or such like, the like good may we receive from the north and north-east part of that country, near unto cape briton, in return for our course woollen clothes, flanel and rug fit for those cold region. 10: the passage to and fro be through the main ocean sea so as we be not in danger of any enemy coast. 11: in the voyage we be not to cross the burn zone nor to pass through freeze sea encumber with ice and fog, but in temperate climate at all time of the. 11: in the voyage we be not to cross the burn zone nor to pass through freeze sea encumber with ice and fog, but in temperate climate at all time of the year. and it require, not as the east indie voyage do, the take in of water in diverse place, by reason that it be to be sail in five or six week and by the shortness the merchant may yearly make two return, a factory once be erect there, a matter in trade of great moment. 12 in this trade, by the way, in our pass to and fro we have, in tempest and other hap, all the port of ireland to our aid and no near coast or any enemy. 13 by this ordinary trade. our pass to and fro, we have, in tempest and other hap, all the port of ireland to our aid and no near coast or any enemy. 13: by this ordinary trade we may annoy the enemy to ireland and succour the queen majesty friend there, and in time we may, from virginia, yield they whatsoever commodity they now receive from the spaniard, and so the spaniard shall want the ordinary victual that heretofore they receive yearly from thence, and so they shall not continue trade nor fall so apt in practice against this government as now, by their trade thither they may. 14: we shall, as it be think, enjoy in this voyage either some small island to settle on or some one place or other on. now by their trade, thither they may. 14: we shall, as it be think, enjoy in this voyage either some small island to settle on or some one place or other on the firm land to fortify, for the safety of our ship, our man and our good, the like whereof we have not in any foreign place of our traffic, in which respect we may be in degree of more safety and more quiet. 15: the great plenty of buff hide and of many other sundry kind of hide there now present to be, have, the trade of whale and seal fish and of diverse other fish in the great river, great bay and sea, there shall present, defray the charge in good part or in all. the trade of whale and seal fish and of diverse other fish in the great river, great bay and sea. there shall present defray the charge, in good part or in all, of the first enterprise, and so we shall be in better case than our man be in russia, where many year be spend and great sum of money consume before gain be sound. 16, the great broad river of that main that we be to enter into, so many league navigable or portable, into the main land lie so long a tract with so excellent and so fertile a soil on both side do seem to promise all thing that the life of man do require and whatsoever man may wish that be to plant upon. excellent and so fertile a soil on both side do seem to promise all thing that the life of man do require and whatsoever man may wish, that be to plant upon the same or to traffic in the same. 17 and whatsoever notable commodity the soil within or without do yield. in so long a tract that be to be carry out from thence to england, the same river, so great and deep, do yield no small benefit for the sure, safe, easy and cheap carriage of the same to shipboard, be it of great bulk or of great weight. 18 and in like sort whatsoever commodity of england the inland people there shall need. the same river do work the like effect in benefit for the bulk or of great weight. 18 and in like sort whatsoever commodity of england, the inland people there shall need the same river. do work the like effect in benefit for the incariage of the same apt, easy and cheap. 19, if we find the country populous and desirous to expel we and injurious to offend we that seek but just and lawful traffic, then by reason that we be lord of navigation and they not, so we be the better able to defend ourselves by reason of those great river and to annoy they in many place. 20, where there be many petty king or lord plant on the river side and by all likelihood maintain the frontier of their several territory by war, we may by. many place. 20, where there be many petty king or lord plant on the river side and by all likelihood, maintain the frontier of their several territory by war, we may, by the aid of this river, join with this king here or with that king there, at our pleasure, and may so, with a few man, be revenge of any wrong offer by any of they. or may, if we will proceed with extremity, conquer, fortify and plant in soil most sweet, most pleasant, most strong and most fertile and in the end bring they all in subjection and to civility. 21: the know abundance of fresh fish in the river and the know plenty of fish on the sea coast there may assure we of sufficient. all in subjection and to civility. 21- the know. abundance of fresh fish in the river and the know, plenty of fish on the sea coast there may assure we of sufficient victual, in spite of the people, if we will use salt and industry. 22- the know: plenty and variety of flesh of diverse kind of beast at land there may seem to say to we that we may cheap victual our navy to england for our return, which benefit every where be not find of merchant. 23- the practice of the people of the east indies, when the portugal come thither, first be to cut from the portugal their lade of spice and hereby, they think, to overthrow their purpose trade, if these people shall practice. east indies, when the portugal come thither, first be to cut from the portugal their lade of spice, and hereby, they think, to overthrow their purpose trade. if these people shall practice the like by not suffer, we to have any commodity of they without conquest, which require some time yet, may we maintain our first voyage thither till our purpose come to effect, by the sea-fishing on the coast there and by drag for pearl which be say to be on those part, and by return of those commodity the charge in part shall be defray, which be a matter of consideration in enterprise. of charge 24. if this realm shall abound too too much with youth in the mine there of gold as that of chisca. defray which be a matter of consideration in enterprise of charge 24, if this realm shall abound too, too much with youth, in the mine there of gold, as that of chisca and saguenay, of silver, copper, iron etc. may be a employment to the benefit of this realm, in till of the rich soil there for grain, and in plant of vines there for wine or dress, of those vines which grow there, natural, in great abundance, olive for oil, orange tree, lemon, fig and almond for fruit, woad, saffron and mad for dyer, hop for brewer, hemp, flax, and in many such other thing. by employment of the soil, our people, void of sufficient trade, may be honest. employ that else may become hurtful at home. for brewer, hemp, flax and in many such other thing. by employment of the soil our people, void of sufficient trade, may be honest employ that else may become hurtful at home. 25: the navigate of the sea in the voyage and of the great river there will breed many mariner for service and maintain much navigation. 26: the number of raw hide there of diverse kind of beast, if we shall possess some island there or settle on the firm may present, employ many of our idle people in diverse, several dress of the same, and so we may return they to the people that can not dress they so well, or into this realm where the same be good merchandise, or to flanders etc. which present and so we may return they to the people that can not dress they so well, or into this realm where the same be good merchandise, or to flanders etc. which present gain at the first raise great encouragement present to the enterprise. 27, since great waste wood be there of oak, cedar, pine, walnut and sundry other sort, many of our waste people may be employ in make of ship, hoy, buss and boat and to make of resin, pitch and tar. the tree, natural for the same, be certain, know to be near cape briton and the bay of menan and in many other place there, about 28, if mine of white or gray marble, jet or other rich stone be, find there our idle people. briton and the bay of menan and in many other place there. about 28: if mine of white or gray marble, jet or other rich stone be find there, our idle people may be employ in the mine of the same and in prepare the same to shape, and so shape they may be, carry into this realm as good ballast for our ship and after serve for noble building. 29: sugarcane may be plant aswell as they be now in the south of spain, and beside the employment of our idle people we may receive the commodity cheap and not enrich, infidel or our doubtful friend of who now we receive that commodity. 30: the daily great increase of wool in spain and the like in the the commodity, cheap and not enrich, infidel, or our doubtful friend of who now we receive that commodity. 30- the daily great increase of wool in spain and the like in the west indies and the great employment of the same into cloth in both place may move we to endeavour for vent of our cloth. new discovery of people, region where hope of sale may arise. otherwise, in short time, many inconvenience may possible ensue. 31- this land that we purpose to direct our course to lie in part in the 40 degree of latitude, be in like heat, as lisbon in portugal do, and in the more southerly part, as the most southerly coast of spain do, may, by our diligence, yield unto we beside wine. be in like heat as lisbon in portugal do, and in the more southerly part, as the most southerly coast of spain do may, by our diligence, yield unto we beside wine and oil and sugar, orange, lemon, fig, rese, almond, pomegranate, rice, raw-silk such as come from granada, and diverse commodity for dyer as anile and cochenillio and sundry other colour and material. moreover, we shall not only receive many precious commodity beside from thence, but also shall, in time, find ample vent of the labour of our poor people at home by sale of hat, bonnet, knife, fishhook, copper, kettle, bead, looking-glass, bugle and a thousand kind of other wrought ware that in short time may be bring in use among the people of that country. hat, bonnet, knife, fishhook, copper, kettle, bead, looking-glass, bugle and a thousand kind of other wrought ware that in short time may be bring in use among the people of that country, to the great relief of the multitude of our poor people and to the wonderful enrich of this realm. and in time, such league and intercourse may arise between our stapling seat there and other port of our northern america and of the island of the same, that incredible thing and by few as yet dream of. may speedy follow tend to the impeachment of our mighty enemy and to the common good of this noble government. the end of this voyage be these: 1. to plant christian religion. 2. to traffic. 3. to conquer or of our mighty enemy and to the common good of this noble government. the end of this voyage be these: 1. to plant christian religion, 2. to traffic, 3. to conquer or to do all three. to plant christian religion without conquest will be hard. traffic easy. follow conquest, conquest be not easy. traffic without conquest seem possible and not uneasy. what be to be do be the question if the people be content to live naked and to content themselves with few thing of mere necessity than traffic. be not. so then in vain seem our voyage, unless this nature may be alter, as by conquest and other good mean. it may be, but not on a sudden the like whereof appear in the east indies upon our voyage, unless this nature may be alter, as by conquest and other good mean. it may be, but not on a sudden the like whereof appear in the east indies upon the portugal seat. there, if the people in the inland be clothe and desire to live in the abundance of all such thing as europe do and have at home all the same in plenty. yet we can not have traffic with they by mean. they want not any thing that we can yield. they admit that they have desire to your commodity and as yet have neither gold, silver, copper, iron nor sufficient quantity of other present commodity to maintain the yearly trade. what be then to be? do the soil and climate first be? as yet have neither gold, silver, copper, iron nor sufficient quantity of other present commodity to maintain the yearly trade. what be then to be? do the soil and climate first be to be consider, mean to breed a speedy trade? and you be with argus eye to see what commodity, by industry of man, you be able to make it to yield that england do want or do desire. as for the purpose, if you can make it to yield good wine or good oil, as it be like you may, by the climate, where wild vines of sundry sort do natural grow already in great abundance, than your trade may be. maintain, but admit the soil be in our disposition as yet it be not in. wild vines of sundry sort do natural grow already in great abundance than your trade may be. maintain, but admit the soil be in our disposition as yet it be not. in what time may this be bring about for wine? this be to be. affirm that first the soil lie in 36 or 37 degree in the temperature of south spain. in, set your uine-plant this year, you may have wine within three year and it may be that the wild vines grow there already, by orderly prune and dress at your first arrival, may come to profit in short time. and plant your olive tree this year, you may have oil within three year and if the sea shore be flat and fit for receipt of. come to profit in short time and plant your olive tree this year, you may have oil within three year. and if the sea shore be flat and fit for receipt of salt water and for salt make, without any annoy of near fresh than the trade of salt only may maintain a yearly navigation, as our man now trade, to the isle of maio and the hollander to terra near the west end of the isle of margarita. but how the natural people of the country may be, make skilful to plant vines and to know the use, or to set olive tree and to know the make of oil and withal, to use both the trade, that be a matter of small consideration, but to conquer know the use or to set olive tree and to know the make of oil and withal, to use both the trade, that be a matter of small consideration. but to conquer a country or province in climate and soil of italy, spain or the island from whence we receive our wine and oil, and to man it, to plant it and to keep it and to continue the make of wine and oil able to serve england, be a matter of great importance, both in respect of the save at home of our great treasure now yearly go away and in respect of the annoyance thereby grow to our enemy. the like consideration will be: have touch a place for the make of salt of temperature like now yearly go away and in respect of the annoyance thereby grow to our enemy, the like consideration will be: have touch a place for the make of salt, of temperature like those of france, not too too cold as the salt of the northern region be, nor too too fiery as those be that be make more southerly than france, in regard whereof many circumstance be to be consider, and principal, by what mean the people of those party may be, draw by all courtesy into love with our nation. that we become not hateful unto they, as the spaniard, be in italy and in the west indies and elsewhere, by their manner of usage for a gentle course, without cruelty and tyranny. best answer the profession. unto they, as the spaniard be in italy and in the west indies and elsewhere, by their manner of usage for a gentle course without cruelty and tyranny, best answer the profession of a christian, a gentle course, best to be hold, best plant christian religion. make our seat most void of blood, most profitable in trade of merchandise, most firm and stable and least subject to remove by practice of enemy. but that we may, in seat there, not be subject whole to the malice of enemy and may be more able to preserve our body, ship and good in more safety and to be know to be more able to scourge the people there, civil or savage, than willing to offer any violence and for the body, ship and good in more safety and to be know to be more able to scourge the people there, civil or savage, than willing to offer any violence. and for the more quiet exercise of our manurance of the soil where we shall seat and of our manual occupation, it be to be wish that some ancient captain of mild disposition and great judgement be send thither with man most skilful in the art of fortification and that direction be take, that the mouth of great river and the island, in the same as thing of great moment, be take, man and fortify, and that haven be cut out for safety of the navy, that we may be lord of the gate and entry to go out. of great moment be: take man and fortify and that haven be cut out for safety of the navy, that we may be lord of the gate and entry to go out and come in at pleasure and to lie in safety and be able to command and to control all within and to force all foreign navigation to lie out in open ride, subject to all weather, to be disperse by tempest and flaw, if the force within be not able to give they the encounter abroad. the red muscadel grape that bishop grindall procure out of germany, the great white muscadel, the yellow grape, the cut of these be wont yearly, to be set at fulham and after one year root to be give by the out of germany, the great white muscadel, the yellow grape. the cut of these be wont yearly to be set at fulham and after one year root to be give by the bishop and to be sell by his gardener. these present provide and place in earth and many of these so root with store of cut unroot beside, place in tub of earth ship at the next voyage to be plant in virginia may begin uineyard and bring wine out of hand. 2 provision: great of wild olive tree may be make out of this city so then to be carry to increase great store of stock to graft the best olive on. and virginia stand in the same degree that the shroffe, the olive place do. city. so then to be carry to increase great store of stock to graft the best olive on, and virginia stand in the same degree that the shroffe, the olive place do in spain. we may win that merchandise. grass, the wild. 3. sugarcane, if you can not procure they from the spanish island yet, may you, by our barbary merchant, procure they. 4. there be a herb in persia whereof anile be make, and it be also in barbary to procure that by seed or root be of importance for a trade, of merchandise for our clothing country. 5. woad by the seed you may have, for you may have hundred of bushel in england. as it be, multiply and have soil and labour in virginia cheap. our clothing country. 5: woad by the seed you may have, for you may have hundred of bushel in england as it be multiply and have soil and labour in virginia cheap and the oad in great value lie in small room. it will be a trade of great gain to this clothing realm and the thing can not be destroy by savage. the root of this you may have in plenty and number come in the trade so this may grow in trade within a year ready for the merchant. 6: fig tree of many good kind may be, have, hence in barrel. if now present, they be provide and they in that climate will yield noble fruit and feed your people present and will be bring. good kind may be. have. hence in barrel, if now present they be provide and they in that climate will yield noble fruit and feed your people present and will be bring in frail home as merchandise or in barrel as rese also may be. 7- saw board of sassafras and cedar to be turn into small box for lady and gentlewoman will become a present trade. 8- to the infinite natural increase of hog to add a device how the same may be feed by root, acorn etc without spoil. your corn will be of great effect to feed the multitude continual employ in labour and the same cheap breed and salt and barrel there and bring home will be well sell for a good merchandise and great effect to feed the multitude continual employ in labour and the same cheap breed and salt and barrel there and bring home will be well sell for a good merchandise and the barrel after will serve for our home herring-fishing. and so you sell you wood and the labour of your cooper. 9: receive the savage woman and their child of both sex by courtesy into your protection and employ the english woman and the other in make of linen. you shall raise a wonderful trade of benefit both to carry into england and also into the island and into the main of the west indies. victual and labour be so cheap there. 10: the trade of make cable and cordage there will be of great importance. into the island and into the main of the west indies victual and labour be so cheap there. 10, the trade of make cable and cordage there will be of great importance in respect of a cheap maintenance of the navy that shall pass to and fro and in respect of such navy as may in those party be use for the vent of the commodity of england to be bring thither and powldavy etc make for sail of the poor savage, yield to the navy a great help and a great gain in the traffic. but if seek revenge on every injury of the savage we seek blood and raise war. our vines, our olive, our fig tree, our sugarcane, our orange and lemon, corn, cattle etc. but if seek revenge on every injury of the savage, we seek blood and raise war. our vines, our olive, our fig tree, our sugarcane, our orange and lemon, corn, cattle etc will be destroy and trade of merchandise in all thing overthrow. and so the english nation there plant and to be plant shall be root out with sword and hunger. sort of man which be to be pass in this voyage: 1 man skilful in all mineral cause. 2 man skilful in all kind of drug. 3 fisherman to consider of the sea fish there on the coast to be reduce to trade hereafter, and other for the fresh water fish. 4 salt-maker to view the coast and to make trial how rich the sea-water there. there on the coast to be reduce to trade hereafter, and other for the fresh water fish. 4. salt-maker to view the coast and to make trial how rich the sea-water there be, to advise for the trade. 5. husbandman to view the soil to resolve for tillage in all sort. 6- uineyard-man breed to see how the soil may serve for the plant of vines. 7. man breed in the shroffe in south spain for discern how olive tree may be plant there. 8, other for plant of orange tree, fig tree, limon tree and almond tree for judge how the soil may serve for the same. 9. gardener to prove the several soil of the island and of our settle place to see how the same. almond tree for judge how the soil may serve for the same. 9. gardener to prove the several soil of the island and of our settle place to see how the same may serve for all herb and root for our victual, since by rough sea sometime we may want fish and since we may want flesh to victual we by the malice of the natural people there. and gardener for plant of our common tree of fruit as pear, apple, plumine, peach, meddler, apricoe, quince for conserve, etc. 10. lime-maker to make lime for building. 11, mason carpenter etc for building there. 12. brickmaker and tile-maker. 13. man cunning in the art of fortification that may choose out place, strong by nature, to be fortify and that 11, mason, carpenter etc for building there. 12- brickmaker and tile-maker. 13- man cunning in the art of fortification that may choose out place, strong by nature, to be fortify and that can plot out and direct workman. 14- choice spade-man to trench cunning and to raise bulwark and rampire of earth for defence and offence. 15- spade-maker that may out of the wood there make spade like those of devonshire and of other sort, and shovel from time to time for common use. 16- smith to forge the iron of the shovel and spade and to make black bill and other weapon and to mend many thing. 17- man that use to break ash tree for pike-stave to be employ in the wood there. 18- other that: to make black bill and other weapon and to mend many thing. 17, man that use to break ash tree for pike-stave to be employ in the wood there. 18 other that finish up the same so rough hew, such as in london, be to be have. 19, cooper to make cask of all sort. 20, forger of pike head and of arrow head with forge, with spanish iron and with all manner of tool to be carry with they. 21, fletcher to renew arrow, since archery prevail much against unarmed people and gunpowder may soon perish by set on fire. 22, bowyer also to make bow there for need. 23, maker of oar, since for service upon those river, it be to great purpose for the boat. perish by set on fire. 22, bowyer also to make bow there for need. 23, maker of oar, since for service upon those river, it be to great purpose for the boat and barge they be to pass and enter with. 24 shipwright to make barge and boat and big vessel if need be to run along the coast and to pierce the great bay and inlet. 25, turner to turn target of elm and tough wood for use against the dart and arrow of savage. 26, such also as have knowledge to make target of horn. 27, such also as can make armour of hide upon mould such as be wont to be make in this realm about a hundred year since and be call scotish jack. horn, 27, such also as can make armour of hide upon mould such as be wont to be make in this realm about a hundred year since, and be call scotish jack. such armour be light and defensive enough against the force of savage 28 tanner to tan hide of buff ox etc. in the isle where you shall plant 29 white tawyer of all other skin there, 30 man skilful in burn of soap ash and in make of pitch and tar and resin to be fetch out of prussia and poland which be thence to be have for small wage, be there in manner of slave. the several sort of tree as pine, firre, spruse, birch and other be to be bore with great auger a. to be have for small wage. be there, in manner of slave, the several sort of tree as pine, firre, spruse, birch and other be to be bore with great auger a foot or half a yard above the ground, as they use in vesely, towards languedoc and near bayona, in gascoigne. and so you shall easy and quick see what gum, resin, turpentine, tar or liquor be in they, which will quick distill out clear, without any filthy mixture, and will show what commodity may be make of they. their goodness and greatness for mast be also to be consider. 31, a skilful painter, be also to be carry with you, which the spaniard use, common in all their discovery, to bring the description of all beast. be also to be consider. 31, a skilful painter be also to be carry with you which the spaniard use common in all their discovery to bring the description of all: beast, bird, fish, tree, town, etc. a brief note of the corn, fowl, fruit and beast of the inland of florida, on the backside of virginia, take out of the 44 chapter of the discovery of the say country, begin by fernando de soto, governor of cuba, in the year of our lord 1539.. the bread which they eat in all the land of florida be of maiz which be like to course millet, and in all the island and west indies, from the antiles forward, there be this maiz. likewise in florida there be many wallnuts. be of maiz, which be like to course millet, and in all the island and west indies, from the antiles forward, there be this maiz. likewise, in florida there be many wallnuts, plum, their fruit, mulberry and grape. they sow their maiz and gather it. every man his own crop. the fruit be common to all man because they grow abundant in the field, without plant or dress. in the mountain there grow chestnut. they be somewhat small than the chestnut of spain, which be call collarinna. from rio grandee towards the west, the walnut be differ from the other for they be soft and round like bullet. and from rio grandee towards puerto deal, spirito santo, eastward, for the most part they be hard and the tree. differ from the other, for they be soft and round like bullet, and from rio grandee towards puerto deal, spirito santo, eastward. for the most part. they be hard and the tree and nut be like in fashion unto those of spain. there be in all the country a fruit which grow upon a herb or plant, like to the herb call dogs-tongue, which the indian do sow. the fruit be like unto the peres rial. it be of a very good relish. these may be the, and of a pleasant taste. another herb grow in the field which bear a fruit near the ground, like to a strawberry, very pleasant in taste. the plum be of two sort, red and gray in fashion and bigness of walnut. the field which bear a fruit near the ground, like to a strawberry, very pleasant in taste, the plum be of two sort, red and gray, in fashion, and bigness of walnut, and have three or four stone in they. these be better than any in spain and they make better prune of they. the want of dress be perceive only in the grape which although they be great, yet they have a great kernel. all the rest of the fruit be very perfect and less hurtful than those of spain. there be in florida many bear, the beast of florida- lion, stag, roe-buck, wild-cat and coney. there be many wild-henne as big as peacock, small partridge, like those of africa, crane, duck, rolas, blackbird and sparrow there. bear, the beast of florida, lion, stag, roe-buck, wild-cat and coney. there be many wild-henne as big as peacock, small partridge, like those of africa, crane, duck, rolas, blackbird and sparrow. there be certain black bird big than sparrow and lesser than stare. there be sore-hauks, falcon, gosse-hauks and all fowl of prey that be in spain. the indian be well proportion. those of the plain country be tall of stature and better proportion than those of the mountain. those of the inland be better furnish with corn and wealth of the country than those of the sea coast. the country on the sea coast towards the gulf of mexico be barren and poor and the people more warlike. the coast bear from puerto deal. spirito santo unto. the sea coast. the country on the sea coast towards the gulf of mexico be barren and poor and the people more warlike. the coast bear from puerto deal, spirito santo, unto apalache and from apalache to rio de palmas, almost from east to west, from rio de palmas unto hispania. it run from north to south. it be a gentle coast but it have many shoal and bank or shelf of sand. a note of such commodity as be find in florida, next adjoin unto the south part of virginia, take out of the description of the say country write by rene laudonniere, who inhabit there two summer and one winter. the country of florida be flat and divide with diverse river, the tree of florida and of the say country. write by rene laudonniere, who inhabit there two summer and one winter. the country of florida be flat and divide with diverse river, the tree of florida, and therefore moist, and be sandy towards the seashore. there grow in those part great quantity of pine tree which have no kernel in the apple that they bear. their wood be full of oak, walnut tree, black cherry tree, mulberry tree, lentiske, which yield mastic, and chestnut tree which be more wild than those of france. there be great store of cedar, cypress bays, palm tree, good grape grape. there be there a kind of medlar, the fruit whereof be better than that of france and big. there be also plum tree which bear very fair. palm tree, good grape grape there. be there a kind of medlar, the fruit whereof be better than that of france and big. there be also plum tree which bear very fair fruit but such as be not very good. there be raspess, and a little berry which we call among we blue, which be very good to eat. there grow in that country a kind of root which they call in their language hazes, whereof in necessity they make bread. there be also the tree call esquine, which i take to be the sassafras, which be very good against the pock and other contagious disease. the beast best know in this country be stag roe, the beast of florida. dear goat, leopard, ounce, lucernes, diverse sort of. be very good against the pock and other contagious disease. the beast best know in this country be stag roe, the beast of florida, dear goat, leopard, ounce, lucernes, diverse sort of wolf, wild dog, hare, coney and a certain kind of beast that differ little from the lion of africa. the fowl be turkey cock, the fowl of florida, partridge, perrot, pigeon, ringdove, turtle, black bird, crow, tarcel, falcon, leonard, heron, crane, stork, wild goose, mallards, cormorant, herneshawe, white, red, black and gray, and a infinite sort of all wildfowl. there be such abundance of crocodile that oftentimes in swim man be assail by they. of serpent there be many sort. there be find among the savage, good quantity of gold and silver. gold and silver which crocodile that oftentimes in swim man be assail by they of serpent there be many sort there be find among the savage good quantity of gold and silver, gold and silver which be get out of the ship that be lose upon the coast. nevertheless, they say that in the mountain of apalatcy there be mine of copper, which i think to be gold. there be also in this country store of die and colour, great store of grain and herb whereof may be make excellent good die and paint of all kind of colour. they sow their maiz or corn twice a year, to wit in march and in june, and all in one and the same soil, the say maiz, from the time that it be. sow their maiz or corn twice a year, to wit in march and in june, and all in one and the same soil, the say maiz, from the time that it be sow unto the time that it be gather, be but three month in the ground. they have also fair pumpion and very good bean. they have certain kind of oil, oil in florida, wherewith they use to anoint themselves. a brief extract of the merchantable commodity find in the south part of virginia, ann. 1585. and 1586. gather out of the learned work of master thomas herriot, which be there remain the space of eleven month: silk of grass or grasse-silke the like whereof grow in persia, whereof i have see good grograine, make worme-silke flax. master thomas herriot, which be there remain the space of eleven month. silk of grass or grasse-silke, the like whereof grow in persia, whereof i have see good grograine, make worme-silke, flax and hemp, aslom wapeih, a kind of earth so call by the natural inhabitant, very like to, and by some of our physician, find more effectual pitch, tar, resin and turpentine. there be those kind of tree that yield they abundant. and in great store, sassafras, call by the inhabitant, wynauk, of who sovereign and manifold virtue, read monardes, the physician of siuile, in his book, entitle in english, the joyful news from the west indies, cedar vines of two sort oil. there be two sort of walnut, both hold oil. furthermore, there be three, several his book entitle in english the joyful news from the west indies: cedar vines, of two sort, oil. there be two sort of walnut, both hold oil. furthermore there be three, several kind of berry in the form of oak acorn, which also by the experience and use of the inhabitant, we find to yield very good and sweet oil. there be also bear, which be common, very fat and in some place there be many their fatness, because it be so liquid may well be term oil and have many special use: fur, ottar, marten and lucernes, dear skin, civet, cat, iron, copper, the foresay copper. we also find by trial to hold silver pearl. one of our company, a man of skill in such matter, have and lucernes, dear skin civet, cat, iron copper, the foresay copper we also find by trial to hold silver pearl. one of our company, a man of skill in such matter, have gather together from the savage above five thousand sweet gum of diverse kind and many other apothecary drug die of diverse kind there be shoemake well know and use in england for black the seed of a herb call wasebur, little small root call chappacor, and the bark of a tree, call by the inhabitant tangomockonomindge, which die be for diverse sort of red commodity. in virgina know to yield victual pagatowr or may, which be their principal corn okindgier, call by we bean wickonzour, call by we pease macocquer, call by we pompion melon and commodity in virgina know to yield victual pagatowr or may, which be their principal. corn, okindgier, call by we bean, wickonzour, call by we pease, macocquer, call by we pompion, melon and gourd. a herb which in dutch be call melden, be a kind of orage, etc. a herb in form of a marigold six foot in height, take to be planta, vppowoc or tobacco of great estimation. among the savage root, openauck, a kind of root of round form as big as walnut. some far great monardes call they bead, or of helena and master brereton ground nut, okeepenank be. root of round shape, find in dry ground the inhabitant use to boil and eat. many of they tsinaw, a kind of root much like unto that. brereton ground nut. okeepenank be root of round shape find in dry ground the inhabitant use to boil and eat many of they. tsinaw, a kind of root much like unto that which in england be call the china root. bring from the east indies coscushaw, a root take to be that which the spaniard in the west indies do call cassavy habascon, a root of hot taste, almost of the form and bigness of a parsney leek. differ little from we in england. fruit chestnut there be in diverse place great store use diverse way for food. walnut there be two kind and of they infinite store in many place where be very great wood for many mile together the three part of the tree be walnut. for food. walnut there be two kind and of they infinite store in many place where be very great wood for many mile. together the three part of the tree be walnut tree. they use they for meat and make a milk of they of very pleasant taste and wholesome meddler, a kind of very good fruit. they be as red as cherry and very lushous, sweet mutaquesunnauk. these plant be call also, whereof there be three sort, that which bear no fruit. bring forth the cochenile, a kind of pleasant fruit, almost of the shape and bigness of english pear, but they be of a perfect red colour as well within as without. they grow on a plant who leaf be very thick and full of prickle. and bigness of english pear, but they be of a perfect red colour as well within as without. they grow on a plant who leaf be very thick and full of prickle, as sharp as needle. some which have be in hispania where they have see that kind of red die of exceed great price which be call cochenile to grow. do describe his plant right like unto this of mutaquesunnauk, howbeit the cochenile be not the fruit but a grain, find on the leaf of the plant and strike off upon sheet and dry in the sun. grape there be of two sort which i mention in the merchantable commodity strawberry there be as good and as great as in any english garden such as we have. the sun grape there be of two sort, which i mention in the merchantable commodity strawberry there be as good and as great as in any english garden, such as we have in england: mulberry, apple-crabbes, hurt or hurtlebery sacquenummener, a kind of berry almost like unto caper but somewhat great, which grow together in cluster upon a plant or herb that be find in shollow water. be boil eight or nine hour according to their kind, be very good meat and wholesome. otherwise if they be eat they will make a man for the time frantic or extreme sick. a reed which bear a seed almost like unto our rye or wheat and be boil, be good meat. in our travel in some place we find wild. frantic or extreme sick. a reed which bear a seed, almost like unto our rye or wheat and be boil be good meat in our travel in some place we find wild pease, like unto we in england, but that they be less, which be also good meat. a kind of berry like unto. a acorn of five sort grow on several kind of tree. the one sort be call sagatemener, the second osamener. the three pummuckoner the inhabitant use to dry they upon hurdle like malt in england. when they use they they first water, they till they be soft and then be sod. they make love of bread of they of these three kind. also the inhabitant do use to make sweet oil. the four sort: they till they be soft and then be sod. they make love of bread of. they of these three kind also the inhabitant do use to make sweet oil. the four sort be call sapummener, which be boil or perch, be like unto roast chestnut. of this sort they make bread also. the five sort be call mangummenauk, the very acorn of their kind of oak, be dry as the rest and after water they boil they and their servant, and sometime the chief themselves eat they with their fish and flesh. beast dear up into the country, very great and in some place great store coney of a gray colour like unto hare. they make mantle of the fur or slay of their skin, saquenuckot and maquowoc. the country very great and in some place great store. coney of a gray colour, like unto hare. they make mantle of the fur or slay of their skin. saquenuckot and maquowoc, two kind of small beast great than coney, which be very good meat. squirrel, which be of a gray colour, we have take and eat, bear, which be of black colour, they be good meat and be hunt. they climb up into tree and be kill by the savage with their arrow and sometime by we with our caliver. the lion be sometime kill by the savage and eat wolf or wolvish dog. i have the name of eight and twenty sort of beast disperse, in the main of which their be only twelve, kind by. by the savage and eat wolf or wolvish dog. i have the name of eight and twenty sort of beast disperse in the main, of which their be only twelve kind by. we as yet discover foul turkie cock and turkey hen, stock-dove and partridge crane, herne and in winter, great store of swan and goose. there be also parrot, falcon and marlin hawk, of all sort of fowl. i have the name in the country language of fowrescore and six fish: sturgeon, herring, porpoise, trout, ray, old-wife, mullet, plaice and very many other sort of very excellent fish: seacrab, oyster, great, small, round, long, muscle, scalop, periwinkle and crevice. seekanauk, a kind of crusty shellfish which be good meat, about a foot in breadth, have a crusty. very excellent fish: seacrab oyster, great small round, long muscle, scalop, periwinkle and crevice. seekanauk, a kind of crusty shellfish which be good meat, about a foot in breadth, have a crusty tail, many leg like a crab and her eye in she back. they be find in shallows of water and sometime on the shore. tortoise, both of land and sea kind. they be very good meat and their egg also. certain brief testimony: touch sundry rich mine of gold, silver and copper, in part find and in part constant hear of in north florida and the inland of the main of virginia and other country there unto on the north part near adjoin gather out of the work, all one except extant in print of such and the inland of the main of virginia and other country there unto, on the north part, near adjoin, gather out of the work all one except extant in print of such as be personal traveller in those country. in the second relation of jaques cartier, the 12 chapter, he report that he understand by donnacona, the king of the country. i take these to be the people towards cibola clad in mantle of cotton and other, that to the south-west of canada there be people clad with cloth, as the french- be very honest- and many inhabit town and that they have great store of gold and red copper etc. in the discovery of the inland of florida far to the north, begin by fernando de soto. many inhabit town and that they have great store of gold and red copper etc. in the discovery of the inland of florida far to the north, begin by fernando de soto, governor of cuba in the year 1539. and to be see in print in the hand of master richard hackluyt. the indian, in many place far distant the one from the other, give they often and certain advertisement that beyond the mountain northward there be mine of gold at a place call by they chisca, and some show the manner which the indian use in refine the same. this place, in my opinion, can be far from the great river that fall into the south-west part of the bay of chesepioc. the indian inform rene laudonniere. in refine the same. this place, in my opinion, can be far from the great river that fall into the south-west part of the bay of chesepioc. the indian inform rene laudonniere in florida that there be mine of red mettle, which they call in their language sieroa, in the muuntaine of apalatcy which, upon trial make thereof by the french, be find perfect gold as appear 352.. in the three volume of the english voyage and in the same relation, there be very often mention of silver and excellent, perfect and fair pearl find by the french in those part, in the late discovery of new mexico, make by antonio espeio on the back side of virginia, extant in spanish and english in the three volume of. the french in those part, in the late discovery of new mexico make by antonio espeio on the back side of virginia, extant in spanish and english in the three volume of the english voyage 303.. etc. there be mention of rich silver mine and sometime of gold in abundance. eleven or twelve time find as they travel northward by man very skilful in mineral matter which go in the voyage for that purpose, the large description and chart of which voyage contain great number of town and diverse great river discover in that action make in mexico by francisco xamuscado 1585.. be intercept afterward by the english at sea we have in london to be show to such as shall have occasion to make use of the. in mexico by francisco xamuscado, 1585.. be intercept afterward by the english at sea. we have in london to be show to such as shall have occasion to make use of the same, the constant report of many of the savage to the worshipful master ralph lane, then governor of the english colony in virginia, of the rich mine of wassador or gold at a place by they name channis, twenty day journey overland from the mangoaks set down by himself at large in the first part of his relation of the, say, country of virginia, extant in the three volume of the english voyage, 258.. be much to be regard and consider by these that intend to prosecute this new enterprise of plant never unto those part. extant in the three volume of the english voyage, 258.. be much to be regard and consider by these that intend to prosecute this new enterprise of plant. never unto those part, i can give large information of the rich copper i in the east side of the bay of menan, within 30 or 40. league to the south-west of cape breton, whereof i myself have see above a hundred piece of the copper and have show some part thereof to diverse knight, of quality as also of salt as good as that of buruage in france, find near that bay and can make proof of the testimony of the savage touch a silver i in another bay within two or three league to the west of the. france find near that bay and can make proof of the testimony of the savage touch, a silver i in another bay within two or three league to the west of the aforesaid bay of menan. but i reserve a further relation hereof to a more convenient time and place. if it please any man to read the summary of gonsaluo de ouiedo, extant in part in the english decade, of the voyage of sebastian cabote along this coast of virginia and norumbega and the short relation of john de verarsana, which range the say coast long after he in the year 1524.. which be also to be see in the three volume of the english voyage, pagine 298.. he shall find often mention of rich mineral and long after he, in the year 1524.. which be also to be see in the three volume of the english voyage, pagine 298.. he shall find often mention of rich mineral and store of excellent copper which so long ago they see among the savage. they be the first know christian that ever see those coast, so that it be more than wilful madness to doubt of rich mine to be in the aforesaid country.