a caveat or warn for all sort of man, both young and old, to avoid the company of lewd and wicked woman to the tune of virginia. i once do love a bonnie lass, as oxford town do know, but now i see all be not gold that make a glister show the fair apple to the eye may have a rot core and young man, all now by my, my fall. take heed, trust not a whore. she will stroke your cheek, she will stroke your chin, she will fling her arm above ' you and she will protest with vow and oath she can live withou' you. she will sigh and sob. if that you say, you will come to she no more, and gallant all. and she will protest with vow and oath she can live withou' you. she will sigh and sob if that you say you will come to she no more. and gallant, all by this my fall, take heed. trust not a whore. she will buy you bandstring at the fair. she will cause you for to woe she. she will make you bracelet of her hair for to bewitch you to she. she will sit upon you all the night. she will give you kiss store. but gallant, all by this, my fall, take heed, trust not a whore. if thou shall be in heaven, quo'h she, i will not live in hell. if thou shall be on earth, quoth she. in heaven, i will not dwell if. not a whore. if thou shall be in heaven, quo'h she, i will not live in hell. if thou shall be on earth, quoth she. in heaven, i will not dwell. if thou shall be on sea, quoth she, i will not be on shore. then, gallant, all now by my fall, take heed, trust not a whore. if that you chance for to be sad, she will bid you send for wine, for that be good, sweet heart, quoth she for thy choice, heart and i. and thus with sweet ' and smile word, she will dive into your store. but, gallant, all now by my fall, take heedd, trust, not a whore. when she have, have her whole desire and all your quoin be spend if. will dive into your store. but, gallant, all now, by my fall, take heedd, trust, not a whore. when she have, have her whole desire and all your quoin be spend. if you entreat her company, she will say she ' shall be shent. then will she leave you to yourself, your fortone to deplore. then, gallant, all now by my fall, take heed, trust, not a whore. the second part to the same tune. she will sit alone with you and swear by god. that do she make while breath within her body be she will not you forsake shee'le. let you toy and stroke and kiss, she will, let you do much more. but, youngman, all now, by my fall, take heed, trust, not a whore. will not you forsake shee'le, let you toy and stroke and kiss. she will let you do much more. but, youngman, all now by my fall, take heed, trust not a whore. now, here i lie, my friend do, fly my wench, do quite forswear i her father house be but hard by. and yet she come not near i, i in prison. i for she do lie close by her father door. and young man, all now by my fall, take heed, trust, not a whore, my creditor, they chafe at i for my time spend so bad and scarce. i see no friend i have be for my grief, now sad. and those that loud in former time they now do. i abhor then, youngman, all. spend so bad and scarce. i see no friend. i have be for my grief now sad, and those that loud in former time they now do. i abhor then, youngman, all now by my fall, take heed, trust not a whore my kinsfolk they do send to i and often i do rail now be i plague in misery here, lie in the jail. but if that i come out again, though i be never so poor, i never more will give consent to meddle with a whore. you, young man that in london live, take heed by this, my fall, for if you still will follow whore they will you all, your quoin, your state, your health and friend, then turn you oat of door o. take heed by this, my fall, for if you still will follow whore, they will, you all, your quoin, your state, your health and friend, then turn you oat of door, o youngman all, by this my fall. take heed: trust, not a whore. now, farewell, all you prentice that do in london. dwell, leave all those vice which will bring one day your soul to hell. so with my heart prayer for you, i now will say no more but wish you all, both great and small, take heed: love, not a whore.