a declaration how the money viz seventy pound eight shilling six penny be dispose which be gather by m patrick copland, preacher in the royal james at the cape of good hope towards the build of a free school in virginia, of the gentleman and mariner in the say ship, a list of who name be under: specify: for god glory, their comfort and the encouragement of other to the further of the same or the like pious work which 70 pound, 8. shilling 6. penny, together with 30. pound, add thereunto, by a unknown person for the furtherance of the say free school, be pay unto the right honourable henry earl of southampton, for the honourable company of virginia at their great and general quarter court hold. the 21. of nouem 1621.. and the say court for the better maintenance of the say school, schoolmaster and usher intend there to be place. grant 1000 acre of land to the say free school to be at charles city as the most commodious place for health, security, profit and conveniency, and appoint that with the say 100 pound, 8. shilling, 6. penny there shall be send over present a usher for the instruct of the child there in the principle of religion, civility of life and human learning, as also that five person beside a overseer of they shall be forthwith send in the condition of apprentice to manure and cultivate some part of the say land for the use and benefit of the say usher till. god stir up the heart of other to be further helpful to the say school. likewise the say honourable virginia court think fit, in honour of the say east-india benefactor, the say free school shall be build and the say 1000 acre set out in charles city to be call the east-india school and that the east-india company servant shall have precedence before any other to prefer their child thither to be bring up in the rudiment of learning. they think fit also that this, as a collegiate or free school, shall have dependence on henrico college in virginia, which shall be make capable to receive scholar from the school into such scholarship and fellowship as the say college shall be endow withal for the advancement of scholar. as they shall rise by degree and desert in learning there be, since by a person, refuse to be name, send into the great and general quarter court hold for virginia, the 30. of january 1^21, 25. pound, towards the furtherance of this godly work, so that now there be in all 125.. pound. 8. shilling, 6. penny. they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the star for ever and ever. dan 12., 3. for public action of virtue. beside that they be present, comfortable to the doer, be also exemplary to other, and as they be more beneficial to other, so be they crown in we. our principal care shall be that. while our soul live in glory in heaven, our good action may live upon earth and that they may be put into the bank and multiply while our body lie in the grave and putrify. whosoever shall receive such a little child in my name, receive i mat 18. 5.