virginia. god be thank. psalm 107. verse 23. they that go down to the sea in ship and occupy in the great water. 24. they see the work of the lord and his wonder in the deep. 25. for he command and raise the stormy wind and it lift up the wave thereof. 26. they mount up to the heaven and descend to the deep so that their soul melt for trouble. 27, they be toss too and fro and stagger like a drunken man and all their cunning be go. 28. then they cry unto the lord in their trouble, and he bring they out of their distress. 29. he turn the storm to a calm so that the wave thereof be still. 30. when they be. the lord in their trouble and he bring they out of their distress. 29. he turn the storm to a calm so that the wave thereof be still 30. when they be quiet, they be glad, and he bring they to the haven where they will be 31. let they therefore confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man. 32. and let they exalt he in the congregation of the people and praise he in the assembly of the elder. the occasion of our present meeting, right, honourable, right, worshipful and dear belove in our lord jesus christ, be to celebrate the goodness of our good and gracious god and to give he public and solemn praise for the sa^e. right, worshipful and dear belove in our lord jesus christ be to celebrate the goodness of our good and gracious god and to give he public and solemn praise for the sa^e arrive of your fleet of 9 sail of ship in virginia in november and december last, and for the happy yea, and in a manner miraculous, land o^ 800.. people, m^n, woman and child, all in health, as also for the hopeful and good success wherewith almighty god have crown your colony in that heathen-now christian kingdom. this task be lay upon i, the unworthy of many who can and will have perform it better. i have endeavour to discharge according to the scantling of time and measure of grace, vouchsafe unto i, the prophet in: unworthy of many who can and will have perform it better. i have endeavour to discharge according to the scantling of time and measure of grace. vouchsafe unto i, the prophet. in this psalm, magnify the providence of god against all profane, epicure and carnal worldling who ascribe all ^hings either to blind fortune or their own industry. set down four kind of man which be most indebt unto god for deliverance from danger. the first be of those who, in their journey by land, have escape a dearth. from the first verse to the ten. the second be of prisoner enlarge and set at liberty. from the ten verse to the seventeen. the three be of such as be free from a desperate and mortal sickness from. the second be of prisoner, enlarge and set at liberty. from the ten verse to the seventeen. the three be of such as be free from a desperate and mortal sickness, from the 17. verse to the 23.. the last be of mariner sailor and seafaring man who have escape a storm and have get into the wish haven, from the 23. verse to the 33.. this last part be the text appoint for my present discourse. i have for my better, proceed in it and, your memory sake, reduce to these three head a danger, a deliverance, a duty. the danger be set down: verse 25.26.27. for the other two, verse be, but as it be a introduction into it. for he command and raise the stormy. a deliverance, a duty. the danger be set down, verse 25.26.27. for the other two verse be, but as it be a introduction into it, for he command and raise the stormy wind, etc. the deliverance from the danger be set forth by the mean that these seafaring man use to be free from it, viz. faithful and fervent prayer unto god, verse 28.29, 30. then they cry unto the lord in their trouble, etc. the duty be deliver, verse 31., 32.. let they therefore confess before the lord his love, kindness, etc. to speak of these in order, the first thing we have to note be this: that great be the danger of seafaring man d great be the danger of seafaring man, a lively image of. these in order. the first thing we have to note be this: that great be the danger of seafaring man d great be the danger of seafaring man. a lively image of their uncertain and variable life be here set down by the prophet, and if we mark well the comparison, it be next to famine, imprisonment and a deadly disease to be a seaman pittacus, for, as one say, mortuous sailor, be neither among the live nor yet among the dead, as have but a few inch of plank between they and death, they hang between both, ready to offer up their soul to every flaw of wind and billow of water wherein they be toss: the immovable rock and the mutable wind, the overflow water and between both, ready to offer up their soul to every flaw of wind and billow of water wherein they be toss. the immovable rock and the mutable wind, the overflow water and swallow sand, the tempestuous storm and spoil pirate have their life at their mercy and command. mariner live in the sea almost as fish have the water as their necessary element. be common man, void of fear, venturous and contemner of danger. yet when god on a sudden command a ^^orme and sit himself in the mouth of the tempest, when their ship be founder with water under they, when life and soul be ready to shake hand and depart this present world, then even these nought-fearing fellow, these high stomach man, tremble for fear like founder with water under they. when life and soul be ready to shake hand and depart this present world, then even these nought-fearing fellow, these high stomach man, tremble for fear, like fainthearted woman that shrink at every stir in a wherry on the river of thames in a rough and boisterous tide, or like unto a young soldier which start at the shoot off of a gun. i remember what aeschi^es speak of demosthenes at rhodes, when he read the defence that demosthenes have frame to his accusation. the people wonder at the strength and validity of it. pronu^cia^tem^, what will you have tho^ght, say he, if you have hear the beast? for so he speak. disgraceful of demosthenes. pronounce it with his own mouth, you wonder. validity of it pronu^cia^tem^. what will you have tho^ght, say he, if you have hear the beast, for so he speak, disgraceful of demosthenes, pronounce it with his own mouth. you wonder at the hear of the dangerous storm describe here by the prophet. but what will you say if you have see it yourselves with your own eye? jonah, a seafaring man, when he write of the storm wherein he be his pen, write nothing so effectual as his heart feel, and be the scribe and orator. only he be nothing so fluent and copious as when he be the patient. the style of his history be simple and plain. jonah, pray u^to the lord, his god, out of the belly of the fish. jonah, 1. 1. as when he be the patient. the style of his history be simple and plain: jonah, pray u^to the lord, his god, out of the belly of the fish. jonah 1.. 1. what one word therein be lofty and magnificent and lift above the common course of speech. but the style of jonah himself speak from a sense and feel of his own woe. be full of ornament and majesty, full of translated and vary phrase, as if a sentence of ordinary term be not sufficient to express his extraordinary woe for be in affliction and in the danger itself. verse 2. it be not say, as before, that he pray but that he cry. pray be turn into cry, not from the belly of the fish, but in the danger itself. verse 2. it be not say, as before, that he pray but that he cry. pray be turn into cry, not from the belly of the fish but fro^ the belly of hell, a maru^ilous transformation and the trouble he speak of. verse 3. be say to be a cast of he into the bottom of the midst of the sea and a compass of he about with flood, surge and wave which go over and over his head. nay, verse 5. a compass about of his soul and a very melt of it for tro^ble, as here in this psal, verse 26. and a wrap about of his head with weed and a go down unto the bottom of the mountain. let the of it for tro^ble, as here in this psal, verse 26.. and a wrap about of his head with weed and a go down unto the bottom of the mountain. let the scripture be thorough, search again and again, from the begin of genesis to the end of the revelation, and we shall hardly meet with the like description of misery, so emphatical and pathetical, set out as this of seafaring man, set down both in that second chapter of jonah and in this 107. psalm. the misery of job. you all know how vehement they be and he never more kind. express they then by this translation: be i a sea or a whale-fish that thou keep i in ward, job 7.12. will you yet see the? be and he never more kind. express they then by this translation: be i a sea or a whale-fish that thou keep i in ward, job 7.12. will you yet see the great danger of sea man? i will lead you along to weigh it by a experience and trial of my own in a typhoon or cruel tempest that i meet with off of the island of macqa^, adjoin to the continent of chyna. in this typhoon or storm, our goodly unicorn, a ship of 800^ t^nne, be cast away upon the continent of chyna. but all the people bless be, god save. and though at their first land upon the chyna shore, they be rifle by some of the base ^ort of the chynae^, yet upon but all the people bless, be god save. and though at their first land upon the chyna shore, they be rifle by some of the base ^ort of the chynae^, yet upon the come of the mandarins or governor they have good entertainment of diet and houseroom for their money and be very kind use by those of better note. in this tempest we lose also our pinnace, with 24 or 30 man in she which we have send before we to firando, a island adjoin to japan, to give notice of our come, of who we never hear news. we cut off our long boat and let she go. we sink our shallop with two man in she who be swallow up by the wave, such be. we never hear news, we cut off our long boat and let she go. we sink our shallop with two man in she who be swallow up by the wave, such be this storm as if jonah have be fly unto tharshish. the air be becloud, the heaven be obscure and make a egyptian night of five or six day perpetual horror. the experience of our seaman be amaze, the skill of our mariner be confound. our royal james most violent and dangerous leak and those which pump to keep other from drown be half drown themselves with continual pump. but god that hear jonah cry out of the belly of hell and who here be say to turn a storm into a calm, he pity the distress. themselves with continual pump. but god that hear jonah cry out of the belly of hell and who here be say to turn a storm into a calm, he pity the distress of his servant. he hush the tempest and bring we safe to firando our wish haven o that the tempest of macqau may never out of my mind, but that this wonderful deliverance and all other god mercy may still be. jog i at the elbow and put i in mind to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work, before the son of man, that i may exalt he in the congregation of the people and praise he in the assembly of the elder. but you will say, what need all this? the son of man that i may exalt he in the congregation of the people and praise he in the assembly of the elder. but you will say, what need all this discourse touch? the danger of seaman. we be meet together for another purpose: to give thanks unto god belove. i do confess, indeed it be so, that the end of our present meeting be for thanksgiving. but how can wee^er be feel thankful, as we shall in word and deed, if we know not the danger wherein we be and the deliverance vouchsafe unto we? will not the true knowledge and deep consideration of these make we put so many the more thanks into our sacrifice of praise, wherefore i beseech you to take to heart. we will not. the true knowledge and deep consideration of these make we put so many the more thanks into our sacrifice of praise, wherefore i beseech you to take to heart: first, the danger of your people in their passage both to virginia and after their land. second, the danger of your whole colony there. three, the danger of yourselves here at home and leave other that be not of your honourable company may think this point impertinent to they. let all of we consider the danger wherein we be and still be, and the many deliverance vouchsafe unto we, for i must entreat you to give i leave, to join danger and deliverance together for the better stir of you up unto your duty, and then many deliverance vouchsafe unto we, for i must entreat you to give i leave, to join danger and deliverance together for the better, stir of you up unto your duty, and then, i doubt not, but all of we, shall have cause to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man, and first to touch the danger of your people, both in their passage to virginia and after their land. there, may i not say, in the word of job, job 16.3.4, will you give the word of he that be afflict to the wind, as if he have say: when affliction itself and the inmost sorrow of my heart tell my tale, will you not regard it o that? he that be afflict to the wind, as if he have say, when affliction itself and the inmost sorrow of my heart tell my tale, will you not regard it o that your soul be in my soul stead, that you feel as much sorrow as i do. liquour in queror in i speak, that that i speak from a world of trouble. i make my complaint in the bitterness of my soul. sure, if some hundred of those that miscarry in the infancy and at the first beginning of your plantation, which be exceed better within these 2. year, be now alive, i think they will speak no otherwise than job spake^. will you give the word of they that be afflict to the wind? will you? within these 2. year be now alive. i think they will speak no otherwise than job spake^. will you give the word of they that be afflict to the wind? will you not believe in what danger we be? summer land, when some of we make shipwreck upon the suppose enchant land, when other of we encounter with bloody enemy in the west indies, when many of we die by the way, and when those that be leave alive, some perish a shore for want of comfortable provision and look unto and other be kill with the bow and arrow of the savage upon our first land. there, i presume i speak to melt heart of flesh as tender, sensible of your brother. woe as hearty thankful for. the bow and arrow of the savage upon our first land. there, i presume i speak to melt heart of flesh as tender, sensible of your brother, woe as hearty, thankful for your own good and now belove, since the case be alter, that all difficulty be swallow up and see first. there be no danger by the way, neither through encounter of enemy or pirate, nor meet with rock or shoal, all which to seafaring man be very dangerous and from all which your ship and people be far remove by reason of their fair and safe passage through the main ocean, nor through the tediousness of the passage. the fit season of the year for a speedy passage be now far better. know then before, and and safe passage through the main ocean, nor through the tediousness of the passage. the fit season of the year for a speedy passage be now far better know then before, and by that mean the passage itself, make almost in so many week- as former it be wont to be make in month- which i conceive to be, through the blessing of god, the main cause of the safe arrival of your last fleet of nine sail of ship, that not one but one in who room there be another bear of eight hundred which be transport out of england and ireland for your plantation shall miscarry, by the way, whereas in your former voyage scarce 80. of a 100 arrive safe in virginia, and second see, be transport out of england and ireland for your plantation shall miscarry, by the way, whereas in your former voyage scarce 80. of a 100 arrive safe in virginia. and second, see there be no danger after their land, either through war or famine or want of convenient lodging. and look too through which many miscarry heretofore, for bless be god, there have be a long time and still be a happy league of peace and amity. sound conclude and faithful keep between the english and the native that the fear of kill each other be now vanish away beside there. be now in your plantation plenty of good and wholesome provision for the strength and comfort not only of the colony but also of all, such as: now vanish away beside. there be now in your plantation plenty of good and wholesome provision for the strength and comfort not only of the colony but also of all, such as, after their passage, do land ashore there be also convenient lodging and careful attendance. provide for they till they can provide for themselves, and a fair inn for receive, and harbour of stranger erect in james city, to the set up of which both your worshipful governor, sir francis wyatt, and your worthy treasurer, master george sands, do write that. they doubt not. but there will be raise between fifteen hundred and two thousand pound to which every man contribute, cheerful and bountiful. they be all free-hearted and openhanded to all public. good work, see i. there will be raise between fifteen hundred and two thousand pound to which every man contribute, cheerful and bountiful, they be all free-hearted and openhanded to all public good work. see, i say that now all former difficulty which much hinder the progress of your noble plantation be remove and in a manner overcome, and that your people in your colony, through god mercy, be all in good health, every one busy in their vocation as bee in their hive at the set sail of your ship, the concord, from virginia in march last. o, what miracle be these, o what cause have you and they to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work, before the son of man, but to pass from the? miracle be these. o what cause have you and they to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work, before the son of man, but to pass from the danger and deliverance of your people who endanger yea, lose their life in settle of your plantation? consider, i beseech you, in the second place, the danger wherein your whole colony stand. at the time of sir thomas gate arrive in virginia from the summer land, when it be conclude a few day after his land, by himself, sir george summer, captain newport and the whole counsel, by the general approbation of all, to abandon the colony because of the want of provision and to make for newfoundland and so for england. and will not the the whole counsel, by the general approbation of all, to abandon the colony because of the want of provision and to make for newfoundland and so for england. and will not the hopeful settle of your colony there now, under the government of a worthy and worshipful commander and a wise and wel-experienced counsel, stir you up to confess before the lord, his love kindness, and his wonderful work before the son of man? but if neither the danger of your people nor the danger of your whole colony abroad and the deliverance vouchsafe to they both be enough to stir you up to confess before the lord, his love kindness, then i beseech you in the three place to consider the danger of your own self here. both be enough to stir you up to confess before the lord his love kindness. then i beseech you in the three place to consider the danger of your own self here at home. what mass of money have you bury in that plantation? how many of you have it not make to wish that you have never put your hand to this plough? nay, how many of you have it not make to shrink in your shoulder and to sink as it be under the burden and to be quite out of hope for ever? see, penny, of that you have so large depurse. and now, belove be not the case, alter, be not your hope. great of see, nay, of feel, within a few year of. see, penny, of that you have so large depurse. and now, belove be not the case, alter, be not your hope. great of see, nay, of feel, within a few year, of double treble, yea, i may say, of tensold for one. do not, all of you know what that religious and judicious overseer of your college land there, write unto you from thence, master george thorpe in his letter, write from james city, may 17. 1621.. no man, say he can just say that this country be not capable of all those good thing that you, in your wisdom, with your great charge, have project, both for her wealth and honour, and also of all other good thing that the most opulent part of christendom do afford. you in your wisdom, with your great charge, have project both for her wealth and honour and also of all other good thing that the most opulent part of christendom do afford. neither be we hopeless that this country may also yield thing of better value than any of those. and sure, by that which i have hear and see abroad, in my travail to india and japan, i be confirm in the truth of that which he do write. for japan lie in the same latitude that virginia do, and if there be any odds virginia have, they as lie more southerly than japan do. japan, i say, lie under the same latitude that virginia do, abound with all thing for profit and pleasure. be one of. virginia. have they, as lie more southerly than japan? do japan, i say, lie under the same latitude that virginia do? abound with all thing for profit and pleasure? be one of the mighty and opulent empire in the world, have in it many rich mine of gold and silver, and have you not a taste of some merchantable commodity send unto you from virginia some year ago, while that worshipful and worthy governor, sir thomas dale, send home unto you sample of above a dozen, several good commodity from thence? have you not now great hope of abundance of corn, wine, oil, lemon, orange, pomegranate and all manner of fruit pleasant to the eye and wholesome for the belly, and of plenty of silk, silk grass, cotton-wool? hope of abundance of corn, wine, oil, lemon, orange, pomegranate and all manner of fruit pleasant to the eye and wholesome for the belly, and of plenty of silk, silk grass, cotton-wool, flax, hemp, etc. for the back. be not you already possess, with rich mine of copper and iron, and be not your hope great of far rich mineral. master george sand, in his letter, write from james city, march 3. 1621.. have you not read what, of late, your worthy treasurer do write unto you? if, say he, we overcome this year the yron-worke, glasse-worke, salt-work, take order for the plentiful set of corn, restrain the quantity of tobacco and mend it in the quality, plant vine, mulbery-tree, figtree, pomegranate, potato, cotton, woolle and erect a glasse-worke, salt-work, take order for the plentiful set of corn, restrain the quantity of tobacco and mend it in the quality, plant vine, mulbery-tree, figtree, pomegranate, potato, cotton woolle, and erect a fair inn in james city, to the set up of which? i doubt not. but we shall raise fifteen hundred or two thousand pound for every man give willing towards this and other public work. you have enough for this year and a little after. in the same letter^, master pory deserve good encouragement for his painful discovery to the southward, as far as the choanoack, who, although he have tread on a little good ground, have pass through great forest of pine, 15. or 16. mile broad and above 60. mile long, which will serve the choanoack who, although he have tread on a little good ground, have pass through great forest of pine, 15. or 16. mile broad and above 60. mile long, which will serve well for mast for ship and for pitch and ^arre when we shall come to extend our plantation to those border. on the other side of the river, there be a fruitful country, bless with abundance of corn reap twice a year, above which be the copper mine by all of all place, general affirm. he have also meet with a great deal of silk grass which grow there monthly, of which master harriot have affirm in print many year ago that it will make silk grow-graines^ and of which, and cotten, will all the cambaya. silk grass which grow there monthly, of which master harriot have affirm in print many year ago that it will make silk grow-graines^, and of which and cotten will all the cambaya and bengala stuff be make in the east indies, hear you not with your own ear what m john martin, a armenian by birth, that have live now 6. or 7. year in virginia and be but very late, come from thence and purpose, as all other that be late, come over, who also far prefer virginia to england, to return thither again with this resolution there to live and die, say in the audience of your whole court, the 8 of this instant. i have travail, say he, by land, over eighteen, several kingdom and this resolution there to live and die, say in the audience of your whole court, the 8 of this instant. i have travail, say he, by land, over eighteen, several kingdom, and yet all of they, in my mind, come far short of virginia, both for temperature of air and fertility of the soil. all this thorough consider o how great cause have you to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man, and that all of we here present may confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man. let we take to heart our private, our public danger and deliverance. from how many danger, eminent and imminent, have the lord deliver. and his wonderful work before the son of man. let we take to heart our private, our public danger and deliverance. from how many danger, eminent and imminent. have the lord deliver we and our whole land in eightie-eight and in the gun powder-treason? have we not, then, all of we, good cause to exalt the lord in the congregation of the people and to praise he in the assembly of the elder? nay, have not elder and yongers and all good cause so to do? but, alas, i be afraid that we have forget the love, kindness of the lord and his wonderful deliverance bestow upon we. (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). may not england just be charge with israel sin who prayer and praise end so. love kindness of the lord and his wonderful deliverance bestow upon we (@), (@), (@), (@), (@). may not england just be charge with israel sin who prayer and praise end so soon as they pass the red sea. among the tribe there be one name, manasse, which signify forgetfulness. i pray god, the tribe, even the head of our people, forget it not, but that we and the whole land may confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work, before the son of man and se^ke to exalt he in the congregation of the people and to praise he in the assembly of the elder, verse 28. then they cry unto the lord in their trouble, etc. thus have speak of the danger i of the people and to praise he in the assembly of the elder, verse 28.. then they cry unto the lord in their trouble, etc. thus have speak of the danger. i come now to speak a word of the deliverance and the mean which these seafaring man use to be free from their trouble, which be faithful and fervent prayer. then they cry unto the lord, etc. faithful and fervent prayer unto god, d there be no danger so great, out of which faithful and fervent prayer will not help a man. in the name of jesus christ, be a sure mean to procure help in trouble and to free we from the great danger that be, or at least from the evil thereof, these mariner go. of jesus christ be a sure mean to procure help in trouble and to free we from the great danger that be, or at least from the evil thereof. these mariner go unto god not with a cold and careless devotion, nor with a dumb spirit, but with as earnest and impatient a voice as the affection of their heart and affliction of their body can send forth. they thus cry unto the lord in their trouble. he bring they out of their distress. he hush the storm. he bring they to the haven of their desire and make they glad at the heart as david give charge to his soldier that they shall not kill absolom, his son, though he send they against absolom to stay his desire and make they glad at the heart as david give charge to his soldier that they shall not kill absolom, his son, though he send they against absolom, to stay his rebellion. so god forbid his cross to destroy his child, though he send they against his child to purge out their corruption. as john, after the voice of thunder, hear the voice of harper, so when the saint have hear the noise of sorrow, they shall hear the sound of joy as the viper leap upon paul and leap off again. so trouble leap upon the righteous and leap off again, as though they have mistake the party and rapt at the wrong door. one call affliction the trance of the righteous, because they seem dead. upon the righteous and leap off again, as though they have mistake the party and rapt at the wrong door. one call affliction the trance of the righteous, because they seem dead for a while, but they wake again. now all this come to pass because the lord send the spirit of prayer into the heart of his child, whereby they cry unto he in the time of their trouble, and therefore no marvel when they cry unto the lord in their trouble that he bring they out of their distress. the most effectual spe^ch to the secret ear of god come not from word but from sigh and groan. he that hear without ear can interpret our prayer without our tongues^ he that see and fancy nathaniel. the secret ear of god come not from word but from sigh and groan. he that hear without ear can interpret our prayer without our tongues^. he that see and fancy nathaniel under the figtree before he be call. he that see and sanctify john baptist in his mother womb before he come forth, he s^eth and bless our prayer fervent conceive in the bosom of our conscience before they be utter. but if they be faint and faithless- 1 king, 18. 26^, 27. etc. they shall be answer of god as the prayer of baal priest be who, though they cry loud from morning to noon and to the offer up of the evening sacrifice and cut themselves till the blood gush out upon they. yet there. priest be, who, though they cry loud from morning to noon and to the offer up of the evening sacrifice, and cut themselves till the blood gush out upon they, yet there be none to hear nor to regard their roar. give, therefore, but thy prayer a voice to cry, for it must not be dumb nor tongue-tied. give it a eye to seek, for it must not be wander and careless, and give it a hand to knock, for it must not fear to molest and disquiet. and not only shall thou be free from danger, but the door, yea, all the treasure and jewel of the kingdom of heaven shall be open unto it. but some, it may be, will say: my danger be great, yea. danger, but the door, yea, all the treasure and jewel of the kingdom of heaven shall be open unto it. but some it may be will say: my danger be great, yea, so great that it make my heart to ache within i and my soul to melt for sorrow. i answer: the greatness of our danger can be a stop to our deliverance. if we can but call and cry unto the lord in our trouble, he will bring we out of our distress. the seafaring man here describe have their heart to melt for sorrow, yet cry unto the lord in their trouble, he bring they out of their distress. the word here translate: distress be by arias, montanus, translate and by junius, and so that. sorrow, yet cry unto the lord in their trouble. he bring they out of their distress. the word here translate: distress be by arias, montanus translate and by junius, and so that the trouble here speak of be not proper trouble but narrowness and straits. be our case, then, never so desperate. the lord can help it for nothing be unpossible to he. the israelite groan unto he in egypt. he hear and deliver they from the tyranny of pharaoh, the young man in the fiery furnace. call upon he and be. deliver the cry of daniel. stop the mouth of the roar lion. paul and silas be in bond, pray and their chain fall loose from they. the door open and give they passage, although we be. daniel, stop the mouth of the roar lion. paul and silas be in bond, pray and their chain fall loose from they, the door open and give they passage. although we be plunge never so low that we know not where to seek nor where to find, although the flood of trouble run clean over and over, we in so much that we seem to ourselves past help and recovery. yet be we not indeed past help, so long as we be not past desire to be holpen man, indeed, be altogether amaze and in a manner bereave of wit and understanding when they feel themselves dangerous, toss too and fro, as here these seafaring man do, but when they cry in their trouble, un^o the lord, he manner bereave of wit and understanding. when they feel themselves dangerous, toss too and fro, as here these seafaring man do. but when they cry in their trouble, un^o the lord, he bring they out of their distress. there be never affliction so great, but the hand of the lord have be able to master it. there be never storm so fierce but his power have be able to allay it. therefore, if out soul do even melt for trouble within we, we must not take discomfort at it. the lord sit above the water-flood, the lord command the sea and all that be therein. the lord that turn the storm to a calm, bless be his name and let the might of his majesty receive honour for. lord command the sea and all that be therein, the lord that turn the storm to a calm. bless be his name and let the might of his majesty receive honour for evermore. he will never forsake his child that cry unto he, neither in health nor sickness, light nor darkness, storm nor calm in the land of the live, nor in the land of forgetfulness. therefore, let we resolve with holy david, psal 23.4: though i shall walk through the valley of the shadow of death, i will fear no evil. i will fear no evil, say david, neither great nor small, for it be all one with god to deliver from the great storm aswell as from the lesser, some difference there be, indeed of danger. evil, say david, neither great nor small, for it be all one with god to deliver from the great storm aswell as from the lesser. some difference there be, indeed, of danger and deliverance out of they, but it be only such as in book print on large and less letter and paper. the matter not vary at all. for example, when god bring some of the ship of your former fleet to virginia in safety- here god providence be see and feel private by some and this be a deliverance- write as it be in on a lesser paper and letter. but now when god bring all of your 9 ship and all your people in they in health and safety to virginia, yea and that ship. on a lesser paper and letter. but now, when god bring all of your 9 ship and all your people in, they in health and safety, to virginia, yea, and that ship, tiger of you, which have fall into the hand of the turkish man of war through tempest and contrary wind, she not be able to bear sail and by that mean drive out of her course some hundred of mile for otherwise of itself the passage from england to virginia be out of the walk of turk and clear and safe from all pirate who common lurk near land and head-land and not in the main ocean, when this your tiger have fall by reason of this storm and some indiscretion of her m^ster and people. who common lurk near land and head-land and not in the main ocean, when this, your tiger have fall by reason of this storm and some indiscretion of her m^ster, and people who take the turk to have be fleming bind for holland or england. bear up the helm to speak with they, for they need not, if they have list to have come near the turk but have proceed safe on their voyage into the hand of those merciless turk who have take from they most of their victual and all of their serviceable sail, tackle and anchor and have not so much as leave they a hourglass or compass to steer their course, thereby utter disable they from go from they and proceed on their voyage. tackle and anchor and have not so much as leave they a hourglass or compass to steer their course, thereby utter disable they from go from they and proceed on their voyage. when i say, god, have ransom, she out their hand. esa 43.4, as the prophet speak by another sail which they espy and bring she likewise safe to virginia with all her people, two english boy only, except for which the turk give they two other, a french youth and a irish. be not there. the presence of god, print as it be in folio on royal crown paper and capital letter that, as habacucke say, hab 2.2. they that run and ride post may read it. o then how great cause have you and they? folio on royal crown paper and capital letter that, as habacucke say, hab 2.2. they that run and ride post may read it. o then, how great cause have you and they to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man, verse 31.32. let they therefore confess before the lord, etc. hitherto of the danger and deliverance, now of the duty which, in a word, be thanksgiving. the great our danger, i^ d the more and great god blessing be upon we, the large and hearty. ought our praise and thanksgiving be unto god. for the same, the more joyful be our deliverance and ^he more cheerful ought we to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful. praise and thanksgiving be unto god for the same, the more joyful be our deliverance and ^he more cheerful ought we to confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man. thanksgiving be the end of our deliverance. this duty, careful perform, be a singular exercise of faith. when man stand upon the shore and behold the dangerous and tumultuous sea which they have pass, be stir up to sacrifice praise and glory to he for the s^me, gen 8.20, exod 15.1, psal 50.15. this service be a further work of faith. then. petition for they which be but enlighten ^gainst death, may serve in a sort to make some petition to god, but they never bethink they atall of the. work of faith, then petition for they which be but enlighten ^gainst death, may serve in a sort to make some petition to god, but they never bethink they atall of the duty of thanksgiving when they have receive benefit from he. and for this cause, nine of the ten leper which christ cleanse be defame to all posterity by the holy ghost in the gospel. let we labour to purge ourselves of such a wickedness. spend much of our time in song of thanksgiving, confess before the lord his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man. for thanksgiving, be as it be the homage or rent-charge which we be to return to god for all his mercy, especial for our right to our before the son of man for thanksgiving, be as it be the homage or rent-charge which we be to return to god for all his mercy, especial for our right to our inheritance in heaven. and we know that if man refuse to do their homage or pay their rent to their earthly landlord, they shall deserve thereby to be turn out of their farm and other to be put in their room, which shall discharge the duty better. so if we prove unthankful to the lord of heaven, shall we not just deserve to lose our inheritance? wherefore let we do as man which be bind by bond to make tender of a sum of money upon great penalty, in a certain place and at a certain. our inheritance. wherefore let we do as man, which be bind by bond to make tender of a sum of money upon great penalty in a certain place and at a certain time. name in the bond. they will be sure to tender the payment in the place and at the time, appoint and specify in the bond lest they incur the penalty even so, etc. let we beware, we do not forslow our thankfulness upon light and slight excuse, lest we forfeit god love, kindness and our own salvation. let we weigh what god have do for we and lay all god benefit together, thereby the be^ter to stir we up unto thankfulness. leah bear one son and call his name reuben, a second son and call do for we and lay all god benefit together, thereby the be^ter to stir we up unto thankfulness. leah bear one son and call his name reuben. a second son and call his name simeon, gen. 29.32. 33.. etc. and a three and call he. but when, above expectation, she conceive and bear the four time, she purposely call his name judah and express protest that she will praise the lord if one benefit move you not many shall. if many have not do it yet, this last and late mercy pass all the former o call it judah and now, of set purpose, praise the lord and confess before he his love, kindness and his wonderful work, before the son of man, which that you may the. call it judah, and now, of set purpose, praise the lord and confess before he his love, kindness and his wonderful work before the son of man, which, that you may the better do give. i leave, i pray you, to show you how your thanksgiving ought to be qualify. that it may be a sweet savour unto god, it must be accompany: 1. with confessi^^, 2. with exaltation. confession again be either of god love kindness or of his wonderful work. there be two thing in which god love kindness be to be see: 1. in give, 2. in forgive. god love kindness in give be to be praise. for be not god a great and good benefactor or we, and do we not great, praise our? in give. 2. in forgive god, love kindness in give be to be praise. for be not god a great and good benefactor or we, and do we not great, praise our benefactor? o let we confess his love kindness, as he be our benefactor. god. love kindness in forgive our sin be also to be confess. i show you before the danger of your people send to virgini^, the danger of your colony plant there and the danger of your own self here at home. and now, if you look to the primitive and original cause of all these, your great danger and many disasters that have heretofore befall to your plantation, i suppose you shall soon find the cause to be sin. the mariner in the cause of all these, your great danger and many disasters that have heretofore befall to your plantation. i suppose you shall soon find the cause to be sin the mariner in the transportation of jonah, jonah^ 1.7. make no question hereof. let we, with these mariner cast lot that we may know, for who cause this evil, come upon your plantation in virginia, be it for the sin of our land in general, either because, as it be say, of m^r^^, it come not out to help forward this work of the lord with their prayer and purse, judg 5.23- or be it because, as the prophet speak, isaiah 1.5- the whole head be sick and the whole heart be heavy, from the sole of the foot to and purse, judg 5.23. or be it because, as the prophet speak, isaiah 1.5, the whole head be sick and the whole heart be heavy, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there be nothing whole therein, etc. sure, sure the sin of our land be, cry sin, and be it. any wonder if they do awake the justice of god and turn the mercy of heaven into rod of indignation. or be it for the sin of your own society at home, because you have either too much affect your gain or too too seldom call upon the name of god in prayer for give his blessing to your plantation, or too faint depend upon god by faith and patience for the gain, or too too seldom call upon the name of god in prayer for give his blessing to your plantation, or too faint depend upon god by faith and patience for the issue, or too much neglect god in thankfulness for the success. i can not excuse nor accuse you. you need not care to be judge by man day 1. cor 4: 3^. your conscience can best tell you whether the lot fall upon you or not, or be it for the sin of such as you have transport to your plantation, because most of they at the first be the very scum of the land, and great pity it be that no better at that time can be. have they neglect god worship, live in idleness. they at the first be the very scum of the land, and great pity it be that no better at that time can be. have they neglect god worship, live in idleness, plod conspiracy, resist the government of superior and carry themselves dissolute among the heathen. if in any of these they have offend, be not god rod of mortality just upon they for their sin, but now belove almighty god. have gracious, look upon you and your people in pass. by their and your sin, the lord have say to the destroy angel, 2. sam 24.16. it be sufficient, hold now ^hy hand. the mortality of your people be cease abroad and the hope of your good return be increase at home. o ^herefore ought you not? 24.16, it be sufficient. hold now ^hy hand, the mortality of your people be cease abroad and the hope of your good return be increase at home. o ^herefore ought you not to confess before the lord his love, kindness, both in give of mercy and forgive of sin. another confession there must be of god wonderful work, and both these confession be again and again repeat in the amebe burden or foot of this psalm. it be most true ps^l 40.5 and 66.3, and 10, 4. 24.. that all god work be wonderful, for he have make they all in wisdom, in number, weight and measure, and that the lord declare himself to be great and wonderful, even in the least of they amongst the son of. have make they all in wisdom in number, weight and measure, and that the lord declare himself to be great and wonderful, even in the least of they amongst the son of man. this pharaoh enchanter do confess this: be the finger of god. exod 8.19, in the little, louse but unthankful man, take no notice of ordinary favour, common protection, health, plenty, rest, pleasure, which be usual with they, and therefore god name be not praise for they, for except christ work miracle they will not believe. john 6.30: what sign, say the fleshly hearer of christ word? show thou that we may see it and believe thou. what do ^hou work? no sign, no faith, yea, except god do great thing for they. psal 147.20 mark. of christ word. show thou that we may see it and believe thou. what do ^hou work? no sign, no faith. yea, except god do great thing, for they- psal 147.20, mark 2.12- that they may be able to say that he have not do so to any, and we never see such a thing. they will not confess his love kindness, but rather smother both it and his wonderful work. let we therefore consider and weigh well the wonderful work of the lord, for be it not a work of wonder to command the creature against the course of nature, as to cause the wind to cease with a word and to quiet the sea only with a beck to stay the fire that it do not. against the course of nature as to cause the wind to cease with a word and to quiet the sea only with a beck to stay the fire that it do not burn and the hungry lion that they do not devour, to mollify the heart of savage and to make some of they voluntary to remove from their own warm and well seat and people habitation to give place to stranger who they have never before see, as p^whatan at the first plantation of the english, to remove from his own station and now, of late, the mattaw^mbs to depart from their clear and rich ground and to make other of they as opachancano to sell to the english and their governor, sir george, yeardly, the right. late the mattaw^mbs to depart from their clear and rich ground and to make other of they as opachancano, to sell to the english and their governor, sir george yeardly, the right and title they have to their possession. yet all these have the lord do, and be they not wonderful work indeed. o then let we stir up ourselves and other and call upon. they say, psal 66.16: come and hearken, all you that fear god, and i will tell you what the lord have do to my soul. o let we confess before the lord as his love, kindness, so also his wonderful work before the son of man. but alas, i be afraid that it be with we concern god, wonderful work as it be. lord as his love, kindness, so also his wonderful work before the son of man. but alas, i be afraid that it be with we concern god wonderful work, as it be with the people of the jew concern the wonder of god law. of who god by his prophet, complain? hosea 8.12. i have write to they the great thing of my law, but they be account as a strange thing god have vouchsafe to teach they the wonder of his word. what great bounty they pass by they as thing not worthy to be wonder at and regard. what great impiety. o that it be not with we touch his wonderful work, as it be with they concern the wonder of his law. our thanksgiving if wonder at and regard what great impiety o that it be not with we touch his wonderful work, as it be with they concern the wonder of his law. our thanksgiving, if it be good, must be accompany with exalt of the lord. now, to exalt the lord, none can proper be say to do it, for who can exalt the high that exalt all and be exalt of none? to exalt the lord, then, in the congregation of his people, be nothing else but, as david expound it, psal 122.8.9- to wish prosperity unto god church, and to procure the wealth of god people. o then belove, will you have god to accept of your thanks and to give a blessing to your colony abroad and yourselves. church and to procure the wealth of god people o then belove. will you have god to accept of your thanks and to give a blessing to your colony abroad and yourselves at home? study to wish well and to do well to god. church and people labour first to procure faithful, honest and peaceable preacher and send they over to your people, as you have send some already, both of good learning and sanctify life, and many more such may you send that they may open their eye- act^ 26.18- that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of satan unto god. that they may receive forgiveness of sin and a inheritance among they which be sanctify by faith in christ. if you darkness to light and from the power of satan unto god, that they may receive forgiveness of sin and a inheritance among they which be sanctify by faith in christ. if you provide not spiritual food for your people aswell as corporal, what better provision make you than you do for your bruit beast which feed in your pasture? nay, do you make so good for have not a ox therein what he need, but a man without this, be he not leave unprovided of the far better part, even his soul, yea. and if you have no care to provide good preacher for your people, but send over unto they such as offer themselves hand over head, you provide not well for yourselves. for what assurance can have no care to provide good preacher for your people but send over unto they such as offer themselves hand over head. you provide not well for yourselves, for what assurance can you have of they who have no assurance of themselves? what service can you expect from they which perform none unto almighty god? will they ever be faithful unto you that be unfaithful unto he? and how can they be faithful unto god if they have not faithful preacher to bring they unto he? sure the best you can look from they be but eye-service which. how good this will be, i leave it to yourselves well to consider of who have feel the smart of it by your slow return. nothing can cast a sure. eye-service which, how good this will be, i leave it to yourselves well to consider of who have feel the smart of it by your slow return. nothing can cast a sure knot upon the heart of your people but the true knowledge and fear of god, so as when you advance religion you advance together with it your own profit. the neglect of this have make your hope in your long look for return to this hour to be frustrate. 1. sam 6.11, deut 28.5, hag 1.19.30. obed ed^m prosper the better for the ark of god. the jew have no good harness while they leave off to build god temple and they amend in their estate. when they amend that fault and reform themselves, among other. of god, the jew have no good harness while they leave off to build god temple and they amend in their estate, when they amend that fault and reform themselves, among other, of the cause that it have not please god to be successful unto your plantation, at the beginning thereof and in the infancy of the same, that worthy overseer of your college land, before mention, give this as one that you have not, as you ought, for these be his very word: prefer god glory by your serious endeavour of convert the native who, as he write, do live so peaceable among we and round about we, as they do even seem to groan under the burden of the bondage of satan and to want nothing. as he write, do live so peaceable among we and round about we, as they do even seem to groan under the burden of the bondage of satan and to want nothing but mean to be deliver. and this he confirm by a discourse which he have with opachankan^, their great king, who have succeed powhatan, who daughter pokah^^ta^ one master, john rolfe, a english gentleman of good worth marry. for. he find that the say opachankano have more notion of religion in he than can be imagine, in so great a blindness, since he willing acknowledge that they be not the right way, desire to be instruct in we and confess that god love we more than they and that he think the cause of his anger. acknowledge that they be not the right way, desire to be instruct in we and confess that god love we more than they and that he think the cause of his anger against they be their custom of make their child blacke-boye or consecrate they to satan. he find also that the say opachankan^ have some knowledge of many of the fix s^arres and have observe the north star and the course of the constellation about it and call the great bear, which in their language do signify the sun. i may here speak something touch my own experience of the willingness of the heathen in gen^rall, in all the eastern part of the world where i have travail, how ready they be to receive the gospel if my own experience of the willingness of the heathen in gen^rall, in all the eastern part of the world where i have travail, how ready they be to receive the gospel if there be but preacher among they that can and will instruct they by their doctrine and life. and of one of they in special, peter pope, so name by his majesty, which i bring with i out of india to england and teach he i not be able to speak otherwise to he, nor he to i, but by sign to speak, to read and write the english tongue and hand both roman and secretary within less than the space of a year, so that his majesty and many of the nobility wonder at his hand. and write the english tongue and hand both roman and secretary within less than the space of a year, so that his majesty and many of the nobility wonder at his hand. and within the compass of three year i teach he the ground of religion and to learn most of saint pa^les epistle by heart and to give a public confession of his faith the day he be baptize in a famous assembly here in the city, before the right worshipful, the east india company, and since to write the latin epistle hereunto adjoin. i can here say much of the double diligence of jesuit, their poison with the coloquintida of popery, many thousand soul in the e^st indies and japan and other, the remote part of. can here say much of the double diligence of jesuit, their poison with the coloquintida of popery, many thousand soul in the e^st indies and japan and other, the remote part of the world, all which may be motive strong enough to stir you up to have a great care of the plant of the gospel in your plantation. but time now call upon i to excite you as to labour, to procure and send over honest and painful preacher. so in the second place, to have a care, as i know you have, to procure and send over skilful and pianefull tradesman and husbandman to follow their trade and to cultivate the ground. our country abound with people. your colony want they. you all know that there. and send over skilful and pianefull tradesman and husbandman to follow their trade and to cultivate the ground. our country abound with people, your colony want they. you all know that there be nothing more dangerous for the estate of commonwealth. then, when the people do increase to a great number and multitude, then may just parallel with the largeness of the place and country in which they live. for even as blood though it be the best humour in the body, yet if it abound in great quantity than the vessel and state of the body will contain and bear, do endanger the body and oftentimes destroy it. so, although the honour of a king be in the multitude of people, as wise king solomon speak, yet body will contain and bear do endanger the body and oftentimes destroy it. so, although the honour of a king be in the multitude of people, as wise king solomon speak, yet when this multitude of people increase to over great a number, pro^ 14.28- the common wealth stand subject to many perilous inconnenience, as famine, poverty and sundry other sort of calamity thus have fall into. this point of exalt god in the congregation of the people and the assembly of the elder, i have here good occasion offer to i to bless god for the prudence and providence of this honourable city, the honourable elder thereof, the honourable lord mayor, and the right worshipful, the alderman, his brother, who see this city to be mighty increase. the prudence and providence of this honourable city, the honourable elder thereof, the honourable lord mayor, and the right worshipful, the alderman, his brother, who see this city to be mighty, increase and fear lest the overflow multitude of inhabitant shall, like too much blood in the body, infect the whole city with plague and poverty, have therefore devise in their great wisdom a remedy for this malady, to wit the transport of their overflow multitude into virginia, which be first put in practice in the maioralitie of that worthy and famous lord maior, sir george b^wl^^, who se^t over a hundred person. the half of their charge be bear by the city, the other half by the honourable virginia company, which, worthy course, be afterward follow by b^wl^^, who se^t over a hundred person. the half of their charge be bear by the city, the other half by the honourable virginia company, which, worthy course, be afterward follow by the right worshipful sir william cockin, in who, mayoralty, be send over a hundred more in the like nature. and now, likewise, the right honourable, the present lord maior, with the right worshipful, the alderman, his brother, intend to continue this course that they may ease the city of a many that be ready to starve, and do starve daily in our street, to the great grief of all tender-hearted and merciful man, for want of food to put into their mouth. this course i say they have take already and mean to prosecute it as. the great grief of all tender-hearted and merciful man for want of food to put into their mouth. this course i say they have take already and mean to prosecute it, as i be inform, to the end. they may preserve this famous city in great peace and prosperity. herein, wise, imitattng the prudent and provident husbandman who they see, thus to deal with his ground when they be overcharge with cattle, for as he, by remove they from one ground to another, provide well both for his cattle and for his ground, so they, in their wisdom, by remove their super-increasing people from the city to virginia, have provide well both for this city and their people, for whereas many of those which be send over be their wisdom by remove their super-increasing people from the city to virginia, have provide well both for this city and their people. for whereas many of those which be send over be a burden to this city, they be now, through the good government there and god blessing upon the work their hand, become man able to live of themselves in good sort and fashion in virginia. be before their send over, like to unconuert onesymus, unprofitable unto all philem ver 1^, and now by their be there, like unto the same onesymus, but true convert, profitable to the plantation and to the city, to the one, by their pain, to the other, by their prayer, blessing god from the bottom of their heart, that they be send. profitable to the plantation and to the city, to the one by their pain, to the other by their prayer, blessing god from the bottom of their heart that they be send from london to virginia, yea, blessing also the lord mayor in who time they be send over. i may say of this singular prudence and providence of this honourable city what our saviour say of the fact of marie magdalen in pour her costly ointment on his sacred head. howsoever, some son of belial malign this worthy work as judas the traitor, and some of hell malign ^^at act of ma^ies, anoint of christ, pretend ^^e good of the poor but intend it as much as his own salvation, which be little or nothing at all. of hell, malign ^^at act of ma^ies. anoint of christ, pretend ^^e good of the poor but intend it as much as his own salvation, which be little or nothing at all. joh 12.3.4 ^c. mat 26.13. very, i say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be, preach throughought all the world, there shall also this that she have do be speak of, for a memorial of she so very i say of this honourable city and worthy elder thereof, that so long as there shall continue any english in virginia- and we hope their race shall continue there till the second come of our bless saviour transport from this city thither, they shall not cease to pray for the prosperity of this famous city and worthy governor. shall continue there till the second come of our bless saviour, transport from this city thither. they shall not cease to pray for the prosperity of this famous city and worthy governor thereof. wherefore, let i beseech so many of the right worshipful and worthy governor of this famous city as be present, and i humble entreat they to stir uppe all such as be absent to proceed as they have begin, pro^ 4.18: that their way may shine as the light that shine more and more unto the perfect day. that what be speak of ruth may be verify in they. ruth. 3.10. thou have show more goodness in the latter end, then at the beginning, and that that may be their praise, which be record to. ruth may be verify in they ruth. 3.10. thou have. show more goodness in the latter end, then at the beginning, and that that may be their praise, which be record to be the commendation of the church of thy^tir^. re^. 2.19. i know thy work and thy love and service and faith and patience and how thy work. be more at the last, then, as the first right worshipful, you be plentiful in other good work, the maintain of your hospital and other public work in this famous city. preach your munificence through all the world. r^^^^, 8. and 16.19. as the faith and obedience of the roman be, publish abroad among all o be rich in well, do this way, likewise that it may be say: world, r^^^^, 8. and 16.19. as the faith and obedience of the roman be publish abroad among all o be rich in well, do this way. likewise that it may be say of you. many have do worthy for the plantation in virginia, but the honourable city of london surmount they all. your city, as i say, abound in people, and long may it do so. the plantation in virginia be capable enough to receive they. o take cour^e to ease your city and to provide well for your people by send they over thither that both they of that colony there and they of your own city here may live. to bless your prudent and provident government over they, for i have hear many of the painful both they of that colony there and they of your own city here may live to bless your prudent and provident government over they. for i have hear many of the painful labourer of your city even with tear, bemoan the desolate estate of their poor wife and child who, though they rise early, taw and tear their flesh all the day long with hard labour and go late to bed and feed almost all the week long upon brown bread and cheese, yet be scarce able to put bread in their mouth at the week end and clothes on their back at the year end, and all because work be so hard to be come by and there be so many of the same trade that they end and clothes on their back at the year end, and all because work be so hard to be come by and there be so many of the same trade that they can not thrive one for another. right worshipful, i beseech you, ponder, as i know you do, the forlorn estate of many of the best member of your city and help they o, help they out of their misery. what you bestow upon they in their transportation to virginia, they will repay it at present with their prayer and, when they be able, with their purse. and god, in the mean while, will plentiful reward your liberality this way, with his blessing upon your famous city, upon yourselves, upon your posterity, for do not your merciful their purse, and god, in the mean while, will plentiful reward your liberality this way, with his blessing upon your famous city, upon yourselves, upon your posterity. for do not your merciful god, the lord of host mal, 3. ^0 bid you prove he, if he will not open the window of heaven unto you and pour you out a blessing without measure, and that i may bend my speech unto all. see so many of the lord worthy have do worthy in this noble action, yea, and see that some of they great rejoice in this, as i have hear it from their own mouth that god have enable they to help forward this glorious work, both with their prayer and with their purse. let it be. this, as i have hear it from their own mouth, that god have enable they to help forward this glorious work, both with their prayer and with their purse. let it be your grief and sorrow to be exempt from the company of so many honourable mind man and from this noble plantation tend so high to the advancement of the gospel and to the honour of our dread sovereign, by enlarge of his kingdom and add a five crown unto his other four for virginia be the motto of the legal seal of virginia. and let i, in a word, shut up all unto you, all that have be speak with that exhortation of the apostle 1. cor 15: 5^. my belove brother, be you steadfast, unmoveable. let i, in a word, shut up all unto you, all that have be speak with that exhortation of the apostle 1. cor 15: 5^. my belove brother, be you steadfast, unmoveable, abundant always in the work of the lord, for as much as you know that your labour be not in vain in the lord.