to the right. reverend father in god thomas lord, bishop of london, my honorable good lord, all grace, prosperity and happiness, the manifold and weighty ecclesiastical affair wherein your lordship be daily employ and many time weary, partly in advance the sincere profession of god, holy truth, and partly in maintain the happy tranquillity of this most renown church, have often occasion i to remember the word and complaint of that learned father augustine. though, beside those a a aug lib oper monac ca, innumerable ecclesiastical care which he sustain and of which he say that almost none will believe they but such as have experience of they he be daily encumber also with the judicial hear of very many secular cause for which, as he say and aug epistle, he be daily with all reverence, attend and salute by the people. yet some, in that age most unjust, blame both he and other bishop as be desidious and, like the pharisee, tie heavy burden on other man shoulder which themselves will not touch with their little finger. and who can possible escape that censure if the indefatigable industry and toil of augustine can not quit he thereof, he then, with a. most serious and solemn protestation. answer: aug op monac cap. i call jesus christ to witness upon my soul that i have much rather give myself to read, pray and other spiritual exercise. yes, to daily handy-worke, then endure the most tumultuous perplexity of other man cause about their secular business, either ibid judicial to end they, or by persuasion to prevent they. the cogitation hereof have almost persuade i not to withdraw your lordship, so much as to the view of these my slender labor, but that the several band of duty which i owe unto your lordship, over-swayed with i herein at the last, for have not only be call as from little zoar to jerusalem by that message which to i be no other than. the voice of god, though some young samuel may perhaps mistake it to be elijah voice- but further also, in that straightness of time, extraordinary encourage by your lordship to this service, the fruit of my labor therein, if it be any, i judge it my duty to present to he by who authority and appointment they be first undertake. again, see my hearty and sincere desire herein be to testify my unfeigned love first to god, truth, and then to the peace of our jerusalem, in both which i expect no less than the severe censure of two in themselves opposite and both of they very rigorous adversary who, contrary to the apostle ephesian rule, either follow not the truth or follow it not in love. i be embolden in both these to entreat protection under your lordship name, as one who live under your lordship both public and domestical government have and do daily see many assure experiment of your lordship: zeal to the one and prudence join with great moderation in the other. beside i must and do with thankfulness acknowledge, which i have often heretofore glad recount, a good part of that light with which god have in mercy, vouchsafe unto i to have be receive from that fair burn lamp which many year in our university, your very often and happy hold forth unto we. then especial when, in the last year of our late sovereign and in those, as some thought, decline day wherein the child of babylon, upon some vain conceive, hope i know not what, begin somewhat insolent to insult, at which most needful time it can be, forget how the religious, constant and godly zeal of your be one most eminent in that place, do animate and encourage many other, myself among the rest, who then sit at the foot of gamaliel and who, by those word utter in fit time by the tongue of the learned, find in ourselves how true the wiseman say: ecclesiastes, the word of the wise, be like goad and like nail, fasten by the master of the assembly. if, in these respect, i present this small pledge of my duty to your lordship and, with a willing heart, offer this mite unto the lord treasury, let i, in excuse of the slenderness thereof, use those fit word of jerome: hier apol advers ru^in, every man offer in god tabernacle according to his ability. some offer gold and silver and precious stone, other bring silk and purple and scarlet and fine linen and howsoever it be, i glad submit it to your lordship grave wisdom and to the church of god. even in those most submissive word and manner which i long since learn of the most learned austen and which be here express in all my speech and writing, i earnest desire to be understand aug. lib trinit, cap ult and black notley in essex. may your lordship, chaplain, in all duty most humble to be, command richard crakanthorpe chronicle, chap verse. and she say to the king: it be a true word, which i hear in my own land, of thy say and of thy wisdom, howbeit i believe not their report until i come and my eye have see it and behold the one half of thy great wisdom. be not, tell i, for thou exceed the fame that i hear. happy be thy man and happy be thy servant, which stand before thou always and hear thy wisdom. bless be the lord, thy god, which love thou, to set thou on his throne as king, in stead of the lord thy. god, because thy god loucth israel to establish it for ever. therefore, have he make thou king over they to execute judgement and justice. then she give the king six score. talent of gold and of sweet odour exceed much and precious stone. the solemnity of this most joyful day and happy opportunity which god have give we to celebrate the same to the glory of his holy name, to the honor of our most religious sovereign, to the comfort of we and all his loyal subject, but to the confusion of those, son of belial who have evil will at zion, repine and pine away to see the peace and prosperity of this most flourish church and kingdom and to hear of the mirth and melody in. our street this day have. move i to make choice of these word of the queen of sheba to king solomon, wherein every one may see both a fit correspondence to our solomon and a worthy example of that love we all owe to he, and thanksgiving unto god for this so great and so incstimable a blessing in the word themselves, not to seek any curious division which in a history you will not expect. observe i pray you with i four several point which concern four several party. the first concern king solomon, wherein be set down a singular commendation of his wisdom which exceed all report- behold the one half, etc. the second concern the people and subject of king solomon, wherein be declare their bless and happy estate who have solomon a wise king to rule over. they happy be thy servant. the three concern almighty god, wherein be express a most religious thanksgiving unto he for place solomon a wise king over his people. blessed be the lord thy god. in which three point, beside many other, two particular branch, be especial to be consider: the former, from who solomon have or hold his kingdom, and that be immediate, from god, who make he king over israel and place he in his own throne and in his own stead to set thou on his throne. the latter, what move or induce god to grant his people so? wise a king, no merit nor desert either of king or people, but only his own favour and free love to israel, because thy god love israel. the four and last point concern the queen of sheba, wherein be set forth a manifest and outward testification of the honor and honorable respect she bear towards king solomon, in token whereof s^e bestow on he such royal and magnificent present, six score talent of gold, sweet odour and precious stone. then she give the king of these several point. by the most gracious and helpful assistance of god, holy spirit, and by your honorable and wont patience and attention, we be at this time god will, to entreat. the first point concern the admirable and indeed inexplicable wisdom of king solomon, whereof god himself be a most sufficient witness. wisdom and knowledge be grant unto thou so that there have not be the like among the king which be before thou, neither after thou shall there be the like chronicle. and again god, give solomon wisdom and understanding exceed much. he be wise than any chronicle man and he excel all the king of the earth in wisdom. king verse to go no further than my text, so famous, be he for wisdom among all nation that there king come of all people unto he and all chronicle king of the earth seek to hear the wisdom of solomon, which god have put into his heart. and though fame be not only a swift messenger but usual a amplifier and multiplier of that which it do report, as saint hieron say hier ^om epis^ furian, yet in this it be quite contrary: the report of this wisdom be such that it seem incredible. and therefore this queen confess she believe it not. but when she have hear it herself and be a eye and earwitness of all, as one, amaze and astonish thereat, she break into this admiration thereof set down in my text. behold the one half of thy great wisdom. be not tell i thou exceed the fame that i hear have speak this of the wisdom of king solomon. may i now presume to speak a word or two of the? sacred majesty, of my dread sovereign. it be not my purpose to make any parallel to solomon, of who god himself have say that none shall be like unto he. nor take upon i to set forth unto you any portraiture of that wisdom which no zeux nor apelles can otherwise express, but only by draw over it the veil or curtain of timanthu^ to import it can be express the wisdom of a man much more of a king. be compare by god spirit prou, to deep water and to a flow river. who be i to dive into that bottomless depth, or with my span to measure the depth and breadth of the main ocean? yet, with all loyal submission, let i thus much say and say much less than i do conceive. neither can this present age, nor all the chronicle- i say not of great britain only, but of all europe- present unto we a king endue with such admirable gift of learning, judgement and memory, adorn with so many princely and heroical virtue, justice, clemency and wisdom, especial with that divine and heavenly wisdom which be the fountain and foundation of all the rest, with religion, piety, zeal and constant magnanimity to profess, maintain and uphold the truth of god and of his gospel, which report of i, if any, suppose to be too lavish. and with this queen of sheba, believe it not. let he well consider those many. and most religious wise speech utter in a manner, in the hear of the whole realm, conference disputation: free monarchy, but special, that most learned apology for the oath of allegiance against the pope, two breve and that kingly gift, fit only for a peerless king to give to a peerless prince all which be but some few spark of that ever-burning lamp or but small stream of that ever and overflow spring. and then he will be force, even with admiration, to profess and say with this queen as, after the hear and read of diverse of they- myself with many other- have often say: it be a true word indeed, which i heard of thy say and of thy wisdom, howbeit i believe it not until i come and my eye have see it and behold the one half of thy great wisdom. be not tell i, for thou exceed the fame that i hear, with which true testimony of the wisdom of both these solomon. i end this first point which concern the king and the admiration of his great wisdom. the second point concern the people and subject of king solomon, of who the queen here say that they be bless and happy, who have solomon, a wise king, to rule over they. happy be thy people and happy be thy servant. nor can there in truth be a great comfort to any people or great safety to any kingdom, then to be govern by a wise and prudent king, by a man of understanding and knowledge. a realm endure long prou. a wise man, much more a wise king, be as a fortress and strong pillar to support even a whole realm, and better be wisdom than weapon of war, ecclesiastes. nay, a wise king be not only a safety but even a happiness, as the queen. here say to a kingdom, for so god himself do witness. eccl. bless be thou land when thy king be the son of noble, that be. by the hebrew i mat, i mark achinos phrase: true noble, endue with virtue, piety and wisdom. wherein alone consist true nobility. on the contrary, a foolish or childish king be one of those heavy judgement and curse which god in his wrath threaten to bring upon a land. i will appoint child to be their prince and babe shall rule over they, isaiah. and again, woe unto thou land who king be a child, a child in knowledge, in wisdom, in understanding. ecclesiastes, the reason of both which be very evident. a wise king govern with justice and equity, and the. king throne be establish by righteousness, proverb, and the king that judge in truth. his throne shall be establish for ever. prou again, a prudent and wise king, as he maintain justice. so his principal and chief care be to maintain and advance piety and godliness, the true and sincere worship of god, throughout all his kingdom. so do holy david, of who it be, say psalm, that he rule thy people, prudent with all his power. and wherein do his prudence appear? he be no soon set upon the throne, but he assemble all the congregation of israel and they bring again the ark of the lord with sing and dance, with viol, with cymbal and with trumpet. chronicle verse and the like. do that most religious. and wise king josiah. he make a covenant before all the people to walk after the lord and to keep his commandment and be cause all that be find in jerusalem and benjamin to stand to that covenant, and he compel all that be find in israel to serve the lord, whereupon it follow that all the day of josiah the people turn not back from the lord chronicle ver. such a blessing the church and the whole kingdom have of a prudent, religious and wise king. on the other side, a irreligious, a wicked and unwise king or governor by suppress justice and equity and make his lust a law. impious. say with the donatist august lib cont. epistle parmen, cap, or as julia do to i. i sparta, in vit anton, caracal, in fine caracalla, what i list that be a law, such a one be even a trouble to the whole land and to his own people. as eliah say to king ahab, king thou and thy father house trouble israel in that you have forsake the commandment of the lord. nor only trouble israel by violent and tyrannical intrusion into the vineyard and land of naboth, but, chief, by cause the people to forsake the lord and his worship and to follow baal or the calf, as do of who it be. therefore, say that he do evil, above all, that be before he. and why? for he do not only sin himself, but he do sin and he cause israel to. sin king verse. and you see now what a heavy judgement and curse a unwise king. be unto the land and people. but that kingdom be happy, that people and those subject be happy over who. solomon, a wise and prudent king, be place by the lord. i may, true here, say unto you yourselves also be witness and say it to the immortell praise of god name, to the honor of our sovereign and to the joy and comfort of all his people, that in this happiness, this renown, kingdom among all and above all, nation of the earth be. bless this day. happy king, be thy people and happy be thy subject or servant. it be not my meaning, nor be it fit to make a panegyrical oration in this place at large, therein to recount and amplify also those manifold blessing which, by the mean of our solomon, we do now enjoy yet the more to stir we up to magnify and bless god glorious name and, if it be possible, more also to love and honor that sacred majesty who god have choose to be his royal instrument, whereby so many and great blessing be derive unto we. i may not omit to mention some few which be most eminent. commend the rest to your private and religious consideration. the first be our long tranquillity and happy peace, with all the blessing and bless fruit of peace, a blessing which god begin to bestow on this land at the joyful entrance of our late sovereign queen elizabeth, who, sacred spirit, do now rest and reign with the lord, but her memory shall be bless and eternize in the world for ever. when all those, venomous in his answer to the apol and viperous tongue set on fire by hell, which now in vain bark against she and seek to stain her spotless honor, shall rot and be even as the dung upon the earth have, enjoy long and happy peace under her long and happy reign. it be expect by the agent and vassal of antichrist that the day which end her life shall have. end all our comfort and be to we a dismal day, a day of murder and massacre, a day of war, of tumult and of utter desolation. one of their own false prophet, west trip homin, ^ffic lib pag, with a lie spirit in his mouth, foretell of that day. at that day they will fight it out. indeed, behold he that sit in heaven. laugh they to scorn the lord, have they in derision, himself place in his own throne after david saloman, a chronicle man of rest and peace. for god. have give he and in he to we rest and peace from all his and our. enemy round about and lo this be now more than the fifty year wherein the people of this land in abundance of peace sit. as the prophet mich say, every man under his own vine and under his own figtree, without danger. such so long and so happy peace. never do our father nor ancestor see before we in this land, nor have any of all the nation and neighbour-kingdome enjoy the like, who in the mean time have be weary and waste either with foreign or with intestine war. yes, and this very day, which they have cruel design to weep mourn and lamentation, god, by the happy mean of our solomon, have turn it, as we all now see, to a day of mirth and melody. a day, offea, sing and rejoice, a day of praise and thanksgiving to his bless name, which be therefore magnify and praise and bless for evermore. a second blessing which, under our solomon, this whole empire enjoy be the sincere profession of god, holy truth, the bless continuance, yes, the establishment also thereof among we, the extinguish of this most glorious light have be often wish by most malicious and devilish device, attempt and at the change of our late sovereign, be undoubted. expect but the wisdom of our solomon, know that piety and religion be the sure prop to a kingdom like constantine. euse^ lib vit, const, cap and seq. and cap the great make it his first care by his most religious edict and law stat. james an cap, and an cap to establish god, truth and true worship in the land, assure further and protest his ardent zeal for ever to uphold and maintain the same, and that so often, in so many honorable and public assembly, with such vehemency of speech, in so many learned and divine writing, publish to the view of the world with so religious and royal promise. nor this only for himself, but in assure hope also of the most happy branch, of that most happy vine that now bless be god that curse balaam and his curse priest of baal, which ere this hope and vaunt in their hope to have see baal or moloch, or the queen of heaven and the whole host thereof. nay, the very abomination of desolation set up in our temple, do now gnash their tooth at this. our felicity and their heart do even languish and faint and pine away to see the truth o^ god, so sincere profess, so constant maintain both by king and people, so assure, settle and, as we may just hope and do hearty pray, even for ever, establish in this land the greatness and indeed the happiness of this blessing my tongue can possible express unto you, nor can our shallow heart sufficient conceive thereof. we never see those marian and bloody day wherein, for the people of god to have be acquaint with the vid regist john longland, epis, lincol, fox, fo and seq. gospel and word of god be. heresy, not to have fall down before the calf and adore the beast, be no less than fire and faggot. and what else the rage and fury of that beast can add unto it. we never feel, nor know those antichristian and more than barbaric inquisition vid reginal gonsal lib, sanct hispa and emaen history, belg lib, to the tyranny and unexpressible torment whereof the bull of phalar^s, the altar of busiris and those primitive persecution under heathen tyrant be almost but death itself, even a pleasure to the rage of that beast, which need not learn of caligula sueton in vit calig cap, torment they, so that they may, sensible, feel death and yet not die, and yet all this be as nothing to their spiritual bondage. they may not buy ap nor sell, nor live nor breath unless they receive the mark of the beast. they may not teach trid synod s^ss cap aught, they may not believe doctrine prin^ cap pa aught? no, not so much as the scripture. and a bellar lib ecclesiastes milit cap adh^c and gretz defence. bellar lib cap pa caluinista, pr^ ibid pa to be the word of god? no, not that there be a god unless the beast say so. and what soever the beast say, that without all scruple, must be receive as a oracle. papa in his pertinent dellar lib pontiff rom, cap of god and a undoubted article of their faith. consider, but in one point, what themselves do, teach and profess: concern rome. which be the sea of that beast. they can endure a, a bell lib ro ca to hear it call the seat of antichrist. but yet they willing, profess and fond, prove rome to be that babylon. jo^annes in bell l^b p^ntif rom, cap johannes, apocrypha decem bellar lib rom, argument nom ne roman in epistle petri and in come mean in cap apocrypha pa, whereof john prophesy that very babylon, i say, which be the apocrypha mother of whoredom and abomination of the earth, which apocrypha have make all nation drink of the wine of her fornication and herself be drink, apocrypha, with the blood of the saint and martyr who destruction and utter desolation be foreshow by the apostle apocrypha cap ^ap. thus much themselves profess and prove, concern rome, now though some of roman and c^ristianos, bella^ li^ pont rom ca and by babylon be signify partly th^ whole society of the wicked, partly the city of rome. only in respect of. the terrene and hea^ state. of that persecute the church rhe test annot in cap apocrypha: they, very childish indeed, have suppose only the old and heathenish rome to be mean thereby. yet who foe please to read ribera the jesuite, in his commentary upon the of the revelation, shall see he, by many evident and undeniable demonstration, declare and prove: first rome to be that very babylon rome, riber ^bid pa, where of saint john speak, and second, even that rome, i i babylon and riber ibid pa to be babylon, which shall remain near unto the end of the world. of his large treatise, let i allege some few word of he, because, say he rib ibid pa, there be no doubt but that babylon be. the very shop and storehouse of all idolatry and of all wickedness. if we have already prove, as before he have rome to be, it can be doubt but that rome, towards the end of the world, shall leave all these, to wit all idolatry and all abomination, and again that rome shall be rib ib, burn and consume with a mighty fire, not only for her old sin, when it be heathenish, but for those also which, in the last time it shall commit ad^o perspicue. we know it, say he, so evident by the word of this revelation that the very fool can deny it. and yet their great cardinal bellarmine and the rhemist blush not to deny it, who sentence and doom their own jesuite. have, as you see, pronounce and then cite the word of the apostle apocrypha: babylon, the great city be fall, which have make all nation drink of her fornication. he add: rib pag, who so read these thing, may think they to be speak of those who live before joha or in his time, and this be true, but they be also speak of those who shall live at rome in the last time of the world and commit fornication with she, whereof he give a clear proof. out of the apostle apocrypha, the merchant and lover of babylon, that be of rome, shall weep and wail and say: alas, alas, the great city in one hour be make desolate. whether say ribera, rib ibid shall they lament. thus, which be dead a thousand year since and more, or they who shall then live when rome be consume and shall see the smoke of her fire, by which it be manifest, perspicuous, that the sin which rome shall perpetrate in the last time shall be altogether like those which it commit under the heathen. emperors that be, as himself rib pa expound it. there shall be then, in the great licence or allowance of all idolatry and of all sin, and so turn in nefariorun rib into a very sink of nefarious mischief. thus write their own jesuite ribera. see, then, it be not rome heathenish, which many hundred of year since be out of date, but that rome which as yet be to fall and to be burn with fire and which shall remain near to the end of the world, as ribera true do demonstrate, which the spirit of god call babylon and who eternal destruction be foreshow by the lord. see again as bellarmine bel lib pont rom ca of purpose, prove and say quod that it be a pious and most probable sentence that peter chair can be separate or remove from aute^ bellar ibid rome, and that, therefore, the roman church, even the particular church of rome, absolute, absolute, can err, not fail, nor cease, but rome shall continue. christian, yes, popish. profess their present popish faith unto the very end ro and cap apocrypha, ju ^ine, bel ibid and destruction thereof, which, by the calculation of this worthy prognosticator, must precise fall out within three: bel lib, pont, rom, ca and roman, and eam^ solabit and ibid cap year and a half of the end of the world. it be hence evident and inevitable consequent that the present popish rome profess their present popish faith, from which, as the cardinal say, it shall never fail nor fall away, be that very same babylon which be the mother of idolatry and all abomination and which shall most undoubted receive those judgement of desolation and eternal condemnation from the lord. what a woeful and miserable thing be it then to be. a papist, a member of the church of rome, or which be all one of babylon especial, see god himself have foretell apocalypse that they who partake of her sin shall receive also of her plague. and again apocalypse, if any receive the mark of the beast that be subjection unto he. the same, unless he repent apocrypha and go out of babylon, shall drink of the wine of the wrath of god and be torment in fire and brimstone before the holy angel and before the lamb. think now with yourselves what a blessing and happiness we do all enjoy. who, under the most religious reign of our sovereign, be free and secure from that iron and more than babylonish captivity. who, in abundance of peace and tranquillity, live to serve god in bethel and at jerusalem, in the house of god and city of peace, not in beth-aven, not in babylon, in the house of vanity, of confusion and utter desolation. let i say yet one thing more: whereas the spirit of god have foretold a, a apocrypha that sundry king and kingdom loathe and detest, the abomination and idolatry of babylon, which be confess to be, rome shall not only forsake the whore, but hate she and make her desolate and naked and burn she with fire. which prophecy be in part begin: occupa^ lutheri, regina pont rom cap and suetian gothiam, dania, hei^etiae bohemiae, bel lib, odd cap at to be fulfil, but in due time. shall be full accomplish. though i be no prophet, nor son of a prophet that i can divine, yet, as one of those who expect and pray for the performance of god, promise and full deliverance of all his people from that miserable thraldom, cry: how long, lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge our blood. it may well, i say, be hope. consider the piety, zeal and magnanimity of our most religious sovereign, that either himself or some of his most happy and religious offspring, shall be the very general, the first and chief leader of the army of the lord of host against babylon. and so not only give cause to all the people of god, with endless joy, to sing that triumphant song for the ruin thereof, foretell by the apostle apocrypha- heaven, rejoice of she and you, holy apostle and prophet, rejoice for god. have. give your judgement of the whore, but purchase also to themselves that blessing and happiness which god have promise and will undoubted perform to the ruinater and destroyer thereof, daughter of babylon, waste with misery. happy shall he be that reward thou as thou have serve we bless shall he be which take thy child and dash they against the stone. to this blessing of piety and religion let i adjoin another of near affinity and which be also a special mean to continue the. former happiness unto we, to wit the peaceable and happy settle of the ecclesiastical government and affair of our church. will to god, that tumult in the church may never be remember, but bury in eternal oblivion which the new donatist of this age have make, who forsomuch as these assembly stand in a false constitution, even in apostasy. it be as clear as the sun that all man ought, upon pain of damnation, without delay to depart out of they franc john. treatise of the minist of england. whether it be to be separate from or no pag. none may have any spiritual communion therewith. ibid pag. their church-assembly be not congregation of faithful man but a confusion o^ all manner of people, though never so wicked. and profane hold of all soul spirit fr ans to jac except pa. they be not to be judge true christian, nor true constitute church of christ ibid pa and that name of conventicle be to light and contemptuous for those meeting of they, of the separation for therein be to be consider for what cause they depart, which be through the mislike of that which antichrist have bring in reply to whitg pag and the government ministry office and ceremony in england be contrary to god word, simple evil. hen lib assertion dedicate to king james an pa and and seq and whet^al pa. like those. apostolum fulgentius, august lib fulg donatist article in saint augustine, time can abide no spot nor wrinkle in the church who cry unto other. depart isa, etc. august lib cont. ep. parm cap. every one must be a hee-goat before the rest to lead they out. fr. john, treat of the minist pa depart you. go out from thence and touch no unclean thing, or stand isay apart and come not near we. we be holy than you and who glory as austen i i aust lib, cont. epistle tarm cap. show in these word of the apostle i corinthian: take away evil from among you. they abuse those apostolic word to make a schism which be sacrilege and for a occasion of praecision of cut. off and separate themselves from the true church of god which by a late learned man, cal inst adver anab, article pag, be condemn for diabolical, though otherwise a man live a angelical life. but alas, it be too apparent to the world and the church, which have feel the smart thereof, have grieve and groan to see she own child, who she have nourish and tender, bring up to rebel against she and, with corah, dathan and abyram, to go apart and make a faction against moses and aaron and, with disdainful insolency, to say number unto they. moses and aaron, you take too much upon you. see all the congregation be holy, wherefore lift you up yourselves above the congregation of the lord. nay, though the church, out of the tenderness of a mother compassion, will willing cover and conceal all these wrong. yet be they too well know in gath and publish in the street of askalon and the uncircumcised philistine by these man occasion have and do daily blaspheme the name of god and his glorious truth and gospel, which we do profess, who rejoice in our discord and say among themselves: there, there, so will we have it, do even laugh and triumph to see how those who shall have turn their edge against amalecke and babylon, the enemy of the lord, have be most sharp, whet and seditious back also to wound their own mother and those who, in the church, be like eliah king, the very chariot and horseman of israel. it be not my purpose at this time to entreat either of the dignity or of the divine and sacred authority of those most reverend father of the church which in another very learned and academical assembly i have some year praelect i in epistle tit oxon i jul, since at large demonstrate to have a assure and undeniable warrant not only from all antiquity and the renown practice of the whole primitive church but even from the apostle themselves and from the divine institution and ordinance of the lord. nor be it my purpose at this time to make evident unto you how that imperious, nay rather imperial, presbiteriall consistory which those new builder have fancy beside that it want all ground of scripture and of antiquity. be in truth and in experience will prove a very seminary of sedition and a sanctuary to every turbulent and seditious gracchus, both in church and kingdom. nor be it possible that a fancy, so repugnant to scripture, father and all antiquity, so contrary to the peace and tranquillity both of church and kingdom can ever have, find like entertainment if the maintainer and abetter thereof have not be guide, nay blind, with two most dangerous affection both for church and commonwealth: affectation of singularity and of popularity. that which i will only mention at this time, be the great blessing which, by the happy mean of our solomon, we now enjoy. who see and grieve to see a rent in god church himself, like psalm phinees stand. in the gap and, with more than princely clemency and moderation, make up the breach, appease those affair and remove that shame and reproach from israel which the unquietness of contentious spirit have bring upon it, who, be wise as the angel of the lord, according to the abundance of that admirable and divine wisdom wherewith god have extraordinary fill his royal heart, have firm settle and establish the ark of the lord upon those holy mountain of zion on which, even from the most pure and primitive day of the church and from the apostle themselves, it have ever rest, which, if their fancy may have prevail, have long since not only be remove from zion but place also, as do the philistine place it sam most. base and totter and disgraceful, even set upon a cart in the happy establish, whereof though some few, as the eckronites say, have be just smite of the lord, because they neither have right nor bare sincere love to the ark of god, who cure also have be seek, and that with most tender and fatherly care and compassion. but such be the zeal of opposition and predominancy of popularity and contentious humour that by no demonstration of reason will they be persuade? no, not when they be indeed persuade. by no authority will they be moved? no, not by that sacred and sovereign which god himself have appoint in many of those affair to be the very canon and rule of right, though some few of these. i say, may repine hereat. yet shall it ever be the honor, yes, the felicity and safety also of our sovereign, to have those holy aaron to support his princely hand, and this shall ever be reckon as a special, and as it be in truth even a rare blessing of god upon this church and kingdom, by all those whosoever, not in show but in sincerity and truth, wish to see peace in zion and prosperity in jerusalem. i must in silence pass by many other and great blessing which, by the mean of our solomon, be heap upon we. but let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth if i forget that one most memorable happiness which we all receive by he on that. five of november, that one day shall be for ever a most glorious tro haeum and everlasting monument both of his most bless and unspeakable wisdom and of the infinite blessing which, by he, we have all receive. by it we enjoy not only our good, our land, our live, our liberty, our religion, but even this that we live and breathe this day. we owe it to he and to his wisdom. it be not the love nor loyalty of he, though most love and loyal subject, which prevent that sudden and secret blow that shall at once have dispatch and blow up all. it be not the prudence and vigilancy of those thrice-noble, worthy of king david, the golden pillar of israel, though a most wise. and a most honorable senate. all may and all willing do, disclaim the praise of that day. the whole honor of that most wonderful and withal, most happy deliverance must be give first to thou, most glorious and most gracious god, and next, after thou, to thy anoint alone. thou do fill his heart, as thou do sometime the heart of thy holy prophet, daniel, with wisdom. from above to daniel, i discover the deep and secret thing, and to know what be in darkness, and he be full of thy spirit to the endless comfort of this empire and of all his loyal subject. discover indeed that dark and secret speech, that dark and secret vault, that dark, secret and hellish treason, and so keep off that. imminent blow which will have prove fatal to he, to we and to all his kingdom. the happiness of that day and of thy wisdom, gracious king, our history and chronicle shall commend, our law and statute shall record to all eternity every city, town and village, every church in this land, every degree of thy people, from the tall cedar to the very shrub, shall sing and sound forth thy noble praise, and as the israelite do, zach, in honor of josiah, every tribe and family shall praise thou apart and their wife apart. the royal and princely tribe of judah shall praise thou apart and the holy tribe of levy shall praise thou apart. the nobility shall praise thou apart. the gentry and commons shall praise. thou apart. the student of a^professions shall praise thou apart. the man of war and the man of peace shall praise thou apart. yes, every house and every family, throughout all israel shall praise thou apart. we, in this age, will speak of thy praise to our child and our child to their child, child unto all generation. and if it be possible that we or our posterity can be silent herein, yet, the magnificent and princely building and monument in these two famous and renown city, the very wood and wall of these house and stone in these street, even with their dumb eloquence, will sing aloud and sound forth thy noble praise. all which in their kind be partaker of that happiness which under thou and by thou we then all receive. judge now with yourselves if, beside many and great blessing which i have purposely omit, for these so great and indeed invaluable blessing which by the happy mean of our solomon we do enjoy, we may not all most just say to he, as do the queen of sheba, to king solomon: happy king be thy people and happy be thy servant. shall i further here add, whereof this queen be silent in that king of israel, that the wisdom of our solomon be a happiness not only to his own people and subject, but even to stranger also, the gracious beam there of like those of the. sun spread themselves to far and foreign country, yes, to the utmost coast of this and the other world. to omit many other, and evident proof hereof, even that which be the chief, if time will suffer, aught not to be. omit that with such constancy and zeal himself, hold forth a glorious lamp of piety and true religion unto all christian king and kingdom. perform herein that which god spirit have. note eccle as the great part of wisdom. the more wise the king be, the more he teach they knowledge and cause they to hear. but omit these. let the honorable expedition now happy intend for, be a witness enterprise, i say not, but by the most wise and religious direction and protection of our chief. pilot, second by so many honorable and worthy personage in this state and kingdom that it may just give encouragement, with alacrity and cheerfulness for some to undertake for other to further. so noble and so religious a attempt, i may not stay in this straightness of time to mention, much less set forth unto you, the great and manifold benefit which may redound to this our so populous a nation. by plant, a english colony in a territory as large and spacious almost as be england, and in a soil so rich, fertile and fruitful as that, beside the sufficiency it natural yeald for itself, may, with best convenience, supply some of the great want and necessity of these kingdom. of these and such like particular, i will not now entreat, though i can commend they by more than ordinary and vulgar report unto you. but that happiness which i mention be a happy and glorious work indeed, of plant among those poor and savage and to be pity, virginian. not only humanity instead of brutish incivility, but religion, also piety, the true knowledge and sincere worship of god where his name be not hear off and reduce. those to faith and salvation by christ who as yet, in the blindness of their infidelity and superstition, do offer sacrifice, yes, even themselves, unto the devil. this be the religious and honorable intendment of this enterprise. what glory shall hereby redound unto god. what honor to our sovereign, what comfort to those, his subject, who shall be the mean or furtherer of so happy a work. not only to see a new britain in another world, but to hear also those as yet heathen, barbaric and brutish people, together with our english, to learn the speech and language of canaan and next, after their hymn and hallelujah unto god, to sound forth the honor and happiness of our sovereign, not only say with this queen of sheba. happy be thy people and thy subject, but happy be we and other that be stranger to you, yes, stranger and alien to god. happy be we by thou and by thy wisdom. and this be speak of the second general point, which concern the people and their happiness by have solomon, a wise and prudent king to rule over they. the three general point concern almighty god and contain a thanksgiving to he for set solomon a wise king to rule over his people. bless be the lord, thy god, which set thou on his throne, the acknowledgement in this queen of the true god of israel, of his divine providence and omnipotent power. in place solomon in his own throne, of his goodness and love to israel, who he will establish for ever of his righteousness, in that he will have his people govern by justice and judgement. special this her religious thanksgiving unto god for this blessing bestow on his people. all these be so many evident demonstration of her true knowledge of god, of her love to god and god child, of her sincere piety and religious serve of god. and that, though by nature she be a gentile and alien from god, yet be she, by his special grace, one of those which be engraft into the true olive and make partaker of the fatness thereof and of those heavenly blessing store up in jesus christ. but i purposely omit all these particular. the only point which i will now commend unto you be what a motive and provocation this aught to be for we all to laud and magnify the lord for place, so wise and religious, a king over we and all these kingdom. king solomon be but a stranger to this queen who yet, as you see, be so thankful to god. he, so far from be a stranger to we that we may say, as do the tribe of israel, to king david sam: we be thy bone and thy flesh. she be, but a sojourner for a very short time in that kingdom, can not long partake the benefit of his instruction, nor of peace and protection by his justice and judgement. but we, from our solomon, receive continual influence of his divine, both sacred and political wisdom, continual protection under his sacred shield, continual tranquility under his most just, equal and wholesome law, both ecclesiastical and civil. how much more than shall our mouth be fill with praise and blessing unto the lord, our god, and how religious shall we say, as she do: bless be the lord, thy god, which love thou to set thou on his throne. i doubt not. but for these blessing of the lord often time in your private house and chamber. you sing hymn and psalm with a grace in your heart unto the lord. but because for these public and extraordinary blessing, god, look for public and extraordinary praise at our hand, because we be now assemble in this place, as at the temple of jerusalem of purpose, to offer the sweet sacrifice and incense of our lip unto god and this day, both before man and angel, to testify our thanksgiving unto god, our love and loyalty to our sovereign. let every one of you provoke and stir up another and suffer i as one of the trumpeter of the lord, to excite we all and stir up your prepare heart and religious affection for all and every of these blessing to laud and magnify the glorious. name of god and, if it be possible, by some extraordinary strain of our unite, thanks to pierce the very sky and give a echo to those celestial quire. sing halleluiah. halleluiah, honor and praise and glory be unto god and to the lamb for evermore. first, for that abundance of our continue and happy peace, let we say with the prophet psalm: praise the lord jerusalem, praise thy god, zion, for he have make fast the bar of thy gate and bless thy child within thou. he make peace in thy border and fill thou with the flower of wheat. for establish, together with this peace, his holy temple and sanctuary among we, and in it the true and sincere worship of his holy name, that we can express the like joy, as do the israelite, for their temple, which solomon build and establish among they. all the congregation, assemble therein the levite and singer of all sort of asaph, heman and jeduthun be clad in fine linen, stand with cymbal, with viol and with harp at the east end of the altar, and with they a hundred and twenty priest blow with trumpet, and they be all but as one man and make but one sound to be hear in praise the lord chronicle. but because the pomp and beauty of the second temple be even as nothing to the first, let we yet, with the best trumpet of our heart and tongue, and with all our most solemn instrument of music, sing that psalm of thanksgiving which they then do unto god. praise the lord, for he be good and his mercy endure for ever. praise the lord like joy and thanksgiving. let we all show for the ark of the lord which, by the mean of our solomon, according to god own ordinance, be establish on those holy mountain of zion of which the lord have say: here will i dwell, for i have a delight therein. yes, let we for these blessing not only sing and rejoice, but with the kingly, prophet sam, even shout and dance with all our might before the lord, for which, howsoever, some michols of babylon or of the house of saul shall scoff and scorn and taunt. say unto we how glorious be you for the temple and for the ark this day. yet this be our comfort and shall for ever be our honor that in uprightness of heart we can true say with that man of god: it be before the lord, who have choose we and not your father house, and who have command we to rule over the people of god. and therefore will we sing and play and dance, yes, and be more. vile also. then. thus, before the lord, and even of those maidservant of israel of who you speak, that be of the holy church of god, shall we be have in honor. but for those scoff michols of the reject house of saul and those blaspheme rabseka of assyria, they shall be as chaff scatter before the wind and as dung sweep away from the presence of the lord and from the face of the earth. but what can we render unto god, or say unto he? for that most rare and wonderful deliverance, let we say with the israelite, after the like delivery from the jaw of pharaoh and the red sea exodus ver, we will sing unto the lord, for he have triumph. glorious who be. like unto thou, lord, glorious in holiness, fearful in praise, and do wonder the lord. be my strength and praise and be become my salvation. he be my god and i will praise he. he be my father god and i will exalt he. or let we sing that psalm, psalm of the whole church. if the lord himself have not be on our side, may israel now say: they have swallow we up quick. when they be so wrathful, displease at we, the water, nay, the rage fire have devour we, the flame have go over our soul. praise be the lord, which have not give we over for a prey unto their tooth. last for all these and for all other, the blessing of the lord. special for his sacred majesty. under who and by who we live and live to enjoy they all. let we, with one heart and mind, sing that last psalm of the prophet. praise god in his holiness. praise he in the firmament of his power. praise he in his noble act. praise he according to his excellent greatness. praise he in the sound of the trumpet. praise he upon the lute and harp. praise he in the cymbal and dance. praise he upon the string and pipe. praise he upon the well-tuned cymbal. praise he upon the loud cymbal. let every thing that have breath praise the lord. and this be speak of the thanksgiving to god for place solomon, a wise king, over his people in this. thanksgiving. we before observe two particular branch. the former be from who king solomon have and hold his kingdom, of which it be here, show that he have it neither from the priest nor from the people, but immediate from god, and therefore it be express here: say: god make thou king over israel and he set thou on the throne, not the priest, not the people, but god make he king and god set he on the throne. for further evidence whereof it be here, add that solomon be set in the throne neither of the priest nor of the people, but he be set in god own throne as king and set there in god steed as one immediate represeut, god own person among they. and be his immediate vicegerent or lieutenant over all israel. to this purpose, the scripture not only in general, call king the minister or lieutenant of god rom, and say that god set up king and give kingdom daniel, but particular, also note this immediate designment of god in many of they. as of david the lord, choose he to be king and delight in he to make he king over all israel. chronicle of saul. the lord have anoint thou to be governor over his inheritance, sam of hasael and jehu. god say unto the prophet: anoint hasael king over aram and jehu. shall thou anoint king over israel. king and to omit other, of solomon who our text mention, god choose solomon to sit upon the. throne and he say of solomon, i will establish his kingdom for ever. chronicle the describer a a author inscripti^ fra^ ^c navar, clem, anno of the victory and glorious triumph, as he author pa rom, henrico, call it, which, pope clement, get over henry, the present french king, at his unhappy revolt and subjection to the man of sin, among other, pageant of that triumph. tell we that, whereas some curious french politician, as he galli ibid term, they do maintain the king to ibid hold his kingdom immediate from god, that this be at rome account a ridiculous, nay, a most ridiculous matter. indeed. it be no news nor marvel that the sacred truth of god shall be blaspheme and make a very jest and laughingstock. at rome, which be the mother of abomination as themselves: babylon, babylon, meretrix, babylon matter, riber, jesuit, in ca, apocrypha pa profess, and which have a name of blasphemy, apocrypha in front: bl^spbemiae, hierom algas, quest. as for his behaviour, who now raig^eth i have see he and consider of he. have upon his head a triple crown where be write upon his forehead in precious stone, the word mystery, a christian declaration of fran breton, a monk of the celestine public, make at vendosm janu in her forehead and have enlarge her mouth to blaspheme god and his tabernacle, where, if any doctrine distaste the beast or want his allowance, not this only and such like sacred truth, but even the sacred scripture themselves shall be make. a jest and no better esteem than be aesop. fable, as you may perceive, both by car linall, hosius, etc. pie dict^ hosius, author sacr scrip, lib b^ent proleg sol, and by gretzer, wo^fangus hermanus a lo absurd, etc. jaco^ gretz, append add lib bellar pa, the late defender of bellarmine, the most scurrile writer that this or the former age have see, who shame not to excuse that very speech and comparison from falsity, from impiety and from blasphemy. but howsoever this doctrine be, by the romanist, i i be^lar, lib ca and rhemist tes^an annot in pet, condemn and in these day count at rome most ridiculous. yet both in itself, it be most sacred, be ground, as you have see, upon the word of god. and as most sacred have it be. esteem in the primitive church, among the ancient father and godly writer of all age. it be most sacred in the day of tertullian who live in the next age to the apostle. in his book we christian say he do honor the emperor as a man next or immediate unto god, inferior to none but god, and whatsoever he have in respect of his imperial authority, he have it from god. and again, most excellent. in his apologetical against the gentile cap christian say he do know who it be that give the empire unto caesar, even god alone in under who only power and authoriry. they be deos, from which god emperor be the second after who they be. the first, before all and above all other, both god and live man. he make he emperor, who make he a man before he be emperor? from he he have his sceptre, from who he have his soul. what can be speak more divine, what more eloquent, what more effectual for the imperial authority of king? immediate and only derive from god, immediate depend of god and of god alone. and all this be speak in those ancient and primitive day of the gospel, not in the person of tertullian only, but as the judgement and just defence of all the christian and of the church, as at that time, yes, even of the whole church of rome itself than catholic and apostolic, where tertullian live and write. this, though, the very same doctrine in the present apostatical, antichristian and babylonish rome be make a very jest and account, as you have hear, a most ridiculous matter. it be sacred to optatus, bishop of melivis, who, in his book page against permenian, most divine, say there be none at all above the emperor, but god only, who make the emperor. sacred to chrysostom, who speak of theodosius the great in his homily, pop antioch say of he the emperor, have not his peer or equal upon earth. he be the high and head of all man upon earth. sacred to saint ambrose who, in his apology of david ca, ibid ca, say that king be not subject nor obnoxious to any human law. be free by. the highness of their imperial authority, but yet they be subject to god, unto who, king david, say: to thou only have i sin. sacred to austen, who often say: august lib civet ca, that it be god who give earthly kingdom, whether to good or bad, and when king command that which be good, none command by they, but only christ, epistle, and yet have king depend on any superior power, their command shall have be both christ and his. also to who they have be subject, sacred to their own. pope gregory the first, great, i confess for learning, but in acknowledgement of this truth, which be now at rome so ridiculous, far great, in his book of epistle ca, he thus write: of mauritius the emperor: first, he call the emperor his lord than he. faith, power and authority be give unto he, but from who? even from god and from heaven, ay, but perhaps with a subordination or mediation of some other. no, say, pope gregory. it be give he above and over all other person whatsoever, and therefore without any dependence of man, who be all inferior to he and so immediate depend and derive from god, who alone, as this pope, true say. be above the emperor, omit the succession of other age. let i adjoin to these two other most memorable example and of far late time: the one in the roman, which be elective, the other in our english, which be a hereditary kingdom. about year since, when some depress the imperial authority as depend on some other beside god, lewes of bavare, then, emperor, not only by his edict, declare and prove that the empire be hold (p), (p) a papa s^d a, a decret lud caesar, adver pont na^cler, an from god alone and immediate from god, which, out of their own canon (q), (q) dict ca a papa, v^ ca law. he further prove, as may be see in the history of upon the year, but further the emperor make and publish a law, and that most deliberate. all doubt and ambiguity be leisurable and sound, discuss some part of which imperial law be worthy, not the read only or hear, but engrave in golden letter upon the wall of our house and post of our door. i have think requisite to recite unto you: by the counsel and consent of the elector and other prince, we declare that the imperial dignity and authority depend only of god, and whosoever shall presume to affirm or consent to other affirm aught against this decree, we deprive they and hereby do decree they, both in right and indeed to be deprive. of all their freehold, feudi^ or farm and of all their privilege which they hold of the empire and further, we decree and declare such to have incur the crime of high treason and to be subject to all those punishment which be inflict upon traitor. these be the very word of that imperial law. as you may see, they set down, and much more to this purpose in hieron balbus, one of their own popish bishop, in his book dedicate unto charles the five, the emperor, pag. and of that book, the other testimony be a authentic record also of no less moment and somewhat of a late time, a statute make in the year of king richard cap of purpose to keep sacred and inviolable the. sovereignty and regality of this kingdom. it be therein. declare that the crown of england have be so free at all time, not then only, but which be special to be remember at all time, that it have be in subjection to no realm but immediate subject to god and to none other, in all thing touch the regalty of the same. these be the word in that statute, beside diverse other tend hereunto, in defence of which statute they, in the parliament then assemble promise to live and die as it be there. note by all which it be evident that this doctrine, which now at rome be count most ridiculous, be in itself most sacred as be ground on the scripture of god and as most sacred have be embrace by all the christian in the primitive church, teach and maintain, with a general consent by the ancient and godly father in their several age and succession, constant defend by whole kingdom and empire, and that under pain of high treason to the gainsayer thereof, even in those late time also, when superstition have dim, i confess, but not quite extinguish and put out the truth and, which be far worse, the love of the truth as it may just be fear it have do at this day in rome. and in those of their sect who to error and heresy have add not only obstinacy but blasphemy. like new lucian scoff, the sacred truth of god account it a most a ridiculous matter. may i, with your patience, proceed a little further in this argument to consider which be in truth worthy your consideration. see, these man will not allow king and emperor to hold immediate from god, which be the most honorable, be most fit to be, a regal tenure. to who else they will have they be behold, and to do homage and fealty for their crown and kingdom. and to who else, think you? but to the utter enemy of god, to that man of sin and son of perdition who exalt himself indeed. as the apostle thes say, and who they also have exalt. above all, exalt he first from a christian bishop to a antichristian pope, and then from a pope or pastor to a temporal king and supreme monarch of all, who sovereignty must be over all king and people and his dominion over all land, good and possession in the whole world, even of this man of sin, must all king hold their crown and kingdom, and that in the most base and servile tenure that can be devise. hold they as tenant at will, by the mere favour and good will of the pope, as the vain triumpher, victor clem hen affirm of the kingdom of france. these to be their resolve position you may clear perceive. by franciscus bozius, who profess, set down and undertake, by the help of god and saint peter, to prove thus much, fr boaz lib ca, that the supreme temporal jurisdiction belong to the pope, so that he be both a hierarch and a monarch. ibid cap pa in all thing, affirm fr boaz lib ca, again his argument to show that to the pope belong indeed the supreme temporal monarchy for which he entitle his book, monarchio. by who cup ^on ca dinct pa nu say that the pope be, deserve, esteem and be indeed the king of king and lord of lord, and that, ibid pa nu the direct dominion of the empire belong to god and consequent to the pope, as be god vicar who permit. as he say, the power of the sword to who? he list by aug? steuchus a a lib donat const, who not only challenge sovereignty, lib and dominion in many kingdom, as in right belong to the pope, particular ^u steu lib fol and seq of spain, aragon, portugal, england, france, italy, denmark, hungaria, croatia, dalmatia, russia, bohemia, su^tia and, in a word of sp ape, all the western kingdom and country. but as if all this be too small a patrimony for the pope, he add that this sten ibid fol, as he call it, most ancient and almost omnipotent power be extend over all king and kingdom and that the pope rule ibid the whole world and hold the reign of all kingdom. steu ibid fol. suffer other king and emperor to reign, but with this condition that they acknowledge and confess a high power or sovereignty to be in the pope by the roman thrasonical triumpher, brev, nar, hen and clem before mention, who brag that all i, i kingdom in the world be behold to the pope, because all do or aught to swear to defend his sea and to omit other. you may see this most large in alexander the late, car lib cap and and ibid ca, controller of cardinal bellarmine, in the second of those his book entitle by he against impious politician and heretic of this time, but of purpose and at large refute, and that not without scorn, their own great cardinal, his position and reason there. tell we that as lib ca in god, so the pope may be call a temporal lord and monarch of the world. that the papa car lib ca, papa and pope as pope be such a prince in, who be the top of temporal authority, and therefore that as pope he may make civil law and may change and correct thy imperial law. further, out of one of their bishop, he car lib ca, affirm that this be to be hold as a article of the right faith, that the kingdom of the pope be the true and the only immediate principality or kingdom of the whole world, and that not only in spiritual but in temporal cause, in regard whereof he somewhat pleasant call the pope, ibid. cae, the husband or good man of the world, which you may well think be indeed a fit wife for his holiness. as for king and emperor, they teach that their authority be but immediata and in papa. carrer lib cap ministerial, derive from the pope and dependent sole carrer lib cap a boaz lib ca pa of he as the light of the star depend of the sun, or as the body depend of the soul, which receive be virtue and all operation from it and out of he. affirm it to be sanc lib orig differ carrer lib ca the kingly and imperial authority to be at the pope pleasure and command, movable, revocable, corrigible and punishable. they further to this purpose, teach that king and emperor be but the pope, minist, car li ca, minister. the pope i i car ca commissioner or deputy, yes, the pope, man innocentius, car sigon lib regn, ital an or vassal. swear fealty to he as the pope clemens lib clement tit ca romanis himself have define. receive sieu lib dona^i const cont laurent val fol crown and hold their kingdom from he and by his donation and be to use their temporal sword and authority at the pope pleasure and sufferance, as not only bozius boaz lib ca pa, but pope be bon ca extr and obedient boniface the eight before he affirm in a word that other power and authority car ca do depend of that. first kingly authority of the pope. but tell we, i pray you, be the pope lord only over the person, or be he not lord also of the good and posession in the whole world? yes, the pope, he be lord of al. as the dominion of the whole world be in christ and in papa, so must it be confess that the same dominion be in the pope. say lib ca and again: see ca. the earth be the lord and all that be therein, by consequent also: this belong unto the pope, who be god vicar, and so the earth be the pope and all that be therein. the same teach bozius boaz lib ca pag see in christ, according to his human nature, by the doctrine of saint thomas, there be a absolute power of all thing. therefore, the pope shall be the lord both in right and in power of all country, or, if you will rather say so, of the whole world. whereupon it follow that neither constantine constantinus lib ca and ibid nor any other do, neither can any man possible give aught unto the pope for all be his own already, but they may restore unto he what they unjust do withhold, and so do constantine constantinus car ca and constantinus boaz lib ca pa the great. from this sovereignty of dominion and as the triumpher true call, brev vict clem. and erebi ibid it unlimited power, for so it be indeed, by his description thereof as extend itself above the heaven and as low again as be hell. from hence i say, proceed that absolute and uncontrollable authority which he claim to give, to take away not only small quillet but, as the pope gregor in henr a platina, in greg imperia and, and dare himself express, affirm empire and kingdom and whatsoever mortal man can possess or have. yes, take kingdom away from some, as say car lib ca, though they commit no fault at all, and give they to those who have no right unto they. so do pope gregory the ten, with the empire of the east car. he take it from balwin the second. who be the true owner thereof and give it to michael pal^ologus, who have no right at all unto it. but tell we further, by what right and title have the pope so large and fair a patrimony as be the monarchy and sovereignty over the whole world and in all, both civil and ecclesiastical cause he have it, say they a a summus lib ca and and boaz lib ca pa, even by the very law of god, ay, but perhaps this be but your private opinion only no sentence and decree doctrine among you. yes, say car tit ca ib. it be the common judgement of our divine, yes, of our great divine, whereof he there express name. it be further, the common judgement of the. canonist, canonistaru^ carer lib ca, tit ca and and boaz ca pa. some of they bold avouch banelus, car lib cap, the contrary opinion, to be heretical. more than so, it be boaz lib cap pa, say bartolus, the sentence or judgement of their holy mother, the church. and last, which be, all in all, it be approve by the decree and determination of the pope, es^ boaz lib cap pa themselves, by name of innocentius, innocentius ca express ^ult in regm and petrun and boaz lib cap pa, the three cap sec, carl lib cap and cap i i cap. so car lib cap, to who may be add innocentius the four who inno come in cap extra. thus define the popedom, the popedom, say he be. a prince-hood or sovereignty, as well in temporal as in spiritual matter. boniface the eight who paral abb in an in token of his right to both the sword, at the solemnity of the jubilee by he first institute with great pomp and ostentation, show himself the first day in his like a pope and the next day in his imperial robe like a temporal monarch, and cause a naked sword to be carry before he proclaim unto all: behold the two sword be here. who further make mart polo chronicle in an and in wern in temp, an, a decree or constitution wherein he affirm that the pope be the lord both in spiritual and temporal cause and that in the whole world judge it heretical, as say martinus, to speak nay, to think the contrary, and that he may subject all other to this soucraignty definitive, determine bon cap ^aior and obed it as a needful thing to salvation for every human creature to be subject to the pope, john the, who express, also affirm, john cap extra nesede vacant, that to the pope god himself have give the right, both of the earthly and of the heavenly kingdom, that be both the temporal and ecclesiastical monarchy, and to omit other. particular. last may be add, the general consent of all late pope who ceren rom ecclesiastes lib sect. pa. yearly, on the night of christ nativity, bestow a hallow sword of some great prince who it please he, the mystery of which gift, as the pope himself explain, it be to betoken thereby that the supreme temporal power be give to the pope by christ, according to those scripture which, most blasphemous, the pope apply to themselves. all power be give to i in heaven and in earth, and again he shall rule from the one sea to the other and from the flood unto the world end. thus teach bozius, together with their pope and popish confederate. who very word in so important a cause i have. now more at large and express: allege: you do now evident perceive that these man who think it a most ridiculous matter for king to hold their crown immediate from god, do teach and define it to be a matter of religion, of piety of conscience, yes, of salvation. to hold the same immediate from the beast, that be in truth from the very devil, for of the beast the apostle say apocalypse, that the dragon, which be the devil, give the beast his power and his throne and his great authority. these be the fruit of popish religion and this the very helena for which they so earnest fight and contend, of which position, though, i may just say, as do saint hierome hier. epistle ctesiph adver. pelag to pa in another cause to have recite your assertion, be enough to refute they. they be stamp with blasphemy in the very forehead. yet as you have willing hear the just defence of regal sovereignty, so suffer i to speak somewhat also at this time, against he who show himself, in his colour, to be the enemy not of one or two kingdom or some people and sort of man, but the enemy of all mankind who, most violent, intrude himself into the right and regality of all king, christian and heathen, and, like a wild boar, invade the land, good and possession of all man in the world. yes, most sacrilegious challenge unto himself, that which be the peculiar prerogative and, as i may say, one of the royalty of god. the earth be the lord and all that be therein psalm. i shall not need to prove that this priestly monarchy be not know in the time of the old testament, of which not only aquina in in substan regina no aqui come in pet and stapleton stap doct lib ca, but himself express confess in carer ca, that the king have then power over the priest and may, for their offence, not only have deprive they of their spiritual office but have kill they also. that in the time of the old testament, car ca, the kingdom be the substantive or superior, and the priesthood be then but a adjective, as depend in good congruity upon the other, though the pope since have alter that most congraeous grammar rule that see, in the old testament the promise be only temporal but in the new be eternal car ca, it must not seem strange, as he say, that the temporal power in the time of the old testament be the supreme. so then, though they pretend etc. boaz lib pa cap pag for this sovereignty, the law of nature. yet by this express confession and clear word of aquinas, and it be evident that this priestly monarchy be not hear of for the first. in a funct four thousand year almost, of the world, in the new testament, what in duty ought first to be perform by the apostle and their successor? let the holy apostle, or the spirit of god, by his mouth, speak and determine. let every soul say rom, he be subject to the high power which himself, in that place, expound to be those king and prince who bear ib ter, bell lib laic, ca, lib pont rom, ca tam, the sword, and to who tribute be due. now this precept, be direct and give to the whole rome church of rome, even at that time also, when saint peter, by their doctrine, bell pont ro ca and be bishop of rome and therefore the spirit of god. command every soul particular in that church to be subject to the secular power and prince, without all doubt, enjoin obedience and subjection even to peter himself and to all his successor- yes, much rather unto they who be to be ensample tim to the rest, both in word and in conversation. a truth so clear that claudius espenseus comment in ca epistle tit dig^ one of their own and a learned bishop, not only confess thus much, but confirm it further. out of theodoret oecumenius and other special, out of saint chrysostom, who express chrys in cap add rom, mention the apostle themselves to be include in that precept, though you be a apostle, though a evangelist, though a prophet, and which i think will reach to. the pope or what else soever you be, every soul must be subject to those high and secular power. or if any, notwithstanding this evidence of truth and such a cloud of witness, will yet exempt either the pope or any other from this duty, it may most just be reply unto he with the word of saint barnard in his: if every soul be subject, then must you, who have exempt you from this universality, if any go about to exempt you, he go about to deceive and tempt you. and again do you power. none be more secular than pilot, before who christ himself stand to be judge and of who he confess that pilate have power over he and that give from god. what in duty then ought to be, do for the whole time of the new testament by this example of christ and precept of god, spirit be most evident and as subjection be command by god, so be it, practise and perform by the apostle, by the primitive bishop, yes, even by the pope themselves, for many hundred of year together, for the first three hundred year after christ, while king and emperor be pagan and persecutor of the church. it be confess both by bellarmine, bel lib, pontiff rom cap, and a a carer bell lib ca. that, for all that time, the apostle and bishop of rome be subject tun emperor as all other christian be, and this subjection be bel ibid carer loc, both, and both, indeed, perform, and in right to be. perform what and shall we think which they, without all shame, will persuade? that their conversion to the faith be the overthrow and aeversion of their temporal dominion and that the gain of christ be the loss of all their crown and kingdom? nor only so, but that of sovereign. they become subject even to those who before, while they be pagan, be subject unto they. i will not say what a effectual dissuasion this may have be unto they and other also, never to have embrace the faith. what a motive it may yet be to turn heathen and pagan again. i will not enforce that true maxim. approve both. bell car loc by bellarmine and christianity at christiani. i, bell carer, deprive no man of his right, nor of his dominion, as be confess in that hymn of wicked king herod. why be thou afraid of christ? he give a heavenly kingdom. he take not away a earthly. he fit christianus bel^ pont rom ca jann perfect we in that want he deprive we not of that. we have consider of many, but some few example, and those even of the pope themselves who have testify and record their subjection to christian emperor. with what lowliness and humility do pope leo, the first four an? prosp, hundred and odd year after christ, sue leo cpi, unto the emperor, theodosius the young, that he will call a general counsel in italy, and yet prevail not. how submissive do he again entreat, the like of marcianus the emperor, i, leo, epistle, beg our lord jesus, author and rector, who be the author and ruler of your kingdom, that you will not suffer the ancient faith to be call into doubt and question again, and that you will rather command the decree of the nicene counsel to be keep. how religious do he profess his subjection and obedience to the same emperor? i have willing, say the pope i, i epistle, add my consent or sentence because by all mean we must obey your sacred and religious will. pope gregory the great, be even admirable in this point. who be i that speak to my lord, but dust and ash say he greg lib, epistle ca to the emperor mauritius. it greg, epistle ca, well beseem a religious prince to command bishop in such matter, and that particular be a ecclesiastical cause also between pope gregory himself and john, bishop of constantinople, in which the pope confess that it well beseem a christian prince to command not only other bishop but even the bishop of rome himself, and as it be fit for the emperor to command, so the same. pope judge it his duty and fit for he to obey. greg, epistle ca. i be desirous to yield obedience unto you. i be lib ca, subject to your command. lib epistle ca, praebin, lib ca. i be obedient to the command of my lord and of the emperor. how often and usual do he give the emperor those title which be witness of his loyalty and subjection unto he? my lord, my gracious lord, my sacred lord and the like, and such be pope six hundred year after christ, at which time, greg, an palm in supplem eu^eb, this pope, gregory. live. to these i will adjoin but one more, the four who live an palm above eight hundred year after christ, who loyal subjection to two. emperor lotharius and lewes, his son, their own canon law have for ever record. first to the father he, lothar august distinct ca d^ capitulie lotharius. this pope, most solemn promise that as much as in he lay, he will for ever and every way be obedient to, he and his predecessor imperial precept. afterward, when complaint be make to lewes, the son of some disorder in the pope government, this leo the four write unto cae^ he in this manner: if we have do aught amiss towards those that be under we, we will amend all our fault not by your advice or admonition but by your judgement. beg the clemency of your highness to send such as may narrow sift all thing, and that not only. these, but all matter, both great and small, that all may be judge and end by they. thus be pope in all matter, great and small, yes, even in ecclesiastical cause, as by these you do perceive how much more in civil, subject to the emperor as to their lord, to their judge, to their sovereign, almost for nine obij^, an palm in supp, hundred year after christ, as yet be not know this new find: monarchy and sovereignty over all, king and kingdom. as yet have never be see his authority in depose king and dispose their kingdom and empire, nor long after this, until about two hundred year after leo the four pope hildebrand, the very firebrand of christendom though they have, saint he, in their calendare. first of all, take upon he to put in practice that transcendent and most extravagant authority. depose the emperor and pr^ stare form abrog pontif plat, greg suscipian^ execc, greg plat, saxon papa, petro, petrus, deadem, rodulpho sigebert, in an henry the, and give his empire to duke rodulph, of which act of he otho frisingensis, a worthy historian near to those time, thus write: oth fris chronicle, lib ca. i read and read over again the act of the roman king and emperor and i no where find any of they to have be excommunicate or deprive of his kingdom by the pope before this henry. this be the first. a a caesaresin, anteom, nes, mos transfer, etc. avent annal li time, and that be more than a thousand year after christ when the pope bull begin to push at king and kingdom, but with such unhappy success both to the giver and receiver as may just have afraid all other either to give or take. the like again. hildebrand, the unjust donor of the empire, by a general, abb vesperg in an sigeb, in an desertor. gregi^ proditor, ommun consens^ a lib pa consent be put. from the popedom, die in sige abb ve in an banishment at sal^ in normandy and at his death, as sigebert relate, confess to god and the whole church that he have grievous offend in his pastoral office and that by the persuasion of the devil he have stir up strife and hatred against mankind and withal. send his confessor to the church and to the emperor to ask forgiveness in his behalf. this be the end of the pope. against who say: cardinal benno, the blood of the church, cry unto god for vengeance. rodulph, the unjust receiver of the empire, some three year after he have get the same in a battle against the depose emperor, have his right hand cut off and at his death. give a memorable warning report in abbas abb ve in an, to all violator of their oath and alleigiance and to all usurper of kingdom upon any such title, for be in extremt at the point of death. look upon the stump of his maim arm and fetch a deep sigh. this quote: he be the hand wherewith i swear alleigiance to my lord, the emperor henry. and behold, i now leave both his kingdom and with it my own life. thus you see how satan, who, as the apostle foretell apocrypha, be chain and bind for a thousand year as soon as he get loose. at the end, h^ i an ribera come in apocrypha, hildebrand an palm in sup euseb of those year begin short after. in pope hildebrand to bestir himself and prepare a way for this papal monarchy, and indeed he only make way unto it, lay as it be the foundation thereof, though i confess he lay that low enough, even as low as be the pit of hell. but for the stately build ben abbvesp in a of his monarchy, it be not erect diverse hundereth of year after hildebrand, in the day of pope eugenu^s the three, almost a circa an palm hundred year after hildebrand, when some be exceed busy in this build, saint barnard, with great courage and constancy, oppose himself unto they and oppugn this papal monarchy, say he. to barn lib consid. add euge, pope eugenius, a shepherd staff be fit for you, not a. king sceptre peter can not give you dominion or sovereignty. he have it, not that which he have. he give you solicitude and care over the church, not dominion. nay, this be the very form and order of the apostle i bar c^sid, eug. domination and sovereignty be forbid. ministration and service be enjoin. and again, dispensation be commit unto you, not the possession of the world. if you go forward to usurp or claim this dominion of the world, god himself will control you. the earth be i and all that be therein. thus, and much more to this end, write saint barnard in those day above eleven hundred year after christ, in the day of lewes, the duke of bauare, the emperor, who live almost three. lud, an palm hundred year after hildebrand, it be adjudge high treason by the imperial law. as before, i declare, and little less in this, our kingdom, in the day of king richard the second, either to affirm or to assent to other, affirm either of these imperial kingdom to be hold of papa coast, lu balb, episc gurc, lib coron, carol, pa, papa decr, lud, naucl in ann the pope, which be then declare to be immediate hold of god and of none other which part of those imperial law be in truth most sacred and divine, when by who and by what i^st authority it be, ever repeal or annul will be very hard, i suppose, to declare, and this be about fourteen rich ann stow. hundred year after christ. let i now descend but one step low, even to our own time and to these day, wherein though the workman and master builder of babylon incessant labor, night and day, to raze this papal monarchy, like the tower gen of babylon, that the top thereof may reach unto heaven. yet to this day be it not erect god by his unsearchable wisdom and goodness, so infatuate and confound the builder thereof, as he do, ib of old, that what some of they, by their craft and great cunning erect and set up other of their own sect with might and main, do pull down the same diverse bell, lib p^utif ca, and by gear blackwell in his large examine an of their chief. man among who be cardinal bellarmine, with many evident demonstration, confirm that bellar lib pont ro ca pas be the pope. be neither the lord of the whole world, neither so much as lord of the christian world. yes, further bell: ibid ca and direct. ibid ca direct, or that direct, or by the law of god, the pope have no temporal jurisdiction of any place in the world, so that, notwithstanding the common judgement of their great divine, the consent of their canonist, the sentence of their holy mother, the church, the decree and determination of the pope in which bozius and triumph as if the field be win, notwithstanding all this- i say even to this day, as you see that be more than sixteen hundred. year after christ, christiani bell, ib, cap this papal monarchy be not erect. do i say it be not erect, i say more: this tower of babylon neither can nor ever shall be erect, not so much because, by god just judgement, the tongue and trowel of those builder be most strange, confound, but because they build it in pride to gen, get themselves a name and that they may say, as do old babylon in the prophet. i say apocrypha, i sit as a queen, i shall be a lady for ever, i be and none else. now this be god, honor and decree isa to stain the pride of all glory and bring to contempt all they that be glorious in the earth and chief because. they build it, as we have now declare, against the will and the eternal word of god, who truth shall stand firm for ever nay. which be worst of all. they build it even in contempt and despite of the lord who have say apocrypha, babylon shall fall. yes, for riber in ca, apocrypha, pa certainty thereof, babylon be fall and therefore, howsoever for ruinate thereof the mean in man eye be most weak and unlikely, howsoever again for uphold and erect thereof all craft, device and mean be use which, in man judgement, be most strong and unconquerable. yet shall babylon fall, because true be the god who have say it and apocrypha strong be the lord of host who will effect it, and there be no. wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the lord pro. my conclusion of this whole point be that which, if the time have permit, i purpose more at large to have. handle though these man strive and, like a cadmean or midianitish judg generation, fight among themselves and sheathe their sword in their own fellow bowel quarrel about the nicety of that, our poor distinction, direct and indirecte whereof whether soever be, say to we: and for the truth it skill not yet see they all a a carer ca bellar lib pont rom co ca joint profess and resolute defend such a sovereignty in the pope as that his judgement and his command must be the last and most certain rule both of faith and of all obedience. as there can be no true faith in, they see, they rely on so fallible and sandy a foundation, as be the judgement of man, yes, of one man, and he even the man of sin. so can that possible be true loyalty, nor sincere obedience which ever attend to an-high command? include in it, as in a trojan horse, that condition of eliz bulla exe ha^ rob parsonio and edmundo campiano, in april, prasente oliverio, manario, facult and camp or the like, which must ever stand or fall at the pope beck and pleasure, and out of which, if a side and christiani oli^ arrianum and simile de^ bellar lib pont rom cap and quods strength and opportunity may serve, as i pray and hope in god. that it shall never, or if be once, change into those romishi, sinon can easy, and with a ready gin let out whole army and troop of arm man sudden to surprise both church and kingdom. true loyalty, which i doubt not, but you do perform, and to the constant and continual performance whereof i earnest exhort you all this day, be to look at our sovereign as at one place, immediate by god, place in god own throne, place in the steed of god himself among we, and then to love, honor and obey he, not for other respect but for that love, religious duty and conscience which we owe unto god who place he in his own throne and in his own stead to govern we. to honor and obey he for fear, be servility and baseness. to obey for gain or profit, be self-love. to obey with that imply condition, be implicit rebellion and antichristian. to love and honor he as we all aught for his own piety, virtue and goodness, be christian charity. but to love and obey he for god own cause, who set he in his own throne to rule in his own steed, be true and christian loyalty. true and most loyal subjection. and this be speak of the first particular branch propose, namely from who the king have or hold his kingdom, even immediate from god who make he king? who set he in his throne and in his steed over the people. the other particular, namely what move or induce god to place solomon over his people, which be no desert of they, either king or people, but his own favour and free love unto they. i purposely omit, and in that short remainder of the allow time intend to speak a little of the last point and then commend you all to the grace of god. she give the king six score talent of gold and of sweet odour exceed much and precious stone. these great, magnificent and princely gift bestow by this queen on king solomon, as the like also from other prince send unto he kin be not for any want or necessity at all for silver be nothing esteem in solomon day king, he give silver. as stone verse and exceed all the king of the earth in riches ver. but they be outward and evident testimony of that reverence and love and of that love and honorable respect which both she and they have to king solomon. the like custom of give present have be usual from subject also, thereby to testify not only their love as do stranger but their loyalty also to their sovereign. suetonius, in aug, cap report that the roman, by their or annual present, testify their love to augustus, who they honor. as of king jehosaphat, it be say, chronicle that in token of their love and loyal affection, all judah bring present to jehosophat. on the contrary, it be say of those wicked man son of belial. and undutiful subject of king saul the wicked man. despise he and bring he no present. sam, it be not my purpose to speak of this particular unto you, though i may, true, compare the willingness and readiness of the subject of our solomon to those of constantius clorus, father unto constantine the great, of who eusebius say: mature study, euseb in vit const lib cap, that they do strive and vehement contend among themselves to fill the emperor treasury. rejoice great that now they have that long wish for opportunity to witness their benevolous heart and mind unto the emperor, whereupon he, true and excellent, say that the love of the people be the rich and safe treasury of the prince. but for the generality which be the outward testify of love and loyalty in ust needs say thus much, that it be the honor of our religion and the honor of so religious a people, and no doubt it be also the joy and comfort of our sovereign, to have ^eeretofore so often see and daily, especial on this day, to behold every where so many so manifest and public, so solemn and ^o religious testification both of the love and loyalty of his people unto. he at his happy inauguration, whereof this day be but a resemblance and a remembrance unto we. how do not only all the people throughout the land, of all sort, sexe^ and degree, rejoice in that blessing of the lord, but, as this day, also even our temple, our house, our street do witness and proclaim that public joy? no otherwise, then do the people of israel, at the inauguration of their solomon king, all the people run after he, ^iping with pipe, blow trumpet and rejoice with so great joy that the earth ring with the sound thereof and cry with all their might. god, save king solomon. the people, to testify their love, use to celebrate some festival day in honor of their emperor sometime, the. day of the emperor birth, as the roman in suetonius, suet, in vit aug cap, of their own accord, observe two day every year for the birth of augustus, sometime the day of their inauguration, when they first come to the empire. as do the people in aelius, sparta, in vit adrian, in honor of adrian, their emperor, sometime ^he day of the emperor preservation or deliverance from some great and imminent danger, so do the roman when they hear of the safety and recovery of germanicus, who they expect to succeed tiberius. they be so admirable in vit calig cap affect with joy thereat that even in the night time they ra^ with lamp and sacrifice to the capitol, and for have they have almost burst asunder. the gate of the temple, every where, with shout and joyful exclamation, sing and cry: the city, the country and all be safe in the safety of germanicus. i may true say that as we have far great cause, so have we and the whole people of this land express far great joy, both for the most happy birth, the most happy inauguration and those two most strange and most happy deliverance of our most gracious sovereign. those festival day observe as a statute in israel, and even this day shall witness to the whole world and to all succeed age that, as no people be more bless of the lord, so be none more thankful unto god, none more love or loyal unto their sovereign in who, happiness and safety. we most just may sing on this and all our festival day: britanni^, the empire of great britain, be safe and happy. nay, the church of god, be safe and happy. we and all the people of these kingdom be safe and happy in the safety and happiness of king james. for who continual safety and felicity. we will pray, as do good nehemiah i, i nehe god, save the king for ever. i. have now, according to my slender ability, handle those four several point which, in the beginning, i propose the success of all which i earnest commend to the grace of god, not doubt but that he who, word sam isa, like the bow and arrow of jonathan, never return empty, will grant some of his blessing upon they. howsoever, this shall be my comfort that god have first, though very unexpected, call and thus far, as you see, have now enable i, on this so joyful and solemn a day, in this so frequent and honorable a assembly, to perform some service unto god in testify unto you that truth wherein you now constant stand in offer, this day, at his temple, not any but the sweet smell. sacrifice of many hundred ye^, many thousand religious and thankful heart unto god, in testify my love and duty to zion and to the peace of, and last, in express, as you have all do with i this day, a humble and most loyal affection to our most gracious sovereign, the anoint of the lord. and now, for conclusion of all, let we once again and continual pray in those few but most fervent and affectionate word of nehemiah: god save the king for ever and let all the people say amen.