a sermon preach in london before the right honourable the lord lawarre, lord, governor and captain general of, and other of his majesty counsel for that kingdom and the rest of the adventurer in that plantation, lvk 22. 32. but i have pray for thou that thy say sail not. therefore, when thou be convert, strengthen thy brother. four, place of scripture: be abuse by the papist above the rest. first, those word of christ: upon this rock i will build my matth 26. church. second, his word at his last supper: this be my body. three, his speech to peter after his resurrection: mat 16. feed my sheep. last, these to peter, afore his passion, john 21. i have pray for thou that thy faith fail not. these last bellarmine like so well that ten time he allege they in one of his tome and make they serve not for one but many purpose. hence he can prove that the pope be the supreme. bellar, tom 1., lib 3., cap 5., pag. 178.. and infallible judge of all controversy. why? because christ say to peter: i have praicd for thou that thy faith fail not. hence he can prove that peter be the head and prince of his brother. why? because rom pont, lib 1., cap 20.. he be bid to strengthen his brother. hence he can prove that the pope can err in matter of faith. ibid lib 4., cap 3.. because christ pray that peter faith may not fail. hence he will prove. that peter have more and great ibid privilege than the whole church. nay, this serve his turn to prove that counsel can err if they tom 2. lib. concil 2. cap 2. be confirm by the pope last, he can prove from this that it be probable the pope as he be a private. tom 1. rom, pont. lib 4, cap 6. person can be a heretic. such plentiful use can bellarmine make of any piece of scripture if he think it do but sound for he. but i dare say the scripture that the devil bring against matth 4. christ be as fit and proper, allege as some of these be by bellarmine, as may be evident show in another place and time. but see the primitive. father have make no such ambros and conclusion from this place. therefore, out of their and the latter father exposition, we have gather another kind of divinity from these word, to which end i first lie down this general ground. christ be our true and spiritual physician. from who and the virtue of who merit, we must receive all the spiritual physic that can cure and save our sinful soul, particular as the body, so the soul stand in need of three sort of physic. first, it be necessary that it be purge from the corruption of sin, which else will kill the soul. then be purge, it be to be restore to life and strength. last, be so restore, it be requisite that it be preserve in. that state unto the end, answerable unto these. there be a threefold kind of physic we receive from christ, viz purgative, restorative and preservative. first purgative, to purge our soul from the corrupt humour and the infectious stain of sin. and this powerful potion be confect of the precious merit of the death and passion of our lord jesus christ, who die that we may die to sin and our sin die in we and be crucify. that our sin may be nail on his cross and bury. that our sin may so die that they may never live again in we. but when a sick man be purge of all his evil humour, it help, not if he be not also restore to strength. therefore, second, we receive also from christ restorative physic such as whereby we be restore to the life of grace and favour of god, and this comfortable restorative balm distill from the glorious merit of the resurrection of christ who, as he die for our sin, so he rise- rom 5. ult again for our justification- and who therefore rise from death to life. that he may merit grace for we, whereby we may rise up from the death of our sin to newness and holiness of life. but because it be not sufficient to be restore unless a man be keep in health, for that a relapse be more dangerous than the former sickness. therefore, to keep we from deadly relapse into which, without christ, we be. sure to fall. we do, final, receive from christ preservative physic, by the virtue whereof we be preserve in the state of grace and favour of god, and these bless and sovereign antidote be confect of the glorious merit of christ, his ascension and intercession, who therefore be enter into heaven, to appear now in hcb 9, 24.. the sight of god for we, now for the word in hand. they speak of the sweet and comfortable preseruative we receive from christ, his powerful intercession, as though christ have say: i confess, peter, thou be a great professor and protester, but little know thou how mighty thy enemy be and how weak thyself thou relle i, thou will die for i but know that thy enemy, satan, will. sift thou to the full and not cease till he have try the utmost of his power against thou, but i, who redeem thou, will not leave to love thou. i will therefore, by the power of my intercession, purchase thou such grace as shall uphold thou and raise thou up again, and will so make thou a comfortable example to all my elect thou, therefore, in remembrance of what i have do for thou. when thou feel the sweetness of this, my mercy to thyself. teach other by thy example and endeavour serious the conversion and confirmation of thy brother. all this, the lord jesus, pile up in a few word, but i have pray for thou that thy faith fail not, therefore, when thou be convert. strengthen thy brother. the part be two: christ mercy and peter duty. two part of the text: first, a evident declaration of christ love to the soul of his servant- i have pray for thou, etc. second, the duty of all man who taste of that love when they be convert. they must labour the conversion of other when thou be convert, etc. both be direct first and personal to peter, but from he derive to all god child in the world, for that which then be peter case fall out to be the case of all man, so that the word be not speak to peter as he be a apostle but as he be a ordinary christian and a child of god. and as in the first part christ do no favour to peter which he do not to every christian in like case, namely to pray for they that their faith fail not. so the duty here lay upon peter, in he be lay upon all man to labour to bring other to christ after they be bring themselves. the meaning be thus explain: let we open the point in order. but i have pray for thou that thy faith fail not. first part christ. this time and occasion will not give leave to unfold the question that may be move touch christ prayer and intercession for his church. much less may we spend any of the short time we have in discover or disprove the popish abuse of these word. i wish no congregation do need it more than this, for then the name of pope and popery may be bury, as they long ago deserve. let we therefore come to such necessary instruction as arise direct out of that meaning, which have be lay down, and first of all we may here see out of the doct: 1. dependence of these word with the former, the greatness of god mercy and christ love to a sinful soul. satan, faith, christ have desire to sift thou, but i have pray for thou. see, satan can be so ready to hurt as christ to help we satan. not so malicious to conspire our fall as christ be merciful to sustain and preserve we. and if the devil devise any new way to hurt we, christ be present with new mean and new supply of grace to relieve we a comfortable doctrine and have comfortable use to all that be any way distress. for if it be satisfaction to a man in matter of this life where he have a potent enemy that be able many way and much to hurt he, to be assure that he have a friend that most dear love he, and be wise, strong, wealthy and every way mighty than his adversary, then doubtless it can but minister strong consolation to a distress soul and terrify conscience to remember that they. have a saviour more mighty in his mercy than the devil can be in his malice and more willing to save, then the devil can be to destroy, and no less unto the penitent sinner, who may hereupon be assure that, though he have to grapple with many and mighty corruption, yet christ will be ready with continual supply of grace. that so, where sin abound, grace may abound. rom 5. 20.. much more the man also that be oppress in this world with the might and multitude of his enemy, may here receive comfort to consider that there be still more with he, then against he, and last the poor man who the flood of outward misery do beat upon, may here see for his comfort that. the love and providence of his saviour shall ever be. as ready to relieve he as the world occasion can fall out, to pinch he and to make application. it may yield we much satisfaction. who be engage in this present action to consider that though satan seek to make we desist, and because he can, therefore will hurt we by all his power, as who can marvel? see we touch his freehold so near? yet we have christ jesus on our side, who kingdom we go to enlarge, who love to his child. be such that even then, when satan sift they most narrow he with his prayer be most near they for their assistance, and therefore we doubt not but that see satan be now so. busy to sift we, by all discouragement and by slander, false report, backwardness of some, baseness of other, by raise objection and devise doubt, endeavour to daunt we and so to betray the business that god himself have put into our hand. the more, i say, be we assure that christ will the more mighty oppose this malice of the devil and, by his glorious intercession, obtain from his father. so much the great blessing both on we and it. furthermore, in as much as christ himself, doct 2. pray for his child that their faith shall not sail, no, not in the great temptation. and when satan sift they most narrow. we learn that, therefore, a christian, true convert and call to the state of grace, can. fall away, total nor final, the adversary of the grace of god, the papist hold. he may fall both final and total, other much near we than they say, total but not final. both be confute by these word of our saviour. for if a man shall fall, total from faith and the favour of god, though it be but for a day, and the next day shall be restore again. yet for that time, be it more or less, his faith have fail, but say: christ, i have pray that it shall not. hereupon we argue that which christ pray for, god will grant, but christ pray not that we may not be tempt or sift, but that our faith fail not, and this not for peter. alone. but, as himself say, i pray not for these alone but for all that shall believe in i. through their word, therefore, no true joh 17. 30. christian faith shall or can fail, either final or total. a doctrine of unspeakable comfort to the christian soul, but not a fit doctrine, say some, to be divulge to the people. and why? because, say they, if we be sure we can fall from god favour than what? need a man care how he live? but i answer: no man can just take occasion thus to abuse this doctrine. for the ungodly and unsanctified man be never yet in the state of grace. therefore, to he this doctrine pertain not. and for he that be sanctify, and in god. favour this resolution can befall he which appear most evident both in reason and religion. in reason, we know, a graceless child will neither be fear from evil by the anger, nor win to his duty by the love of his father. but contrary, be it with the good and gracious child, i mean, if he have no more but the grace of a civil nature and good education, if his father so love he that though he often offend he, yet he will not disinherit he. will he therefore be embolden to offend he the more careless nay, he will say to himself, have i so good a father as will not deal with i according to my deserve, but so oft and so merciful have forgive? my offence. sure i will endeavour by all the mean i can to please he and to be worthy of such a father. much more be it true in religion, for when a man be convert, he be cast in a new mould. flesh and blood no long bear rule in he, and he bid battle and stand in opposition and defiance with all such carnal resolution as this be. i say not, but such thought may come into his mind and he may be tempt to such cogitation. but that he shall entertain such resolution, it be impossible. believe not i herein, but let god himself be judge. to which end read and mark well a notable place: i joh 3. 3. we shall be like unto. he and shall see. he, even as he be, and every man that have this hope in he, do he therefore sin the more or take more scope to himself. no, but contrariwise, purge himself even as christ be pure. he therefore that sin the rather, it be certain he have not this hope in. he and he that have this hope in he be so far from that that he endeavour and strive every day how he may overcome his sin and walk more worthy of so love and merciful a father. so, then, the true use of this doctrine be that it serve to be a excellent incitement to stir up and provoke a man unto holiness, unless he purpose to proclaim to the world that he have no hope in he and that he be not in the state of grace in the three place. we may here learn what be doct 3. the true cause of a christian man stand in the state of grace, namely not the excellency of our strength, nor the perfection of our faith or of any thing in we, but the true cause be out of we, even in god. it be the stableness of his purpose, the immutability of his election, the truth of his covenant, the infallibility of his word. and the certainty of his love wheresoever he bestow it, and the excellency and all sufficiency of christ merit in who we be. love and elect. therefore say the rom 11., 29. apostle, the gift and calling of god be without repentance, and who he love, he love unto the end. john 13. 1. and the prophet say of god, i will put my fear into their heart, and they shall not mark. he say not, they can or will not, but they shall not depart from jerem 32. 40. i so here, christ, tell peter sathan desire to fade thou as wheat, and such a sister be he as who can stand by his own strength, but i, who so love thou as i die to save. thou have also pray for thou that thy faith shall not sail. so then, have it not be for the intercession of christ peter, have fain and fail in that temptation. this truth may fit be illustrate by this comparison: a strong man visit his sick friend, and will he to walk? the sick man will, but can the strong man lift he up. he walk in the hand of the strong man. each have hold of other by and by. the sick man faint and let his hold go, but the strong man hold fast and keep he from fall, and so he stand not by his own, but the strong man strength. so be it, in this case a christian convert- have hold of god by his faith and love. god have hold of he by his eternal election and covenant of grace and by the love he bear he in christ. now we walk with god in the course of our obedience, but if temptation come, we shrink and fall away our faith and love like a sick man. strength be soon spend, but then though we let go the hold we have of god. god will never let go the hold he have of we, but in that love he bear we, he still uphold we. and so we stand not by our own strength, but by the grace and mercy of god who, like the strong man, hold we so, as we shall not depart from he then for the use of this doctrine. we may here learn, first that the romish synagogue, in deny this and affirm that a man may fall utter from the state of grace. do no wrong at all to we, but the wrong be to god himself. the certainty of who covenant and truth of who purpose be hereby call into question, as though god shall choose a man. he will forsake and love he to day who he will hate the next, whereas contrariwise, as he love we when we love not he, so he will. keep fast. hold on we when we, in our weakness, will let go the hold we have of he and for ourselves. let this teach we to ascribe the cause where it be due, even to the lord mercy and christ mediation. if we slip or fall, we may thank ourselves, but if we stand and persevere, we must thank the lord. let we therefore cry to god with the prophet. not unto we, o lord, not unto we, but to thy name give the praise. and why? psal 115. 1. to he, for thy love mercic, and for thy truth sake, for it be his mercy and truth that uphold we from fall and perish eternal. last in as doct 4. much as christ say, he pray. for he that his faith fail not, and so uphold he by the virtue and merit of his holy prayer. we learn here the excellency of prayer, namely that it be the best and pourfull mean whereby we may do good one to another, when christ will do the great favour to peter next to die for he, he pray august, ser 122, tom, for he, prayer and preach be the two comfort of the church. if thou pray, say augustine, thou speak with god. if thou hear or-read god speak with thou. both be commend to we by the continual practice of christ, who spend much time in preach and much time in prayer. let we therefore, religious, embrace both these sacred ordinance as the special mean. of our spiritual comfort and by this practice of our saviour, let we all be stir up to this holy duty. shall christ pray and not thou, be he tie and will thou be free. be ashamed of thy profaneness, thou that never pray, and say not that thou go to the church and pray with the congregation, for therein thou do, but that the law require thou, the church be to be commend for that and not thou. but remember that christ, beside his daily presence in the temple, do go aside to his private prayer, and let we further here learn one to pray for another. shall christ pray for we and not we for ourselves. he for we all and not we one for a. other and the better to stir we up to this duty. let we consider that prayer have three excellency above other duty which we perform to our brother. first, it be the cheap and easy for the giver. i mean to a sanctify man. for he who, for want of ability, can give alm nor lend to his poor brother, nor, for want of wisdom, can give counsel nor instruction for want of knowledge. yet he have a mouth at least. if his tongue be cut out, he have a heart to pray for his brother, and he that can do nothing else can do this. and this the poor may do for the rich as well as the rich for the poor. second, it be the most powerful and profitable for the receiver. a alm, we see how much it be. counsel, we see how good it be and what good they will do. we be easy perceive, but what good a good man prayer do for thou be. past knowledge, and beyond all measure, give and lend. may help thou. before man, prayer prevail with god and pull down blessing of all sort and those good thing we often imagine to come other way be send we from god upon the prayer of god, child three, it have this peculiar honour, more than any other duty, that it be profitable both to the giver and receiver as it procure those good thing upon thy friend thou pray for so. it return also into thy own bosom and bring down the same or great blessing upon thyself. therefore, for a conclusion of the first part, let we above all duty not forget to pray for our absent friend. when they be present, we do such duty as may let they see we love they, and when they be absent, let we pray for they. that do testify to god that we love they. and no better duty can we perform to this noble voyage, now in hand, then earnest to commend it to the lord man may furnish it, but god must bless it, and prayer must procure that blessing. money may win and profit may allure man to assist it, but prayer alone can prevail with god. to bless it. some engage their person and more their purse, but our petition shall do more good than our person and our prayer then our purse. thou, therefore, that can do nothing else, yet pray, for we, thou, that can do more, yet pray beside, for though thou shall venture thy person and engage thy money, yet let we have thy prayer also which, if thou be as thou ought, will do more good than all the rest. remember the end of this voyage be the destruction of the devil kingdom and propagation of the gospel. be not these end worthy of thy prayer. remember thy brother, who have engage their person and adventure their life to lay the first foundation and do now live in want. of many comfort and pleasure which thou at home enjoyest. be not these man soul worthy of thy prayer. can thou open thy mouth, in public or in private, and not remember they? oh, let their life be precious and their enterprise honourable in thy eye, and if thou can do nothing else, send up thy prayer to heaven for they. and thus much for the first general part. christ, merciful promise to his church. the second be the duty. he enjoin peter and all other that shall be partaker of this promise. therefore, when thou be convert, strengthen thy second part, peter, duty brother, as the promise, so also the commandment. upon the occasion, then offer be personal, direct to peter, but from he derive to the whole church and every particular christian, so that this commandment be lay upon he not as a apostle, but as a christian man and a member of christ body. and as his case, then may be the case of any man, so every man be bind to this duty. and as there be no christian but may challenge this interest in the intercession of christ, that by the virtue of it his faith shall not fail, so there be no man, but in his measure he be tie to the performance of this duty. for the sense of the word, they be not difficult. satan have, take vantage of thy infirmity and hope to give thou such a fall as thou shall never recover. but i will bear thou up with my own strength. i will make thy faith to hold out and overcome he in the end. thou. therefore, when thou have taste of my mercy and be raise up again from that fall, which be so dangerous and fearful, that thy restoration be as it be another conversion, then be mindful of thy brother, as i have be of thou, and by thy example and all other good mean help forward the conversion and confirmation of they that need the meaning be plain. let we come to the doctrine, and first of all, whereas christ say, when thou doct 1.. be, convert etc. we learn that a man be not bear in the state of grace and favour of god, but there be a certain appoint time of every man conversion. when thou be, therefore, there be a time when a man be not now the time of a man, conversion be first especial in god hand, but partly also in our own. for the first david say: my time, o lord, be in thy hand. if all the time psal 31. 15. and change of his life, then especial the time of his conversion. now it be in god hand, not only because he give the grace and open, soften and prepare the heart, but further because he give the mean of a man conversion, he send. out psal 107.. 20.. his word and heal, they say, the prophet. it be also in a man hand when god vouchsafe to give a man the mean of vocation and conversion. as to we, at this day, this time be. therefore, call the acceptable time and day of salvation now than it. 2. cor 6.. 2. concern every one of we to look to ourselves. be thou change and renew, since thou be bear, know thou the time and the mean, and do thou discern the fruit and effect of thy conversion? thou be a happy creature, if not, and thou die. so it have be good for thou. thou have never be and say not thou be convert. but thou have forget it. for can thou forget the time when thou be marry, when thy elder son be bear, when thy ship come home, when a great and unexpected inheritance fall unto thou? much less possible be it for the soul that be true turn to god to forget the time and circumstance of his conversion. we may be sure peter never forget all his life long how christ look at he for that be the bless luk 22. 61. hour of his conversion. so the hour and time of our conversion be when christ will vouchsafe to look upon we. now, though his corporal presence be remove. he be present in his spirit, in his power and his grace and look merciful upon we every day in his holy word. oh then remember peter who, at the first look of christ, go out and luk 22. 62. weep for his sin and be ashamed that thou have have christ look so many hundred time upon thou, and all in vain. in the next place, whereas christ bid peter when doct 2. he be convert, strengthen his brother, as though then a man be fit to do good to other when he be himself convert and not till then. we may here learn the true cause why man be so negligent in performance of duty to other, even because themselves be unsanctified. man for true love. begin at home. and how can he love another that love not himself, or care for another good that neglect his own? see thou, therefore, a magistrate that govern, not his people, careful, but we all run as it will, and himself take his ease, follow his pleasure or fill his purse. the cause be he be a carnal man and unsanctified. see thou a minister that receive the fleece but feed not the flock. the cause be he be a unsanctified man. see thou a merchant or tradesman that deceive a master, a father, a husband, a wife, child or servant that be negligent or unfaithful. the cause be they be unsanctified. for if a man be convert himself, his next care will be to do all. good he can to other. more particular, we here see the cause why no more come in to assist this present purpose of plantation in, even because the great part of man be unconuert and unsanctified man and seek mere the world and themselves and no further. they make many excuse and devise objection, but the fountain of all be because they may not have present profit. if other voyage be set afoot wherein be certain and present profit, they run and make mean to get in, but this, which be of a more noble and excellent nature and of high and worthy end, because it yield not present profit, it must seek they, and with much difficulty be some bring in and many will not at all. tell they of get 20 in the c, oh how they bite at it, oh how it stir they. but tell they of plant a church, of convert 10000 soul to god. they be senseless as stone. they stir no more than if man speak of toy and trifle. nay, they smile at the simplicity and laugh in their sleeve at the silliness of such as engage themselves in such matter. but these man proclaim to the world what they be, even sow that still wallow in the mire of their profit and pleasure and be themselves unconuert, have therefore no care to convert other and, in deed, no marvel. if have cast all care of their own salvation behind their back, they be insensible of other misery. three, inasmuch as here christ command he that be convert to strengthen another, it appear, doct 3. by a necessary implication of what a excellent nature godliness and holiness be, namely of a large, a liberal, a communicate and diffusive nature, and such as will even compel he that have it to seek to make other as good as himself. it be not so in wealth, honour, learning, wisdom, authority, estimation. you shall not hear a carnal man say: oh, that every one be as wealthy as i, as wise as i, as high as i, as learned as i, as high in the king favour as i as well esteem and as much follow as i. no, for these be of a base and retractive nature and do imprison and close up the heart of man, but grace, be of a high and royal nature and enlarge his heart that possess it. oh say mise ^hat all god people do prophesy, as well as i and paul he cricth, i wish num 11. 29. that all beer present be as i be, except these bond act 26. 29.. we will rather have say: i will you have my bond? i wish you be in prison in my room. but he contrariwife, wish not any man in his bond, but that they be as holy and patient and learned and zealous and as high in god favour as himself, and so assure as many as be, induce with true save and sanctify. grace will say with their tongue, pray in their heart and endeavour with their best assistance that the poor savage in be as good christian as we ourselves. last, out of this commandment of christ, we doct 4. may further learn a doctrine special, pertinent to the present occasion and the business now in hand, namely that it be not voluntary or left indifferent to a man choice, but plain, a necessary duty for every christian to labour the conversion and confirmation of other. that be not. and this necessity arise not only from the excellent nature of religion, which desire ever to propagate and diffuse itself, as we hear before, but especial from the power of christ commandment which be unrestrained, do absolute, bind all christian to obedience, but here the commandment be general and unlimited to every one that be convert to confirm his brother. therefore, it lie upon all man, by a unavoidable necessity, to perform it. it be no way in the power of man to dispense with the general commandment of christ, out of which ground appear evideut not only the lawfulness but even the excellency and the excellency and necessity of this action for goodness, and indeed the plain necessity, as the case now stand, of. this present action, the principal end thereof be the plantation of a church of english christian there and consequent the conversion of the heathen from the devil to god. which ground be so lay it than follow that either we be not convert or they be not our brother, or else that we be convert. must labour their conversion, but we, by the blessing of god, be convert late from popery and former from paganism. nor can it be deny that they, in this case, be our brother, for the same god make they as well as we, of as good matter, as he make we give they as perfect and good soul and body as to we, and the same messiah and saviour be send to they. as to we, for if a virginian have our language, have learn our religion, profess our f^ith, crave baptism and challenge salvation by christ, can either man deny he baptism, or will god deny he salvation? sure, god will not the one and man may not the other. so than they be our brother, want not title to christ, but the knowledge of christ. oh, thrice happy than be they that shall carry the knowledge to they. and we, by the mercy of god, be the man to who god have offer the mean and opportunity to do it first. grant we the mean to discover the land more full than those that attempt it before. we then to find out a fair, easy and short passage, as though he have seat, we here and they there. for such a intercourse, then give we favour in the eye of the savage who rather invite we then resist. we then direct we to a land where be want of inhabitant and consequent room, both for they and we, and to a people inclinable, as we see by some experience already, first to civility and so to religion, and to such a land and such a people as, more than any other people or land we know of, have the commodity which we want and want that which we have. for they these mean. and opportunity, i say, be offer by god providence unto we. it not only show we the possibility, but lay upon we a necessity of seek their conversion and, consequent, of set forward this plantation without which the former can be. and do not think that this duty lie more upon he or he, then upon thou, for what ever thou be, if thou be convert, this duty belong unto thou. to teach other king themselves. be not privilege from the obedience of this duty, which davia know full well, do public acknowledge to god and to his church say: restore i to the joy of thy salvation and establish i with thy free spirit, then shall i teach thy way unto the psal. 51, 12. 13. wicked and sinner shall be, convert unto thou. and in another place come, say he, you child, hear ken to, i, i will teach you the fear of the lord, as though he psal 34. 11. have say as in another place, i will tell you what god have do for my soul. thus, king, be tie, psal 66., 16. and shall you be free. and our most gracious and christian king have show himself conscionable, obedient to this commandment, set forward this bless business by his princely privilege and gracious, grant under his great seal to all the undertaker record it also unto all ensue posterity that he great affect the effectual prosecution and happy success of the say plantation and commend the word. of the second patent date 1609.. the good desire of the undertaker and grant these privilege for their encouragement in accomplish so excellent a work that be so much please to god and profitable to these kingdom. and in a former grant that his majesty great commend and gracious, accept the undertaker desire for so noble a work which the word of the former patent of 1606.. by god blessing, be like to tend to the great glory of his divine majesty in propagate of christian religion to such people as yet live in darkness and miserable ignorance of the true knowledge and worship of god. if, then, his majesty, out of his duty to god, love of his religion and care of their soul, have thus put to his royal hand for the furtherance of this bless and worthy work, who be thou that will be free from the bond of this duty. but beside this necessity of duty, another necessity in nature and reason lie upon we. for the another necessity, we must do as we have be, do unto time be when we be savage and uncivil and worship the devil, as now they do, than god send some to make we civil, other to make we christian. if such have not be, send we. we have yet continue wild and uncivil and worshipper of the devil. for our civility we. be. behold to the roman for our religion, to the apostle and their disciple. do we receive this blessing by other, and shall we not be sensible of those that be still as we be? then in what a case have we be, if god have not send some to civilize and convert, we, and shall not we now labour to procure the same good ro other, otherwise, sure we be most unworthy of the favour we have receive. nay, that be not all, but it appear that we be not true and effectual convert. for if we be, then assure as, by virtue of god commandment, we must so, out of our own conscience and fellow-feeling of our brother misery, we will be most willing and joyful. to procure they salvation, where of we, by god, mercy and the same mean, be already partaker. out of these ground i conclude that for my part, without prejudice to other opinion, it be not only a lawful but a most excellent and holy. assistance of this voyage consist in four thing: countenance, person, purse, prayer, action and, as the case now stand, so necessary that i hold every man bind to assist either with his countenance, power and authority, as do our gracious, sovereign and noble prince, or with their person as some, or with their purse as other of the honourable and godly undertaker, or with their prayer and best wish, as all i hope do that love the lord. but because the first part of this assistance belong only to our sovereign. none can therefore, nay none need, take part in that. and as for the last, which be by prayer, see that the poor may do as well as the rich. i hope i may spare my labour to exhort to that. none be so profane to neglect that duty for we, unless they neglect it for themselves also. but for the middle of purse and person, as i will press none to go in person. so those who conscience and resolution do press themselves, i doubt, not to affirm that they adventure their life in the most worthy action that be attempt in the christian world these many year, but for assistance by the purse. i will here discharge my own conscience, which be that upon the premise before, prove and ground former lay down, i hold every one that know the true end of this enterprise and be able be bind to assist it according to that ability of he. but lest any man mistake or abuse my word, shall here cavil and say: belike than this man hold all damn that be not adventurer to, and it be a sure sign of a profane man if he be not a undertaker in that action or the like. take notice that my assertion be qualify with these two limitation: first, that a man must know the true state of this business and true ground and end both of his majesty gracious grant. and of the undertaker adventure which, as they be, ignorant mistake by many, so most malignant and malicious misreport by papist who mislike all thing do, by protestant and other of base mind, covetous or otherways malevolent spirit, who condemn all thing that serve not their profit or their pleasure. but it be most certain that there be thousand in this city and kingdom who, if they know the truth, will be more willing to assist it than hitherto they have keep out such. therefore, we be far from condemn, but leave they till they be satisfy of the truth, and then, if they change not their opinion, their own conscience will condemn they if none else will. second, though, a man know it never, so well he. must be of ability to contribute, or else this tie he not for a man be, bind, first to maintain himself and his family and to bear his part of the needful burden of the church and state where he live. then, out of that which remain, such action as this do challenge a part. now, whether a man be able or no, he must be leave to his own conscience to give judgement. but herein let a man take heed, he flatter not himself. it be easy for man to deccive themselves, and the devil delight to make man betray their own soul. thou therefore that plead, thou be not able consider how much thou have abroad at interest, how much thou have in other adventure into. which nothing but hope of present profit do allure thou consider how much thou spend in sport and other vanity beside necessary recreation, how much in plain superfluity of apparel, furniture, building or diet, all which it may be, or much of it be. better, spare then spend. if thou and thy conscience do but cast up this account, thou will never say hereafter, thou be unable, for thou know how small a part of those vain expense will have. suffice, this and that that have. do thou hurt. be vain. spend will have. do much good to this godly business. and take heed thou, that be of this mind. the time come not that thy soul wish a great part of that thou have, voluntary and wilful. cast away otherways, be all bestow in this or some such action. thus, with these two caution, i make my conclusion that the assistance of this business be a duty that lie on all man and that whosoever be of ability and know the true ground and end of this voyage, if he assist it, not discover himself to be a unsanctified, unmortify and unconuert man, negligent of his own and other man salvation. or else peter may have reply on christ and say: nay, sir, i may be convert and yet be not bind to strengthen my brother. and this may suffice for the true meaning and right use of this text. but now right, honourable and belove, see a particular consideration of the true state of the virginian voyage. upon occasion of this text we be assemble, peculiar for this business, even to consecrate this enterprise to the lord of heaven and to send away our honourable governor and his associate and attendant. in the name of the lord give, i leave, not as call once into question the lawfulness of so noble a action, but for the further clear of the truth to they that know it, not for the justification of our course against the adversary of all excellent exploit, for the stop of the mouth of the malignant and for the better satisfaction and encouragement of ourselves who, either in purse or person or both, be. engage in the action to descend a little more particular into consideration of the true state hereof. all i have to say i will reduce to two head, namely to lay down, true, the encouragement, the discouragement in this business, for in this or any other action to be undertake. if the encouragement to it and discouragement from it be both of they true and just, lay down and then weigh in the balance of wisdom, it will easy appear to man of understanding whether the business be fit to be undertake or relinquish answerable. let we deal in the present action and so proceed according, and first let we, true and impartial, propound first the discouragement in this action, lay down and remove the discouragement that seem. to attend this present intendment of plantation of a english colony. in the first and fundamental be the doubt of lawfulness. the first discouragement question of the lawfulness of the action. the question be move by many and some not out of curiosity nor other sinister but conscionable and christian respect, and this keep many from assist it. for how may they put their help hand to that which they be not resolve in conscience to be lawful and warrantable in itself for these man sake and not for such as make it but a shelter of their covetous and carnal respect? we will give passage to this objection and for answer hereunto. first we free confess a action can be good, excellent or honourable, and much less. can it be necessary unless it first of all appear to be lawful. second, for the present action. we also confess and yield to this as to a principle of justice. a christian may take nothing from a heathen against his. a christian may not do wrong to a heathen will, but in fair and lawful bargain, abraham want a place to bury in and like a piece of land and be a great man and therefore fear a just and meek man and therefore love of the heathen. they bid he choose where he will, genes 23.. and take it. no, say abraham, but i will buy it. and so he pay the price of it. so must all the child of abraham do. three it be. most lawful to exchange with other nation for that which they may spare, and it be lawful for a christian to christian may traffic with the heathen, have commerce in civil thing, even with the heathen, unless they be such of who god have give a plain and personal charge to the contrary, as he do to the israelite of the curse canaanites, who they be command to kill and have nothing to do withal. but we have no such commandment. touch the virginian upon these ground, which i hope be undeniable. i answer more particular to the present occasion, that first, we will take nothing from the savage by power, nor pillage by craft, nor violence, neither good land nor liberty, much less life, as some of other christian nation have do to the dishonour of reiigion. we will offer they no wrong, but rather defend they from it, and this be not my bare speech, but order be so take both in our patent and instruction, and such be the resolution of our governor. second, we will exchange with they for that. we will take from they only that they may spare we, first their superfluous land, second their superfluous commodity, which they may spare and we do need, and they shall have that which we may spare. and they do much more need. but what may they spare? first, land and room for we to plant in their country be not replenish by many degree, in so much as a great part of it lie wild and inhabit of none but the beast of the field and the tree that have grow there. it may be 1000 year. who ancient possession to disturb? we hold no great offence and who know not. but as the present state of england stand, we want room and be likely enough to want more again. they may spare we timber mast crystal, the commodity certain know to be in virginia. timber crystal mast wine, copper, iron pitch tar, soap-ash sassafras, if not better stone wine, copper iron pitch tar. sassasras, sopeash, for all these and more, we be sure the country yield in great abundance. and who know not? we want these, and be behold to some for they, with who it be better for we if we have less to do these thing. they have these. they may spare these. we need these. we will take of they. but what will we give they? first, we will give they such thing as they great desire and do hold a sufficient recompense for any of the foresay commodity we take of they. but we hold it not. so, and therefore, out of our humanity and conscience, we will give they more, namely such thing as they want and need and be infinite, more excellent than all we. take from they, and that be: 1. civility for their body, 2. christianity for their soul. we give to they what they most need as: 1. civility and skill in trade and tool for trade and government. the first to make they man, the second happy man. the first to cover their body from the shame of the world, the second to cover their soul from the wrath of god. the less of these two be that for the body will make they rich than we find they for he that have 1000 acre and be a civil and sociable man, know how to use it, be rich than he that have 20000. and be a savage, can plough, till, plant nor set, and so receive no more. profit than what the earth of it self will yield by nature, so that we be so far from disinherit they of their possession or take any thing from they that, contrariwise, we will make they much rich, even for matter of this life, than now they be, as they themselves will hereafter confess, whereby appear the vanity of this objection, for when they be civilize and see what they have receive from we, i dare say they will never make this objection against. 2. religion and the knowledge of the true god, we, that these man now do. and now, if the small and base part of our payment be better worth than all we take from they, than it seem the second which be the chief. of all, namely religion, they have from we for nothing, and sure so it be. they shall have it free for god sake and for their soul sake. and yet we know the holy ghost have tell we that if we communicate unto they our spiritual thing, it be but a 1. cor 9, 11. a small thing if they impart unto we their temporal, then how much small be it if they impart unto we their temporal. when we communicate unto they, both spiritual and better temporal than we receive from they, and this may suffice for the lawfulness of the action. especial see whosoever will be satisfy. more particular m simonds. his sermon may have recourse to a lcarned and godly sermon and to a short. but a judicious and sincere declaration, well pen, both set out by authority for that end and the truth whereof will be justify both by the author and the whole body of the counsel for that kingdom. this discouragement trouble the conscience. the rest be rather ground on politic and human reason, wherein, therefore, i will be the short and commit they to those who element it be to consider and determine of such matter. the second discouragement be the difficulty of the second discouragement, difficulty of plantation. plantation for that the country be far off and the passage long and dangerous, the climate hot and disagrece with the state and temper of our body. for answer, if these objection proceed from malice, they be to be reject. if from ignorance, as we rather suppose. let they then know for satisfaction that first, for the distance, it be nothing: 1. by distance, to speak of a two month voyage, and we hope we shall short be able to say a month, how near virginia be to england, compare it with other voyage that be of name, and it be the near of all. second, for the 2. for hard passage: passage it be the easy, fair and safe that have be discover to any place. we come not near the sun nor under the equinoctial line to distemper our body. we have no strait to pass through. we come near no enemy country. no, how fair, safe and easy the passage to be rock, shelf sand. nor unknown land lie in our way. we be not in danger of the turk galley nor other enemy of christian religion who never yet do peep out of the strait of gibraltar. we fear no congeal sea nor mountain of ice to immure we. but after we be out of our own door, the narrow sea, we keep a fair course betwixt the sun in the south, on the left hand, and the ice in the north, on the right, upon the main ocean, where we have sea room enough. and it be hard to name any other great voyage from this land. but the passage be subject either to the untemperate heat of the sun on the one side or the danger of the ice on the other side. witness the voyage to the east, indies and other, into the south, and to moscow, dansk and other, into the north and east. only this passage into be, into the west, south-west or thereabouts, be in that true temper, so fair, so safe, so secure, so easy, as though god himself have build a bridge for man to pass from england to. and let no wise man object that our last fleet be disperse and sore shake by a storm, for he can but know that such as sail by sea must as well expect tempest of wind, as traveller on the land shower of rain. and as he on the land be but a simple swain, as the proverb, be that let his business for a shower of rain no less. be he that fear to sail on the sea for a tempest of wind. but our comfort be that as the heaven can give rain. of jerem 14. 22. themselves, but it be the lord, nor the wind can rise of themselves, but at god word the stormy. psalm 107.. 25. wind arise and lift up the wave. of the ocean. so neither sea nor wind be in the hand or power of the devil nor the pope, for if they be, we shall never plant nor land at. as to the three which be the climate, let we not. 3. the climate: abuse ourselves by ignorance or vain report, but examine the truth. look into the map and card. or if thou have not skill in they, look into our patent. or if thou can not read, or have they not? ask and inquire of traveller by sea or land. if the land that lie between the 34. and 45. degree of northerly latitude from the, the climate in temperate equinoctial line be not far enough from the and from the distemper heat of the sun. and though the middle of seem to be in the same position with the heart and middle of spain as toledo or thereabouts, the true position of yet it fall out for reason not yet full. discern it be not so hot as spain but rather of the same temper with the south of france, which be so temperate and indifferent as if our own be something near unto it. we will be well content with it. and a further evidence that all this be true we have from the experience of a virginian. their skin not black, that be with we here in england who, skin though he have, go naked all his life till our man persuade he to be clothe, be so far from a moor or east or west indian that it be little more black or tawny than one of we will be, if he shall go naked in the south of england and to that experience add a better our man there. not of the climate, namely of our brother in who some of they have be there many year and do not complain of any alteration cause by distemper of the climate. the three discouragement be that it. have so the three: discouragement, smalenes of our beginning and poverty of our proceed. poor and small a beginning and be thereupon subject to the mock and flout of many who say it be but the action of a few private person, and they send but poor supply, but handful of man at a time and one good ship will beat they all. for answer, i say: many great state than many great matter have have small beginning. this be like to prove, have as little or less beginning than this. have the israelite go down into egypt, be but seventy soul and be there but about two hundred year or little. compare deut 10. 22. with exod 12. 37. more, and most of that time under miserable. bondage. yet do they grow to six hundred thousand, man beside child, and soon after to one of the great kingdom of the earth. look at the begin of rome: how poor, how mean, how despise it be, and yet, on that base, beginning grow to be the mistress of the world. oh, but those that go in person be rake up out of the refuse and be a number of disorder man unfit to bring to pass any good action. so indeed say those that lie and slander. but i answer for the generality of they that go. they be such as offer themselves voluntary for none be press, none compel, and they be like for aught. that i see to those be leave behind, even of all sort, better and worse, but for many that go in person, let these obiecter know they be as good as themselves and it may be many degree better, but as a story for the mocker of this plantation to read and observe, for mocker of this business they be worthy. no answer. yet i can tell they a sale not unfitting they, but i will spare this place and audience, not they, but i will repeat they a true story and leave it to themselves to make application when god have move the heart of artaxerxes to send. nehemiah and a few with he, to restore jerusalem, nehem, 1., 7, 8. and build the wall. the text tell we that, as that poor people be at their work, present certain who think themselves no mean man, namely sanballat the horonite and tobiah a ammonite, chap 4.. 1, 2. be not a little stir and mock the jew and speak in the hear of their companion. what do these weak jew will they fortify, will they sacrifice, will they finish it in a day? they build, say another, but if a fox go up he will breakdowne, vers 3. their stony wall and be not the like scornful word mutter against we and this present voyage. but what be these mocker, even horonites, chap 2., 10. and ammonite and such as have no portion, nor right nor memorial in jerusalem. i wish better to our mocker, though they wish so evil to we. but let they take heed, though they care not for have portion with we in this adventure, that yet they have their right and portion and memorial in jerusalem, or else they will prove mocker of we in jest and of themselves in earnest. but what say nehemiah and the jew? that thus be flout. hear, o our god, for we be despise and turn their chap 4., 4, 5.. shame upon their own head. give they unto a prey in the land of their captivity. cover not their iniquity, nor let their sin be put out in thy presence, for they have provoke. we, before the builder, far be it from i and we all, thus to say of we. but contrariwise, i pray, god, this curse be far from our mocker, but i also pray they may be as far from deserve it, but if any with no mock spirit nor ill mind do only for his own satisfaction. further, object that we send man that can live here, man that be in debt, man of base fashion. indeed, thus say nabal, the churl of david and his company, reproachful term they a rout of unruly servant that run away from their master and base fellow, of who i know not whence. they be 1. sam, 25.. 10, 11. but hope that these do object out of better mind. i answer first, this be true for some, not all, and so it be in every town in england. second: we do and must send such as we can, not such as we will. three, if they be all, or the most, such as be. object: it be no more than we have observe to be the beginner of great and noble action. remember who and what they be that come to romulus and remus and be the founder of the roman city and state, even such as no man can without impudency compare we with they. if any man say this, be a profane example and a base precedent. let he look into god book and see who keep with david and be the beginner of the kingdom of judah. there gather unto david all man that 1. sam, 22. 2. be in trouble and all that be in debt and all that be vex in mind and david be their prince and they be about four hundred man. see for their number, but four hundred and for their quality. who be they? three sort first, i that have do some trespass against the law and therefore be in trouble. second, such as be in debt and can not pay. three, such as be malcontent at the proceed of the state in the time of saul and discontent at his government. a strange kind of people. and a poor number a man will think to be the founder and reformer of such a kingdom. but thus have god use to set on foot and lay the beginning of great god, bring to pass great matter on small beginning matter. that his power may be see in weakness and that it may appear to be the work of god and not, and that therefore the glory may be he. thus deal he in thing, natural, human, politic and spiritual. for the first, we see, he make: 1. in matter, natural genes, 1. this goodly world out of a rude and confuse chaos and the beautiful sun and star out of a deform heap. for the second, we see the mighty, 2. in matter, human emperor. of the earth that have make the nation tremble, be at the first cry, infant, keep and carry in the arm of silly woman and three forthing spiritual, the glorious church of the 3. in matter spiritual new testament, which now have king to be her, isaiah 49.. 13. nurse, father and queen, her nurse, mother and prince to lick the dust of her foot. be it not begin by twelve poor man not worthy to be, and take most of they from base and some from bad occupation. no marvel then, though it be so also in the politic body. do not god find the first world on the only two son 4. in matter, politic of adam and the second on the three son of noah. and be not one of adam two and one of noah, three apparent wicked be not here. two strange beginning, both for number and for condition. but thus god can and will do that man may see it and see, may have cause to say a. this be not man power nor wit, but this be the lord do and it be marvelous, psal 118.. in our eye, if any do yet further reply and say: but it object, we send base and disorder. man can never do well to send such fellow, such loose, lewd, licentious, riotous and disorder man. they that can be keep in compass at home, how can they be order there? i answer this objection: be much in show, but the least of. all in substance, for to say nothing, that there be not that mean nor occasion to offend in many kind that be here in abundance. we be further to know that as long as we have wise, courageous and discreet governor, together with the preach of god word, we much care not what the generality be of they that go in person consider. we find that the most disorder man that can be rake up out of the superfluity, or, if you will, the the base and worst man, train up in severe discipline, sharp law, a hard life and much labour do prove good member of a commonwealth, very excrement of a full and swell state, if they be remove out of the fat and feed ground. of their native country and from the licentiousness and too much liberty of the state where they have live into a more bare and barren soil. as every country be at the first and to a hard course of life, want pleasure and, subject to some pinch misery and to a strict form of government and severe discipline, do often become new man, even as it be cast in a new mould and prove good and worthy. instrument and member of a commonwealth. witness, the companion of romulus and remus that be the founder of the roman state and if you will have a more infallible testimony, look into the scripture. call to mind the man that come to david, qualify, as you hear, before man in danger. of law, man in debt and discontent person, our base churl will round. answer like nabal. be these david companion, be these his partaker, such fellow as these that be the scum and scour of the street and rake up out of the kennel, be like to be the founder of a worthy state. but see the shallowness of these man conceit, for when those man have live a while in david fashion and be train up under his discipline, they be so alter and refine that many of they all, be some four hundred, no more than a virginian fleet, become worthy to be of the honourable order of david, worthy or mighty man and prove great statesinen in the commonwealth and all of 1.. chron 11.. 11 and chap 12. 1. etc. they do, david, hold so well to have deserve that when god give he peaceable possession of his own, he bring up all those man, every man with his household, and they dwell in the city of hebron, 2. sam, 2. 3. where they prove good member, nay rather governor, of the commonwealth, and raise their family to great honour than ever they have before now. if those man, so base give and ill qualify, as we hear afore, notwithstanding, by sharp and godly discipline prove so well, how much rather. may, we hope, the same of our brother go and go to many of who be of good descent, of noble and generous spirit, virtuous and valorous and fear god and many way as worthy as many of their rank that be. leave behind they and to conclude, it be well enough. know to they that better government and discipline in small, then in great state and in those that be new, settle, know any thing, that there be good reason whereupon it come to pass that such as live licentious in a state of long continuance, which be ripe and rot for want of reformation, will easy be bring into order in a new government. and no less good reason be there why there be and will be better government and better execution of law in a little territory then in a great and populous kingdom, and in a new begin rather than in a old and settle state, the truth whereof many of you right, honourable and belove do better conceive than i can express. as to the small number of our adventurer. beside that which be say before, let we further consider how david kingdom begin with poor four hundred man. but what say the text? his i sam 22. 2. cause be good and so know to be there. come more, day by day, to david, to help he, until it be a i chron 12. 22.. great host, like the host of god? even so, we doubt not. but as god have already augment our number far above the expectation of many in the beginning, so he will also stir up the mind of worthy and generous man to assist this bless business in purse and person, until it be grow as david, four hundred, to be as as a. host of god, and i doubt not to see the day that man shall speak of this plantation, as be speak, in another case, though thy beginning be small yet thy latter and shall great increase. the next discouragement, be that the countric, the four discouragement, ill report of the country by they that come from thence be ill report of by they that have be there. i answer it be not true in all, nor in the great or better part, for many there be and man of worth who have be there and report so well of it that they will not be keep from go thither again but hold it and call it their home and habitation. nor can all the pleasure, ease, delight and vanity of england allure they from it, but that some, and it may be many of the vulgar and vile sort, who go thither only for ease and idleness, for profit and pleasure, and some such carnal cause and find contrariwise but cold entertainment, and that they must labour or else not eat and be tie within the bound of sharp law and severe discipline. if such base people as these do from thence write and here report all evil that can be of that country we do not marvel for they do, but like themselves and we have ever find that all noble exploit have be so malign and misreport by the great part which general be the worse. part of man. let we take but one testimony, but that shall be beyond exception: god, with his own voice, give the israelite the land of canaan and in the word of his truth, tell they it be a good land and they shall overcome the heathen and enjoy it. will a man think that after this, any dare have affirm the plain contrary, yet mark what follow a little afore they come to take possession, god bid they send man to search it, and such be send as numb 13.. 3. be ruler and head of the people of each tribe. one a man will also have think that such man will have. speak truth, but see the corruption of man nature. how it be give to. malign and deprave of god blessing, especial if they be commend and advance by some who they affect not for. of those twelve man, so send by god commandment ten: do direct deny what god have. say it be a good land. say god no. say they it be a land not worth dwell in. for it, eat up the inhabitant thereof, you shall overcome. they numb 13., 32. and 33. say god no. say these, we be not able to go up against this. people. thus you, right, honourable and worshipful, that speak well of and can be believe, be content god himself, you see, be thus use and can you look for better. but though these man like man, or more like monster, dare thus, as the holy ghost say, bring up a evil report of the land which they ibid, vers 32.. have search. yet two of the twelve stand up for the truth and therefore the devil get not a verdict for he, and speak bold. the land which we walk through be a very good land if the lord love we, chap 14.. 7, 8, 9, he will bring we unto it. and fear not the people of the land, for the lord be with we and see the vile nature of the multitude when they give place to their furious passion. they rather believe those ten that speak evil out of their own base. fear than these. two that speak the truth and no more than god have speak before they, nay, they will not endure to hear it well, speak of, and therefore cut they off in the midst of their relation and outrageous cry: stone they with stone, dare they? chap 14.. 10. speak well of canaan, stone they. but the god of heaven, take the cause of his own truth into his hand and deliver his servant. pronounce just sentence on all three party. first, on the false reporter that have so slander that good land. those man shall die by the plague before the lord. chap 14.. 37. second, on the base believer of this false report, you shall never see it. your carcase shall fall in the wilderness. ibid 29.. but your child, which you say shall be a prey to the heathen. they shall go in and possess the land which you have. refuse three on those two that speak for the truth and stand to it with danger of their life. joshua and caleb shall live and i will bring ibid 14 and 30. they into the land and their seed shall inherit it. this be the just sentence of the righteous god which according be execute upon they all. now, how fit this story resemble the present business we have in hand. i leave it to other to make application of the particular. i only say thus much: the israelite have a commandment from god to dwell in canaan. we have leave to dwell in. a comparison of search of canaan and and of the report thereof, make they be command to kill the heathen. we be forbid to kill they, but be command to convert they. they be mighty people, we be ordinary. they arm we naked. they have wall town. we have scarce hovel to cover they that land flow with milk and honey, our abound with as good or better. they send man to search that, so we to search this. they bring of the commodity, so have we. many slander that country, so they do we more believe the slander then the truth, and so they do of we. yet some stand bold for the truth, and so there do in we, and better than those that do deprave. it, and as two of the twelve resist the slander whereby the devil have not a full jury, so though many slanderer open their mouth against we and our land, for how can they speak? matth 12. 34. good thing when themselves be evil. yet i hope it be hard to find that ever twelve good man and true as a jury must be, do agree together to speak evil of it. and so, i doubt not, the devil shall never get a verdict against we. but god, who cause we undertake, will ever and in all company have a caleb or josua ready to speak the truth and put the slanderer to silence. there remain the application of the judgement and execution, but that belong not to i. it be the lord to inflict the rom 13.. 19 slanderer die a sudden death, the believer a linger death. far be both. these curse from you all, but far be you also from deserve they. the next discouragement be the hard and miserable condition of they that go and stay there. the five discouragement, misery of they that go in person. their fare, their diet, their drink, their apparel, their house, their bedding, their lodging, be all so poor, so pitiful, that no english man be able to endure it. i answer first. do we purpose to attempt? and answer 1. no great thing achieve without endure misery. achieve, to begin and to perfect any noble exploit in such fashion of life as we live in england. let we not deceive ourselves. stately house, costly apparel, rich furniture, soft bed, dainty fare, dalliance and pleasure, hunt and horse-race, sport and pastime, feast and banquet, be not the mean whereby our forefather conquer kingdom, subdue their enemy, convert heathen, civilize the barbarian and fettle their commonwealth. nay, they expose themselves to frost and cold, snow and heat, rain and tempest, hunger and thirst and care not what hardness, what extremity, what pinch misery they endure so they may achieve the end they aim at. and shall we think to bring to pass a matter of this honour and excellency, which the age to come shall stand amaze? to behold and not to endure much corporal hardness. what be there ever excellent in the world that be not difficult, nay even therefore more excellent and more esteem because difficult. they therefore be misadvise that go to with purpose to live for the present as they live in england, and unworthy be they to be count father and founder of a new church and commonwealth that resolve not to undergo and endure all difficulty, misery and hardness that flesh and blood be able to bear. second, i answer this objection, yield no answer. 2. this objection rise from balenesse and cowardice of spirit, cause of mislike of this action more than other. see there never be noble action that be not subject to these misery, but it discover the pusillanimity, the baseness, the tenderness and effeminateness of our english people, into which our nation be now degenerate, from a strong, valiant, hardy, patient and endure people, as our forefather be, which come to pass not by our peace and plenty, as some causeless cavil, but by the abuse of they, that be by want of exercise of arm and activity, want of trade and labour, by our idleness, laziness and lasciviousness, wherein city have labour to match the court and the country envy the city. and so now, at last, all turn after state and pomp and pleasure, and if any occasion fall out, that man shall be put to. any hardness in cold or heat, by land or sea, for diet or lodging, not one of 100 be find that can endure it. but when other people can endure winter and summer, wind and weather, sun and shower, frost and snow, hunger and thirst in camp or garrison by land or sea and march on foot through snow or water, than our man for the most part be consume and dead or else get home again to the fire side in england. but it be another kind of life that make our forefather fearful to other nation, the ancient valour and hardness of our people, and terrible to their enemy. have they be such mecock and milksop as we be now. they have never expulse the dane. nor overcome the french. we have never quarter the arm of france nor crown our king in paris. we have never take so many foreign king in the field and sometime on their own ground. we have never make the mighty emperor seek alliance and marriage with we and some of they to come in person into our land and fight under the banner and pay of our king. thus they, with labour, win what we, with idleness, have lose. for what be there that industry, labour, pain and patience will not win. and yet all those can win so much as idleness, dainty and effeminateness will easy lose. witness for proof hereof: ourselves and our neighbour of the low country who can but wonder that will observe. what the hollander be a hundred year ago. how, how the low-country man be alter within these 100 year. dull, how base, how poor and servile. but since they shake oft that dull and lazy humour, put themselves to pain and labour to endure all hardness and undergo any extremity, be they not become, for their valour, their government, their wealth, their power and their policy, even the wonder of nation. let some ascribe this to a fortunate constellation, other to other cause. but all wise man may easy perceive that this grow only from these two root of industry and unity. both of they be perfect, with a valour and resolution of heart to endure any thing so they may attain the honourable end they propose to. themselves which, whether they have not now attain, and that in so brave a fashion as be to the world admiration. i can say but little. but let wise man judge the premise. consider: be it not good for we, if our people be enure, a good thing in a state, for people to be enure to hardness, to more hardness, and bring up under obedience of sharp discipline and accustom to less daintiness and tenderness? then heretofore, and be not those to be commend which show by their resolute undertake of a action so honourable in the end of it, and yet accompany with so many difficulty that the ancient valour of english blood be not yet extinguish. and can not thou who, like a churl or a epicure, sit at home by the warm fire and say it be good, sleep in a whole skin and that, drink thy wine in bole and stretch thyself upon the bed of laziness and follow nothing but pleasure after pleasure, can not thou, i say, be content to see other take in hand noble enterprise? but thou must deprive they of their due praise and bring they under the compass of thy base censure. if the action be honourable and excellent, than either do thou attempt it not, withstand the difficulty, or if thou dare not, at least honour they that dare. this shall be my answer if the voyage be attend with as many difficulty and misery. as these man do or any can imagine. but now i answer more particular, that if our answ 3. the misery and want that have be sustain come accidental by the absence of our governor, man there have be at any exigent in this kind. it grow not from any necessity that must needs accompany that plantation or that country, but proceed plain from the want of government and absence of our governor, which be cause by the hand of god and force of tempest which neither human wit can foresee nor strength withstand, or suppose something be miscarry by negligence, haste or other human infirmity. shall one stain blemish the beauty of so fair a business? shall one particular miscarriage overturn the frame or condemn the substance. of the whole action. sure wisdom and good reason will not admit it. and to conclude, see it be know to all that know any thing in this matter that the principal, if not the only wound in this business have be the want of government. there be now care. take that by the blessing of god, there never shall be want of that again, which be once settle. we do very well know that there will nothing else be want in a short time after needful for the comfort of man life. in the mean time we care not. i speak in their name- who go in person, of who out of my own heart i can wish to be one myself. i say we care not. what we endure as long as we go forward in come near to those high and excellent end which in the beginning we propose to ourselves. the next discouragement be the uncertainty of profit and the long time that it must be. expect the six discouragement, uncertainty of profit and the long stay for it, it be certain. but i will not wrong you nor myself in seek to say much, to so base a objection, if there be any that come in only or principal for profit, or any that will so come in, i wish the latter may never be in and the former out again. if the plant of a english colony in a good and fruitful soil and of a english church in a heathen country, if the conversion of the heathen, if the propagate of the gospel and enlarge ans 1. profit be the least and last end aim at in this voyage of the kingdom of jesus christ, be not inducement strong enough to bring they into this business. it be pity they be in at all. i will discharge my conscience in this matter. if any that be go or purpose to go in person, do it only that they may live at ease and get wealth. if other that adventure their money have, respect the same end. i wish for my part, the one in england again and the other have his money in his purse. nay, it be better that every one give something to make up his adventure, then that such nabal shall thrust in their foul foot and trouble so worthy a business. and i can wish for my part that the proclamation which god enjoin to be make before the israelite go to battle be also make in this case, namely that whosoever be fainthearted let he return home again, lest his deut 20. 8. brother heart faint like he, for the coward not only betray himself but daunt and discourage other. private end have be the bane of many. excellent exploit and private plot for the gain of a few have give hindrance to many good and great matter. let we take heed of it in this present business and, all joint with one heart, aim at the general and public end, lest we find hereafter, to our shame and grief, that this one fly have prou corrupt the whole box of ointment, though never so precious. let we therefore cast aside all cogitation of profit. let we look at better thing. and then i dare say unto you, as christ have teach i, that if in this action we seek first the kingdom of god, all mat 6. 33. other thing shall be. add unto we that be, apply it to the case in hand. if we first and principal seek the propagation of the gospel and conversion of soul, god will undoubted make the voyage ans 2.. the voyage will be assure, profitable in short time, very profitable to all the adventurer and their posterity, even for matter of this life. for the soil be good, the commodity many and necessary for england, the distance not far off, the passage fair and easy, so that there want only god blessing to make it gainful. now, the high way to obtain that be to forget our own affection and to neglect our own private profit in respect of god glory and he that be zealous of god. glory, god will be mindful of his profit. and he that seek only or principal spiritual thing, god will reward, he both with those spiritual and temporal thing. and as though we may not do well to be well speak of, yet, if we do well, god will make we well think of and speak of of all good man. so, though we do not intend our profit in this action, yet, if we intend god honour and the conversion of soul, god will assure, send we great profit which we may take, lawful and thankful, as his blessing. but if it be urge further, why be there not? the cause why the profit can not be present expect be because that continual supply be still to be. send, then present profit, at least after so many voyage and supply send. i answer that profit be not the principal end of this action. if it be, what shall so many of the nobility of the gentry and especial of the clergy have their hand in it? it be not fit for they to be merchant, but the high and principal end be plantation of a english church and commonwealth and consequent the conversion of heathen. hence it be, therefore, that profit can be present. expect, because we be still to send more supply of man, munition, instrument and tool for all trade, but when there be send so many that they be able to defend themselves when they have empty a sufficient quantity of the land. from tree and make it fit for corn which be the only want in that place, and when they have build their church and town and have the government settle all which be at this day, bless be god, in a comfortable forwardness than it be time to expect, and then we be sure to receive such quantity of gain as will give full contentment to every man for his money adventure. and then, for a short time of disbursement, begin a long time of profit, even so long as for aught that man can foresee it will continue while there be man to go betwixt the two kingdom. the seven and last discouragement, be that we have many enemy and mighty and that therefore the seven discouragement. multitude and might of our enemy, it can proceed to any perfection. i answer: if it have not many enemy, it shall not have so many friend, and it be therefore better like of some because it be mislike of other, for there never be noble action that have not many enemy. but what enemy have we or be like to have? answ: 1. the spaniard be not our enemy, for he be in league with we. they answer: first the spaniard. i answer: deceive not yourselves, we. have he not our enemy, for first he be in league with we, and we doubt not. but either he hold we no heretic or if he do, yet he hate that piece of popish doctrine that covenant with heretic. be not to be keep. we hope they be too wise and worthy a nation to break their annal silesy curaeum, pag. 139.. and league and falsify the oath of god which they have make. they know the story that when the christian have take truce with the turk for a time and within that time spy a vantage contrary to their oath, fall upon they, god who name be dishonour, so dispose the matter that when in all human reason the turk will have be slay up like sheep and not a man, leave. contrariwise, they have such advantage. offer they by god own providence that they be the conqueror and give the christian one of the foul overthrow that be since the begin of their empire. and that cardinal that be the author, cardinali julianus, of this perjurious breach of league be miserable but just massacre in a ditch, and that noble king of hungary be of incredible valour and virtue. who give way to this wicked counsel of the cardinal, die there on the field in his young and flourish age. they write that amurathe the great turk be thus: provoke to battle and see the picture of christ on the cross in the christian banner, cast up his eye and hand to heaven and cry out as loud as he can: oh thou that die on the cross, if thou be a crucifix. crucifix, god, pour out thy wrath and show thy justice on this vile people that have so horrible dishonour. thou violate the oath they take in thy name, which i that swear by the name of mahomet, dare not do. if thus it fall out to they that break oath with the turk, we hope no christian prince will offer it to we. if they shall, we doubt not. but god himself will be our shield and buckler and make we strong enough against such enemy again. the title that spain may pretend must alexander the six to ferdinando, king of castille 1493.. either be possession or the pope gift. as for the pope, we know indeed that a spanish pope give america to a spanish king, but the question be what right he have to give it for. and they who remember that long ago he give away this bull of pope alexander the six be extant verbatim among the constitution of the pope let out by peter matthew at lion 1588.. and be to be find at page 150.. england also can but know how vain and idle his gift be. and yet if we examine the very word of his gift, they run thus that he give he all america, which be not actual possess before by any other christian prince, so that if the grant be good, yet it seem to follow that whosoever be possess afore he have right before he, but of this part call he never be. and we for many year have be possess, and whereas his grant be conditional that he shall send preacher of the christian faith into those part, if we do not so into we, let all nation rise against we and give it to they that better shall deserve it. the grant of america by alexander the 6. unto ferdinando be restrain by cardinal bellarm, lib 5. pont, cap 2. in fine cap, and by the jesuite valent, tom 3. disput 1., 9, 10. punct 7. where, although he be a spaniard, he doubt whether alexander the 6. err in this particular fact. upon these ground, we be persuade that they will never offer we that indignity and injustice. but if they shall, we hope then to give another. answer. what enemy then have we? the french? nay, they be rather incline to follow our example and to plant in another country not far from we, the same. also. may i speak of other christian nation, the savage? nay, they invite we and use we well, and if they be a small matter, as long as they be their own enemy. but when they be convert and love their own soul, than they will love we also and eternize their name. who bring the gospel to they? thus, no enemy be yet find, but i will save their labour. we confess this. this enterprise have only 3. enemy action have three great enemy, but who be they? even the devil, papist and player. but first let no. man think much that i join they together, for i will glad separate they. but they will not. for who? but the devil? and papist and player do mock at religion and abuse the holy scripture. that the devil do. who doubt that? the papist do their many book do witness, especial their damnable and hellish pruritanus that player do too many eye and ear can witness, some to their content and many to their heart grief. see then they will not be separate, let they go together. the rather see they be all enemy to this noble action. 1 the devil. and who can blame he for we? 1. the devil go to disherit he of his ancient freehold and to deliver from out of his bondage. the soul which he have keep so many year in thraldom. we therefore expect that he will move all the infernal power against we and that we shall want no hurt nor hindrance that he be able to effect. but let he and all his partaker know we have he on our side, who be promise in the beginning to be the breaker of his head and who, according genes: 3. trample he under his foot, triumph over he coloss. 2.. 15. on the cross and overcome he in the grave, his own den. we go to preach the faith against which all the gate of hell shall not prevail. and for matth, 16.. 18. his plead of possession, we care, not the possession be he, but the. right be christ and we be for he, and therefore doubt not, but to bring from heaven such a injunction out of the high court of equity as shall remove he out of possession maugre, his malice. we know his force, his fury, his malice, his wit and subtlety, and, as the apostle say, we be not ignorant of his practice. 2. cor, 2., 11.. but when we remember that he can enter into a hog but by god permission, when we remember matth 8., 31., 32. that the wind and sea be not he, nor do obey he, but he that we serve, when we remember mark 3., 41. how the apostle overthrow he, even by the preach of the gospel which we carry to these, and such like consideration make we that we fear not he and all his angel, so much as he fear the prayer of the poor christian in the world. and yet we will not countermine against he by charm and enchantment. we will not cast out devil by the prince of devil, matth 12. 24.. but we will only assault he with the sword of the spirit which be the word of god. for we know, ephes 6. 17. that when the apostle be to give he the great overthrow and his deadly wound by recover the whole world from heathenism to christ, this be that only weapon with which they. overcome he, and though we be not so skilful fencer nor can handle this weapon so well as they, yet we know it have not lose his force but be the sharp two edge sword in who hand soever it be, heb 4. 12. use, and as long as our end be to plant and preach the gospel, he may, for our sin and sinful carriage, hurt and hinder, but he can never overthrow the work, but contrariwise it shall be his overthrow and the ruin of his kingdom in that country. 2 for the papist. we know they approve nothing. 2. the papist, that protestant undertake, but we undertake not this to be approve by they. they will have all the glory to themselves of convert the. heathen. and if they do convert they. indeed, we will commend and imitate they. but let they not envy we for do that which they extol in themselves. if they seek the pope and their own glory, why shall not we seek god? if they seek god glory, we have cause to seek it more than they in such work as these. we will never break from they. we will never forsake they. we will join with they to convert the heathen. we will join with they to vanquish the turk. but their blind guide, the jesuit, tell they that we be curse and all that partake with we, and that they have better suffer heathen and turk than join with we and the evil and base report. that have be scatter of this enterprise come original from some papist. hence be it that they malign and deprave this voyage, and we be well assure that they have fill all corner of this kingdom with all base report and slander of this action that man wit can devise. but let they go on. we little regard it. the more they hate it, the more we love it. the more base they speak of it, the more honourable do we hold it. oh, but the pope will curse we. let he do so. when he will have god, the more to bless we. for what protestant or any other do he ever curse? but god bless they, the more the 10. curse luther and all man expect. when he shall have die, lutherus papa, some horrible death, but he live to die in his bed and prove the confounder of the pope in his life and death. paul the 3. curse, henry the 8., but after that he root the pope out of england. impious pius the 5. curse. noble elizabeth of england and all the poor papist of the world, look when some terrible confusion shall have fall on she and her kingdom, but she live to see the death of that pope and six or seven more and more than thirty year after, live in that glory as never queen on the earth, in more so as all age to come will speak of she and of her time and of the blessing. of this church and state receive by she sixtus the 5.. curse the french king that be, but his successor be fain to absolve, he on his own condition, pope paul that now be. curse the venetian, but be pope. have ever lose by their curse and excommunication. glad to receive they again on such term as his best friend wish. he have never begin it and confess he have lose more by it than ever he can gain. he and his predecessor in that chair of pestilence have curse all maker and merchant of allom that belong not to himself and all other that shall any way invade any of his revenue or patrimony- but we see they prosper better for it- and all prince and state. go forward as they can, each one to pluck away their feather from he with which that proud peacock of rome do adorn himself, and so the time will come short that the holy ghost foretell, namely that she shall be leave desolate and naked, and thus as all, apoc 17. 16. her curse, which she have cast out on they that shall impair or invade s peter patrimony, for so he call his own revenue, have not prevail, but that her glory and wealth be decay by many degree. so all his other causeless curse do now appear, even to many of his own, to be but flash and to be such thunderclap as terrify, but strike not and hurt no where, but where they be fear. let he then curse we when he will do we good, for we know his curse shall fall on his own head. and when he have curse we, the lord will bless we in more abundance. and to conclude, we know well that as soon as this intent and enterprise of our nation be know at rome forthwith, there will be a consistory call and consideration will be have, with wit and policy enough, what course may be take to cross we and overturn the business. but we be prepare for it and look for no less than all they can do. but if they have never a gamaliel leave to tell it, they let. i tell they that if this work be only of man, it will come to nought of itself without their help, but if it be of god, they can destroy it but shall be find even fighter against god. 3 as for player, pardon i right honourable and belove for wrong this place and your patience with so base a subject. they play with prince and potentate, magistrate and minister, nay, with god and religion and all holy thing. nothing that be good, excellent or holy can escape they. how then can this action but the 3. enemy, the player. this may suffice that they be player. they abuse, but they be but player. they. disgrace it true, but they be but player, and they have play with better thing and such as for which, if they speedy repent, not, i dare say, vengeance, wait for they, but let they play on. they make man laugh on earth, but he that sit in heaven laugh, they to scorn because, like the fly, they so long play with the candle till first it sing their wing and at last burn they altogether. but why be the player enemy to this plantation? and two cause why the player malign this action, do abuse it. i will tell you the cause. first, for that they be so multiply here that one can live by another, and they see that we send of all trade to. but will send no player, which, if we will do they that remain, will gain the more at home. second, as the devil hate we because we purpose not to suffer heathen and the pope, because we have vow to tolerate no papist, so do the player because we resolve to suffer no idle person, in which course, if it be take in england, they know they may turn to new occupation. thus the devil, papist and player, the enemy of this action, single they asunder or let they join their force. we care not for their malice, we seek not their favour, nay, we have, rather have they all three. against we, then with we, and against they all and all other that shall malign we whosoever. we say no more but this. he have set we on work that will maintain we, and for ourselves, no more but this. if god be on our rom 8. 31. side, who can be against we? and thus, with a indifferent, unpartial eye, we have observe and lay down all the discouragement that seem to be incident to this business and all which i ever hear, either friend to fear or enemy to object, and have answer they all out of the ground of truth. now let we according consider of the encouragement which god have give we to proceed in the prosecution of this enterprise. the first encouragement be the consideration of: 2. the encouragement in this business be three: the excellency of the action in itself. this excellency consist of these three: degree: it be a most lawful, a honourable and a holy action. 1 the lawfulness of this enterprise have be i: 1. encouragement, the excellency of the design in itself be: 1. a lawful action, hope sufficient, declare already and more may be say if any thing be further object against it. second, the honour of this action: be extraordinary. 2. a honourable action, both in regard of the end and undertaker. 1. in regard of the end: be of a more high and excellent nature. then be in other voyage which for the most part be profit and pleasure. 2. it be more honourable in regard of the undertaker. where be there ever voyage that have such a king and such a prince to be the patron and protector of it, the one to begin, the other to second it? what voyage ever be there which have so many honourable undertaker and of so many sort and calling, both of the clergy and laity, nobility, gentry and commonalty, city and country, merchant and tradesman, private person and corporation, as though every kind and call of man desire to have their hand in so happy a work all which consider give. i leave to affirm, with due respect to other and without disparagement to any, that of all voyage ever attempt in this nation, the virginian voyage be the. most honour able. three: this be also a holy action in regard of the end and purpose of it, for this action be not 3. a holy action only lawful, so that a man, in do it, may be, assure he sin not. but it be, moreover, a holy action, even such a one as in the performance whereof a man may be assure that he please god and shall have a bountiful reward from the mercy of god. and this be peculiar to this voyage above other. by other we may show ourselves good common-wealths-man by this good christian. by other we may enrich our purse, but by this our conscience. other may help we to live, the more wealthy, but only this can help we to die the more comfortable. other voyage may purchase we some praise before man, but none like this can procure we reward from god. for they that enter into voyage of certain profit for profit sake, these have their reward. but they that undertake a voyage of uncertain and future profit and certain and present difficulty, and not for profit but for the gospel sake, let they know that if he that give a cup of cold water in christ name and he that math 10., 42. give one penny to he who body want relief, can want his reward, then how liberal and bountiful shall he be. reward from the lord, his god, who disburse so great portion of his estate for the relief of distress and miserable soul and of all the voyage and action that man meddle with in this world. none can yield this satisfaction and comfort to the conscience that this can, so that this be a enterprise of that worth and excellency as no other, see it be not only lawful in itself and therefore acceptable to god, but honourable before man and comfortable to the conscience of the doer, and therefore every wise and moral man may be allure, especial, every christian man may be encourage to assist it. the second encouragement be the consideration 2. encouragement, the friend of this action, of the friend and assistant which this business have, which be such and so great, so many and so mighty that whosoever compare they with the enemy before speak of, will present, find cause to say with the prophet: there be more with we, then. 2. king 6. 16 against we, our principal friend and defender, be the lord 1 friend, god himself, our god, the god of heaven and earth, who, king doom, we go to enlarge and to accomplish the number of his elect. and christ jesus who banner, we go to display and to bear up his standard and erect his throne, even there where satan throne be, and the holy ghost for who we go to erect temple. that be to prepare the soul of man for he to dwell in. who have tell we that prou 8.. his delight be with the son of man, even this god bless for ever. who cause it be we go to maintain, who, therefore, we may hope to have on our side. nay, we know we have. he and he have vouchsafe testimony that god be our friend. we no small token and testimony thereof. 1 by incline the heart of our mighty king and noble prince to make themselves father and founder in our king and prince of this plantation and protector of this royal enterprise, thereby show themselves new constantine or charles the great. for by the attempt and achieve of this great work of the heathen conversion, let their highness be assure the age to come will style they by the glorious name of james the great and great henry, the one for set on foot, the other for second, and both for protect. so great, so gracious and so glorious a work. this be doubtless. in they the bless work of that mighty god, in in the undertaker who hand be the heart of king 2. incline the heart of so many person of honour and high place who can go in person not only to grace the action with their presence, countenance and commendation, but to part with so fair a portion of their estate unto it without any. assurance of present profit for the same. 3 persuade so many of our nation and many: 3.. in they that go in person of they of noble blood and honourable descent, to engage not only a great part of their estate but even their very life and person for the good of this business, though it be attend with never so many danger and difficulty, and though, in the vulgar conceit which common carry most man, so many corporal misery be threaten on they that be the first adventurer in this plantation. and this i say, be do by god persuasion. it be god that move man to go thither. she for what man can be persuade by a man to undertake a matter of such a nature. as this be nay, we dare say that all who be go thither, unless they be mislead by some sinister persuasion of their own apprehension, have go only upon the powerful persuasion of god spirit to their conscience. for who shall persuade hereunto, but either god or the devil, or man or a man own reason. but the devil we all know be against it. with might and main he seek to keep man from it by raise slander and put lie into the mouth of man to disgrace it. by these and such like mean he will dissuade all he can, but persuade none. again, we who be interest in the action have persuade none, have allure none, much less compel any, but of all that have voluntary offer themselves or be offer by their friend, have make choice of the best to our best skill. it remain then, that either they persuade themselves upon some carnal hope which we, in charity, will judge of none, or rather which we know of some and wish in all that god who persuade laphet to dwell in the tent of gene 9, 27.. shem have persuade the mind of many honourable and worthy gentleman to venture their life in the prosecution of this noble action. four by incline the heart of the savage. four in the savage who live in that country love to call and invite we and to use our man well when they themselves be well use and by this mean to make a way to their own conversion. five: stir up the mind of so many hundred of good protestant and professor of true five in the multitude of contributor religion, to assist it with large contribution. it be a work which can be effect without much money, as all discreet man do see and acknowledge, insomuch as when those worthy man and ever to be honour that be the first undertaker of it do even shrink to consider what mass of money it needs must cost, and yet know not how nor whence it will arise. the god of heaven, bid they rest content, go on with what they have in hand and leave that care to he who, according, have so wrought upon the heart of man that hitherto it have be both man and money, without all rate, tax or compel, but only and whole by voluntary contribution and continual supply. and though the work grow so great and glorious that it seem already too heavy for the shoulder of we that hitherto have bear it, yet it please god himself so to commend it to man heart that we see hope enough of sufficient supply from more person of honour and other man of all sort and degree. and sure we be unworthy of such a blessing if we do not. willing acknowledge it to be as it be even the lord do and very marvelous in our eye. six by excite so many thousand soul. six in move all good man to pray for it. who want of ability, keep they from assist it with money. to wish well unto this action, to commend it to god and with their continual and earnest prayer to give it all the furtherance they can. and sure, where i observe how many million of christian soul do pour out their earnest prayer to god daily for the conversion of those poor virginian. it make, i say of they, as holy old ambrose say of young angustine, for who august confess whilst he live in the error and vanity of his youth. his mother pour out continual prayer and tear. sure, say he, a soul that cost his mother so many prayer and so many tear can perish. so may we say, a people that have so many a good prayer possible can perish. and these six public evidence we have, which all the world may take notice of, that god be on our side and do favourable, accept the enterprise of we, of carry the gospel to this people. many more private favour and encouragement do this business and the undertaker of it daily receive from god, which be all so many testimony of his love. favour to we and this action, and thus we have not only cause to hope but do find and feel it in our experience that the god of heaven be a friend to this enterprise. our next friend and assistant be the glorious and innumerable multitude of the holy angel. second friend, god, angel. for if the angel rejoice when one soul be convert, which, because it may seem strange that so many great one shall joy in the salvation of one poor creature, therefore christ have affirm it with luk 15. 10. his own mouth then judge what joy be among that bless fellowship when this news come to heaven that england have enterprise the conversion of virginia, whereby so many thousand soul shall be bring to. heaven, oh happy man that shall help forward this work the very angel themselves will do. he honour and service again, if they be send out by god for the good of all the elect, and be command and be willing to heb i ult, psal 34.. 7. pitch their tent about every one that fear god, then how much more willing will they be to assist, defend, succour and protect we in this voyage who go about a work which please and delight they above any one thing in the world. for it be not say of any thing that man can do that it make the angel in heaven rejoice, but this only one: the conversion of soul. last, if it be true that they have charge over every child of god to keep he in all, psal 91. 11. his way, then let we be assure that this action be one of the worthy way that ever a christian nation walk in since the apostle time. we shall therefore be sure of the presence and protection of god, holy angel, to be with we and all our partaker, and namely with you, our right, honourable general, and all your company, to preserve you by land and sea, at home and abroad, from the devil and all other enemy. and though our sin or you may procure the contrary from god justice which his mercy avert, yet this i dare affirm as a undoubted truth: that it be the delight and joy of those glorious creature to do you service, for your service in this action, another and a comfortable friend which we three, friend the prayer of god, church, have be the prayer and hearty welwishing of all god child in the world, whereof as many as know it do, particular and all do, in general term and inclusive, commend we and it to the lord. a mighty comfort. be this to all you that go in person, if ever you shall be in want or misery, danger or any distress by sea or land, to remember that every day in the world there be a sacrifice offer to god and a strong cry send up to heaven from million of soul. for you, it be very memorable how, when our noble henry the five see the english chronicle in henry the five be to give the french battle at agincourt, where be scarce 10000 english man, weak and sickly, against 60000.. french, in which army be the principal chivalry of france, that valorous king rise up from his private prayer and have purposely put off the battle till nine of the clock at. that hour he go in person about all the host and cheer up his people with princely word. he bid they stand to he and fight. valiant and fear not, say he, but be valiant and assure of the victory, for at this hour they be. pray for we at every church in england, semblable. may you right, honourable and belove brother, cheer up your spirit against all doubt and danger whatsoever. see, you may assure yourselves, there be scarce a hour can pass wherein you have not the prayer of many in england for you. thus you see our enemy, the devil papist and player, and you see our friend, god, good angel. a comparison of the friend and enemy of this enterprise and holy prayer against. the devil. we have: god against the wicked papist, holy angel against player prayer. now, if the power of the whole army of angel be unto god, but as a drop of water to the sea, and the might of all man be inferior to the power of one angel, and yet the prayer of one good man be able to shake hell and make the devil tremble, which be the ringleader and chief of all our enemy, than it be apparent enough that our enemy be less than nothing to the friend that this action have the three encouragement to this business: 3. encouragement: the end of this action be the due consideration of the true end of this action, for the end of any attempt though. it be the last in execution, yet be it the first in intention, and it be the end that crown the work. and if the end and final purpose of any action be evil, that action can be good and according. in all lawful action, the more excellent the end, the more excellent be the work. let we therefore consider: 1. accidental end. the true end of this business, and herein i will deal true and sincere, we will not deny, but as we be man, we may be induce in the begin, with hope of great profit, of win a goodly country for english man to live, in, which now by multitude be thrust out at home, and of live a more free and pleasant and content. life and some that go in person, as they be corrupt man may dream of great ease and licentiousness and therefore put themselves into the business, but as we be christian man, as we be sanctify man, the principal and predominant end be of a far more high and excellent nature, and they be of two sort: first, respect the savage of that country, that be the conversion of their soul after they 2. true end, principal in regard of the savage, their conversion first be make civil man a work so excellent as he that do it, but to one soul have. do that which shall yield he more comfort in this life and gain he more glory in heaven than any one work in the world. beside. and more than that, the poor soul, when they be make happy by their conversion, will sing for ever of they that do it. oh, how beautiful be the foot of they that. isaiah 52. 7. bring we these glad tiding. second, respect our god, ourselves and our religion, in which respect our end be in this business to appease and pacify the wrath of our. 2. in regard of god, offend father for sacrifice, be offer to appease. 1. to appease he, because just offend rom. 15. 16. and propitiate now of all the sacrifice of the new testament, this be not the least to offer up a sacrifice of convert gentile to the lord. to i say, paul, be this grace give of god that i shall be the minister of jesus christ to the gentile, that the offer up of the gentile may be acceptable, be sanctify by the holy ghost. now, the sin of this our nation have be horrible. our unthankfulness for the blessing of this last age have be intolerable. what can we offer to the lord better, though not for satisfaction, yet for gratification? then? to offer up a sacrifice of convert gentile. second, to honour the name of our god. 2. to honour he be by we dishonour which? by our sin have be horrible, profane and to advance his kingdom, which by we and our sin have be too much hinder. three: to honour our religion, which by the politic. 3. in regard of our religion, papist have be, in this respect, disgrace, for we must confess that they, in these last c year, such be their government and such their obedience to their superior, wherein we may worthy learn of they, have send many man into the west and east indies to preach christ which, if they have do without other abominable idolatry and superstition, their fact have be most honourable. but howsoever it be to be grant that it be hold of many no small stain to our religion that we have send none. into heathen country to convert. the savage which accusation. how true and just it be, as i will not now dispute so this confident i dare avow that this enterprise take effect will discharge we and our religion for ever of that imputation. in which respect, if there be no other in the world, it be worthy to have the prayer and the purse yea, the person and life of the best of we, all four, to give testimony to the world that some spark of that spirit which be so plentiful. 4. in regard of ourselves, in the apostle, do yet remain in we which, as it make they most willing to convert the heathen world, though it cost they their life. so the same spirit of god provoke we to help forward the conversion of that remainder of the heathen which by they can not be finish. these be the high and sovereign end of this action. now, these be first lay there. follow other end, subordinate not to be neglect, nay, the least whereof be worthy to make we willing undertaker of this business, for hereby we shall honour ourselves and strengthen ourselves by propagate our own religion. hereby we shall mighty advance thehonorable name of the english nation, the honour whereof we ought every one to seek. hereby we shall mighty enrich our nation, strengthen our navy, fortify our kingdom and be less behold to other nation for their commodity. and to conclude, hereby we shall rectify. and reform many disorder which in this mighty and populous state be scarce, possible to be, reform without evacuation, and consequent. when we have achieve all these end, we shall eternize our own name to all ensue posterity as be the first beginner of one of the brave and most excellent exploit that be attempt since the primitive time of the church. and to add one word more, but it be of much moment. we shall hereby wipe off the stain that stick upon our nation, since, either for idleness or some other base fear or foolish conceit, we refuse the offer of the west indies make unto we by that famous christopher columbus who, upon england refusal, tender it to the prince, that in the time of henry the seven now enjoy they. and thus i have give you a taste of the royal encouragement which, natural and infallible, do attend this bless business. you see, the discouragement, how base and idle and imaginary they be. contrariwise, the encouragement, how real, solid and substantial. now the conclusion, therefore: let we all be exhort and encourage to the effectual prosecution. of this enterprise unto the end. and you, first of all, right, honourable and worshipful of the counsel and the rest of the undertaker, 1. to the honorabl counsel and undertaker that live here, by who wisdom the action be to be direct and by who purse maintain, consider what you have enter into, even upon a action of that nature and consequence, as not only all nation stand gaze at, but even heaven and hell have take notice of it, the holy angel hope and the devil fear. what will be the issue? therefore, let all nation see to their amazement, the devil to their terror, the angel to their joy, and especial our god, to his glory and the honour of his truth, that the english christian will not undertake a public action which they will not prosecute to perfection. let we then believe no tale, regard no slander raise or spread by papist or epicure, fear no shadow, care for no opposition, respect no loss that may befall, nor be daunt with any discouragement whatsoever, but go forward to assist this noble action with countenance and counsel, with man and money and with continual supply, till we have make our plantation and colony able to subsist of itself and till there be a church of god, establish in even. there where satan throne be. thus shall we honour our god, our religion, our nation, and leave that honour on our name, which shall make they flourish till the world end and which be, all in all, lay up that comfort to our soul which shall stand by we at our death and speak for we to the great judge at the last and great day, and to you, right, honourable and belove. 2. to they that go in person, who engage your life and therefore be deep interest in this business, who make the great venture and bear the great burden, who leave your ease and pleasure at home and commit yourselves to the sea and wind for the good of this enterprise. you that desire to advance the gospel of jesus christ, though it be with the hazard of your life, go forward in the name of the god of heaven and earth, the god that keep cavenant and mercy for thousand, go on with the blessing, exod 34.. 7. of god, god angel and god church. cast away fear and let nothing daunt your spirit. remember who you go unto, even to english man, your brother, who have break. the ice before you and suffer that which, with god blessing, you never shall remember. what you go to do, even to display the banner of christ jesus, to fight with the devil and the old dragon, have michael and his angel on your side, to eternize your own name, both here at home and among the virginean, who apostle you be, and to make yourselves most happy man, whether you live or die. if you live by effect, so glorious a work. if you die by die as martyr or confessor of god religion, and remember last who you leave behind you, even we, your brother, of who many will go with you that yet may not many will follow you in convenient time and who will now go with you in our heart and prayer and who will second you with new and fresh supply and who be resolve by the grace of that god in who name they have undertake it never to relinquish this action, but, though all the wealth already put in be lose, will again and again renew and continue their supply until the lord give the hope harvest of our endeavour. and thou, most noble lord, who god have particular to the honourable general. stir up to neglect the pleasure of england and, with abraham, to go from thy country and, for sake thy kindred and thy father house, to go to a land which god will show thou give. i leave to speak the truth. genes 12.. 1. thy ancestor, many hundred year ago, gain at the battle with the black prince. great honour to thy house. but by this action thou augment it. he take a king prisoner in the field, in his own land. but by the godly manage of this business thou shall take the devil prisoner in open field and in his own kingdom. nay, the gospel which thou carry with thou shall bind he in chain and his angel in strong fetter than psal 149. 8.. 9, iron and execute upon they the judgement that be write: yea, it shall lead captivity. captive and redeem the soul of man from bondage. and thus, thy glory and honour of thy house, be more at the last, then at the first. go on, therefore, and prosper. with this, thy honour, admonitition and advice to our general and his company, which indeed be great than every eye discern, even such as the present age short, will enjoy and the future admire. go forward in the strength of the lord, thy god, and make mention of his righteousness. only. look not at the gain, the wealth, the honour, the advancement of thy house that may follow and fall upon thou, but look at those high and better end. that concern the kingdom of god. remember thou be a general of english man, nay, a general of christian man. therefore, principal, look to religion. you go to commend it to the heathen. then practise it your self. make the name of christ honourable, not hateful unto they. suffer no papist. let they not nestle there. nay, let the name of the pope, for popery be never hear of in. take heed of atheist, the devil champion, and if thou discover any, make they exemplary. and if i may be so bold as to advise, make atheism and other blasphemy capital, and let that be the first law. make in suffer no brownist, nor factious separatist. let they keep their conventicle elsewhere. let they go and convert some. other heathen, and let we see if they can constitute such church real, the idaea whereof they have fancy in their brain. and when they have, give we any such example. we may then have some cause to follow they till than we will take our pattern from their better especial suffer no sinful, no lewd, no licentious man, none that live not under the obedience of good law. and let your law be strict, especial against swear and other profaneness. and though vain swear, by god name be the common and cry sin of england and no mortal but a venial sin. in popish doctrine a a molanus comp pract tract 2. cap 7. concl 2. nic a grana and confess quaest 40. yet know that it. be a sin under which the earth mourn. b b, icr 23., 10. and your land will flourish if this jac de graff aur to 1. lib 2. cap 14. art 9 and almost all their casuist do teach this doctrine: be repress. let the sabbath be whole and holy. observe public prayer daily, frequent idleness, eschew and mutiny. careful, prevent. be well advise in. make law, but be make let they be obey and let none stand for scarecrow. for that be the way to make all at last to be contemn. this course take, and you shall see those who be to blame at home will prove praiseworthy in, and you will teach we in england to know who almost have forget it. what a excellent. thing, execution of law, be in a commonwealth. but if you shall aim at nothing but your private end and neglect religion and god service, look for no blessing, nay, look for a curse, though not on the whole action, yet on our attempt, and never think that we shall have the honour to effect it. yet think not that our sin shall hinder the purpose of god, for when this sinful generation be consume, god will stir up our child after we, who will learn by our example to follow it in more holy manner and so bring it to that perfection which we, for our sin and profaneness, can not do. but you, right honourable, have otherwise learned christ and we hope will otherwise practice he. and will declare, by your manage of this action, the power of that true religion you have learn in england. thus shall heaven and earth bless you, and for this heroical adventure of thy person and state in such a godly cause, the god of heaven will make thy name to be remember throughout all generation, and thousand of people shall honour thy memory and give thanks to god for thou, while the world endure and thou, who, though my eye, see a salutation of not my heart, shall love, how have god honour thou? thou have thy name from the worthy queen that ever the world have. thou have thy matter from the great king on earth, and thou shall now have thy form from one of the most glorious nation under the sun and under the conduct of a general of as great and ancient nobility as ever. be engage in action of this nature, but this be but a little portion of thy honour for thy god be come towards thou and in the mean time, send to thou and salute thou with the best blessing. heaven have his blessed gospel. look up, therefore, and lift up thy head for thy redemption draw nigh, and he that be the god of israel and be still the god of england, will, short i doubt, not bring it to pass that man shall say: bless. be the lord god of, and let all christian people say amen. and this salutation do my soul. send thou, o even this poor newyear gift who, though i be not worthy to be thy apostle yet do vow and devote myself to be in england thy faithful factor and solicitor, and most desirous to do thou any service in the lord jesus christ, our saviour and thou, who we beseech for his precious bloodshedding to advance his standard among you, and that you may once cry for yourselves as we do now for you. even so, come, lord jesus.