consideration touch the new contract for tobacco as the same have be propound by master ditchfield and other undertaker. in all contract, especial of so public nature, there be two principal quality: think most considerable justice and profit for action, unjust want. the blessing of god and unconcionable damage draw on the complaint and murmur of man. the former contract for tobacco have be dissolve by the lord as not be beneficial to the plantation. it be hope and expect that a new contract to succeed in plant thereof shall have reject the former error and be whole bend to the comfort of the now languish colony. but the same have be take into the careful consideration of sundry person well willer to the plantation and many faction. be whole bend to the comfort of the now languish colony, but the same have be take into the careful consideration of sundry person well willer to the plantation and many faction now partial affect, who neither have any hand as further the former contract nor come with any prejudice against this latter when it be first broach it have appear unto they so full of all kind of unjustice, both to the adventurer and planter, and so bend to the certain and sudden ruin of the plantation that they have think themselves bind both in duty and conscience to deliver. these reason ensue against it. the new contract, therefore, as it have be deliver by part in the meeting we conceive to be these: 1 that the duty and conscience to deliver. these reason ensue against it. the new contract, therefore, as it have be deliver by part in the meeting we conceive to be these: 1- that the tobacco be henceforth to be make all in roll. two hundred thousand weight thereof shall be take off by the contractor, and no more, at two shilling, four penny, the best sort, and 16. penny the other, and one three to be pay for it in hand, the other two, three at 6 and 6 month. 2- that the king shall have yearly 10000 pound certain rent and that 5000 pound more shall be bestow upon the plantation. 3. that for the three year the planter shall have two shilling, 4 penny and three shilling if. pound certain rent and that 5000 pound more shall be bestow upon the plantation. 3. that for the three year the planter shall have two shilling, 4 penny and three shilling if their be profit and 250000. weight take off and the king shall have 15000. pound and 5000. to the plantation. 4. that all the tobacco of the plantation shall be bring to the port of london and if more do come, then 200000. the contracter to take out of the whole what they will and then to ship out the rest into turkey, and he bind not to bring it in again nor to sell it to any that be like to do so. reason against this contract, the whole, what they will, and then we. he bind not to bring it in again nor to sell it to any that be like to do so. reason against this contract, the whole what they will, and then we shall shift out the rest into turkey and be bind not to bring it in again nor to sell it to any that be like to do so. it seem very hard that these colony, in this their infancy, shall have worse condition impose upon they for their merchandise than any other to our knowledge in the world. for their good be their own, and they bear for subject. they shall be command to bring all into this port of london and yet not certain to vent the one moyitie of their merchandise for the colony. and they bear for subject. they shall be command to bring all into this port of london and yet not certain to vent the one moyitie of their merchandise for the colony, if they stand and prosper, can make so little as 400000. weight a year and these contractor will take off only 200000. again, for the particular adventurer and planter, there shall no man be certain to have any take off, some only the contractor, particular friend, which the contractor have liberty to choose and refuse what they list. there be a open gate for all part of partiality. in that kind the contractor and their friend make great quantity. then for those great quantity of tobacco which shall be refuse, what shall become of they? they all part of partiality. in that kind the contractor and their friend make great quantity. then for those great quantity of tobacco which shall be refuse, what shall become of they? they must be send into turkey. new merchant must be seek, disgrace be offer. they loss by long keep and shrink. double charge by new fraught that the poor planter, an adventurer, be much better to give it away in the plantatioe, then here, after so great charge, to sell it for a little or nothing. 2 touch the price of two shilling, 4 penny for the best sort and 16. penny for the rest. it be to be know and consider that of long time, by agreement between the company and colony, the tobacco in virginia. for the best sort and 16. penny for the rest. it be to be know and consider that of long time, by agreement between the company and colony, the tobacco in virginia itself be value at 3 shilling the pound and in summer land at 2 shilling six penny, which price they planter there refuse to abate, and the adventurer and merchant here, not able to give, have occasion the sell of ware unto they at double and treeble their value. they have their, no money but pay for all in tobacco. see then in what state this contract do place they their tobacco must now be all make into roll to the great waist of the commodity and great charge and labour of the planter and maker. state this contract do place. they, their tobacco must now be all make into roll to the great waist of the commodity and great charge and labour of the planter and maker, whereas leaf tobacco in foreign part do sell much better be make, thus it be all to be bring to the port of london and so into the custom house where it must abide the contracter pleasure and leisure, what and who they will take and what and who they will leave. the charge of fraught and shrink can be value at less than 4 penny the pound. so the clear price come of the best to 2 shilling and 12. penny the rest. now, experience have show that in every year return of tobacco there 4 penny the pound. so the clear price come of the best to 2 shilling and 12. penny the rest. now, experience have show that in every year return of tobacco there have be some few country that have far exceed the rest. in goodness, these than must be, take for tobacco of the best sort and pay for at the best price, and all the rest be above 20.. time as much in quantity and not attain to the goodness of the former, must necessary in right and truth be, make tobacco of the other sort and consequent rate at the low price. the contract stiftnes refuse to have more than two sort. in conclusion, the adventurer and planter can, by this contract, expect little more than. sort and consequent rate at the low price. the contract stiftnes refuse to have more than two sort. in conclusion, the adventurer and planter can, by this contract, expect little more than 12. penny the pound for his tobacco, and this at the best hand, for so much as the contracter shall be please to take off for. as for the remain refuse, which must go into turkey, if he get 4. the pound, he may think himself well deal with by those that need to give no manner. then the list, and for this 12. penny, it shall be pay one three part in hand and the other two three at 6 and 6 month, and this be the main substance of this contract. it can but penny. it shall be pay one three part in hand and the other two three at 6 and 6 month, and this be the main substance of this contract. it can but be apparent unto all man of experience in the affair of the plantation that the adventurer and planter shall not sell their tobacco for one half of that which it stand they in for. as for trust to the hope of that clause in the contract, that after two year, if their be profit, the price shall be raise to 2. shilling and 3. shilling, that comfort be small, the time be long, the hope uncertain, and even that price be too little to make, they saviour and thus much touch the particular estate of the shilling, that comfort be small, the time be long, the hope uncertain, and even that price be too little to make they saviour and thus much touch the particular estate of the adventurer and planter, wherein they be to be place by this new contract. 3.. but now three to come to the general plantation themselves and to enter into consideration whether, by virtue of this contract, they be likely to subsist and prosper. it be here first to be consider that the plantation have be found under his majesty, gracious amity, at the excessive great charge of the adventurer and planter, and so continue for many year, with small or no retribution, except to some few person and the attempt of set up staple commodity as iron. charge of the adventurer and planter and so continue for many year with small or no retribution except to some few person and the attempt of set up staple commodity as iron, silk, wine etc. though pursue with great constancy, care and charge, have hitherto fail, by sundry misaccident, to think the bestow now of 5000. pound a year upon the plantation, and that draw from the labour and, as it be, from the blood of the planter will raise they up from that great decay into which, during the space of those latter two year, they have apparent fall, be like to prove a great and dangerous error, whereas the only mean remain to advance the plantation be the encouragement of the adventurer, thither especial, in person. they have apparent fall be like to prove a great and dangerous error, whereas the only mean remain to advance the plantation be the encouragement of the adventurer thither, especial in person, with hope of wealth. good government and iustice experience have show that after the public stock be utter exhaust and the lottery end, yet the plantation in virginia do exceed increase by the multitude of family and other particular person transport thither at their own charge, upon the a foresay hope and encouragement, till the fatal blow of the massacre give those a broad, and the great molestation and dishearten of the company and adventurer here at home cast the colony into that consideration in which now it languish. but whensoever it shall please his gracious. and the great molestation and dishearten of the company and adventurer here at home cast the colony into that consideration in which now it languish. but whensoever it shall please his gracious majesty to revive and renew the former hope and encouragement, it will no doubt restore the former life to the plantation, the remain whereof this contract must needs extinguish, which be thus to be demonstrate, the only commodity for merchant in both the plantation be at this day no other than tobacco, whereby their apparel, tool, implement and all other necessary except victual be procure. there be at this day, in both the colony, at the least 3000. person. this allowance of 200000. weight to both the plantation come but to 65. pound weight of tobacco. procure there be at this day in both the colony at the least 3000.. person, this allowance of 200000. weight to both the plantation come but to 65. pound weight of tobacco the person which, at 12. the pound weight come to 3. pound, 5. shilling, out of which all the planter in the summer land and such as be tenant or servant in virginia pay half to their owner, whether landlord or master, so that to themselves their remain, for their maintenance, only 32 shilling, 6 penny the piece. the charge of transport a person to virginia can be less at this day than 20 pound, which be a thing so general know must needs dishearten all future planter from go and force the present adventurer rather. to virginia can be less at this day than 20 pound, which be a thing so general know must needs, dishearten all future planter from go and force the present adventurer rather to send for their servant home, then to maintain they at a perpetual charge without hope of profit. and this have diverse of they already open declare. we conclude, therefore, that to imagine that the bestow of 5000. pound a year upon the colony, and that draw from the hard labour of the poor planter themselves, will uphold the plantation when they shall find that they can be no long master of their own good but must be force to transport they when they can vent they to put they into their hand, who shall take? that they can be no long master of their own good but must be force to transport they when they can vent they to put they into their hand. who shall take and refuse what themselves please and sell they before their face, perhaps at a noble a pound, and give they but 6 penny after a year attendance for their good, with the fraught and all other charge and loss? and this example also in tobacco, engender a fear of the like measure in all other commodity, whensoever they shall be. raise that we say, as before in our understanding, to be a very great error and of pernicious consequence to both the plantation no less, then, to draw 40 ounce of blood from a tender weak. as before, in our understanding, to be a very great error and of pernicious consequence to both the plantation no less, then, to draw 40 ounce of blood from a tender, weak infant and then to make he a restorative out of five ounce of the same blood. 4. now, in the last place, see this contract be so much magnify as tend to the great and certain good of the plantation. we will take a little pain to make inquiry by way of reason, for who benefit? in truth, it have be set on foot by force of this contract and, by virtue of his majesty proclamation, get into their hand the sole sale of all tobacco to be expend either in this virtue or the kingdom. by force of this contract and by virtue of his majesty proclamation, get into their hand the sole sale of all tobacco to be expend either in this virtue or the kingdom of irelad, it be not to be think, but they will advance the price, after the nature of all monopoly, at least to as high a rate as it have bear in former time, that be to 8 or 9 shilling the pound. but admit, they will begin first with a noble, a pound. two hundred thousand noble come unto sixty six thousand six hundred sixty six pound, 13 shilling, 4. penny, his majesty, rent out of the plantation come unto 15. thousand pound, the planter and the adventurer part after the rate of 18. penny. hundred sixty six pound 13 shilling 4.. penny, his majesty, rent out of the plantation come unto 15.. thousand pound the planter and the adventurer part after the rate of 18.. penny, the pound, which in probability be like to be the high medium, come unto 15000. pound, so the charge in the whole come unto 30000 pound. thereis 36000 pound and one thousand mark remain to themselves in way of retribution for their pain and adventure and, as themselves say, to appease all such storm as may arise, to great a proportion to be draw from the plantation to allow they scarce a six part of their own and to bestow almost four six part upon man. no better deserve in the former contract what clamour and from the plantation to allow they scarce a six part of their own and to bestow almost four six part upon man no better deserve in the former contract what clamour and complaint against 25000. pound to have be raise for salery and all other charge which come to little more than a penny upon the pound, whereas these man profess that under 12 penny a pound get at least they will not meddle with it and they hope for far more. by computation of the former contract, there be to come 60000 pound at least to the benefit of the plantation, whereof the 4 part be now be think a sufficient portion, and yet that contract be say to be pernicious to the colony and this beneficial. to the benefit of the plantation, whereof the 4 part be now be think, a sufficient portion. and yet that contract be say to be pernicious to the colony, and this beneficial indeed, to do equal right unto both. the contract be better than the former in that it exclude all foreign tobacco which with great violence be press upon the former for the first two year. but this be to be attribue to his majesty great grace. give a favourable ear to the suit of the commons in parliament, as appear in his majesty late proclamation in the debate of the former contract. it be allege against it by such as be now great. furtherer of this, that though the planters tobacco be sell at 5 shilling. proclamation in the debate of the former contract, it be allege against it by such as be now great furtherer of this, that though the planters tobacco be sell at 5 shilling the pound, yet by reason of his majesty three, they shall be loser. and now 16 penny a pound be think price sufficient. this excessive gain of the contracter and undertaker we conceive undoubted to be a thing unjust and tend to the immediate destruction of the plantation, for whatsoever they get the planter lose, and where the planter lose, the colony be so much impoverish. for whatsoever the planter make, that go all back to the plantation again, and what the contracter get, it remain with he to his own enrich. for as for the much impoverish for whatsoever. the planter make that go all back to the plantation again, and what the contracter get, it remain with he to his own enrich for. as for the return of 5000. pound to the plantation which this heavy contract adnex, it be in truth to send one hundred man thither and to stay thousand from thence. the strength and prosperity of the colony consist in multitude of people. 5. some thing we be force to add touch the proceed of this contract. 1 first. whereas the adventurer of the summer land remain still a company and be restrain by their letter patent from order of matter of trade, but in a quarter court, this contract have be seek to have be conclude in a still a company and be restrain by their letter patent from order of matter of trade. but in a quarter court. this contract have be seek to have be conclude in a mean and extraordinary meeting and no court at all, when few be present. and those few, man silence also enter as a consent, not many of they understanding it. and those that understand it be amaze at so great injustice. 2: second, the virginia company be now discharge. it have be fit the colony have be consult about it and not to dispose of other man state and good without their consent and knowledge. 3. three: the very manner of treat of this contract have breed a suspicion of very indirect proceed. for first, it have other man state and good, without their consent and knowledge. 3, three, the very manner of treat of this contract have breed a suspicion of very indirect proceed, for first it have be frame, secret and in the dark it have be publish, but by fragment and some principal part, conceal. some of the commissioner appear to be the chief and principal contracter, other some, though they do not appear yet they be partner with they in their trade, be contracter which plain show that they have a interest in it, and so the same man be the contriver and maker of the bargain for themselves and buyer and seller of one and the same ware and take away and set the prize of other man good for. be the contriver and maker of the bargain for themselves and buyer and seller of one and the same ware and take away and set the prize of other man good for their own inordinate lucre. 4. last, under pretence of do allthing orderly, they have make a comity of themselves, as in the behalf of the colony and planter, to treat with their fellow commissioner, the conracter for speedy payment- and most of these man have they choose to be committee- who the adventurer and planter have a long time complain off for their exorbitant wrong to one or both the plantation. many other exception may be take, but these shall suffice at this present. wrong to one or both the plantation. many other exception may be take, but these shall suffice at this present.