judge 5.20. they fight from heaven the star in their course, fight against sisera. all the word of god be always sweet in themselves, say david, but sweet in the mouth and in the pen of some of the prophet and some of the apostle, then of other as they differ in their natural gift or in their education, but sweet of all where the holy ghost have. be please to set the word of god to music and to convey it into a song. and this text be of that kind, part of the song which deborah and barak sing after their great victory upon sisera. sisera who be jabin, the king of canaan general against israel, god himself. make moses a song, deut 31. 31.19 and express his reason why the child of israel say: god will forget my law, but this song they will not forget. and whensoever they sing this song, this song shall testify against they what i have do for they, how they have forsake i. and to such a purpose have god leave this song of deborah and barak in the scripture, that all murmurer and all that stray into a diffidence of god power or of his purpose to sustain his own cause and destroy his own enemy, may run and read. may read and sing the wonderful deliverance that god have give to his people by weak and unexpected mean. this world begin with a song if the chalde paraphrast upon salomon, song of song. have, take a true tradition that assoon as adam sin be forgive he. he express, as he call it in that song, his sabbath, his peace of conscience, in a song of which we have the entrance in that paraphrase: this world begin so, and so do the next world too, if we count the beginning of that as it be a good computation to do so, from the come of christ jesus for that be express on earth in diverse song. in the bless virgin, my soul do magnify the lord. in zacharies, benedictus, blessed be the lord, god of israel. and in simeon, lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. this world begin so, and the other and when. both shall join and make up one world without end. it shall continue so in heaven, in that song of the lamb. great and marvelous be thy work, lord, god almighty. apoc 3. just and true be thy way, thou king of saint. and to tune we, to compose and give we a harmony and concord of affection in all perturbation and passion and discord in the passage of this life. if we have no more of the same music in the scripture as we have the song of moses at the red sea and many psalm of david to the same purpose, this song of deborah be enough, abundant enough to slumber any storm, to becalm any tempest, to rectify any scruple of god slackness in the. defence of his cause. when, in the history and occasion of this song, express in the chapter before this, we see that israel have do evil in the sight of the lord again and yet again, god come to they that god himself have sell israel into the hand of jabin, king of canaan, and yet he repent the bargain. and come to they that in twenty year oppression he come not, and yet he come. that when sisera come against they with nine hundred chariot of iron and all preparation proportionable to that, and god call up a woman, a prophetess, a deborah against he, because deborah have a zeal to the cause and consequent a enmity to the enemy, god will effect his purpose by so. weak a instrument by a woman, but by a woman which have no such interest nor zeal to the cause by jael, and in jaels hand, by such a instrument as with that scarce, any man can do it. if it be to be do again with a hammer, she drive a nail through his temple and nail he to the ground. as he lie, sleep in her tent, and then the end of all. be the end of all. not one man of his army leave alive o my soul. why be thou so sad, why be thou so disquiet within? i sing unto the lord a old song, the song of deborah and barak. that god, by weak mean do mighty work. that all god creature. fight in his behalf. they fight from heaven, the star in their order. fight against sisera. you shall have but two part out of these word, and to make these two part division, i consider the text as the two hemisphere of the world lay open in a flat, in a plain map. all those part of the world which the ancient have use to consider be in one of those hemisphere, all europe be in that and in that be all asia and africa too, so that when we have see that hemisphere do with that, we may seem to have see all do with all the world. but yet the other hemisphere, that of america, be as big as it though, but by occasion of new and late discovery, we have have nothing to say of america. so the first part of our text will be as that first hemisphere. all which the ancient expositor find occasion to note out of these word will be in that. but by the new discovery of some humour of man and rumour of man, we shall have occasion to say somewhat of a second part to the part be first the literal, the historical sense of the word, and then a emergent, a collateral, a occasional sense of they, the explication of the word and the application, how the word be speak, then how they may be apply. now will be our two part and in pass through our first. we shall make these step. first, god can, and sometime do, effect his purpose by himself, entire, immediate, extraordinary, miraculous by himself. but yet in a second place, we shall see by this story that he look for assistance, for concurrence of second cause and subordinate mean, and that therefore god, in this song of deborah, have provide a honourable commemoration of they who do assist his cause. for the prince have their place. verse 15: the prince of issachar be with she, and then the governor, the great person, the great officer of the state, have their place in this honour that they offer themselves, willing to that service, and after they the merchant. verse. 9 for those who be say there. verse 10, to ride upon white ass, to be well mount according to the manner of those nation be by peter, martyr, among our expositor, and by serarius the jesuite, among the other, fit understand to be intend of merchant. and in the same verse, the judge be honourable. remember those that sit in judgement, and a far unlikely sort of people than any of these. in the same verse too, those that walk by the way, idle and discourse man that be not much affect how business go, so they may talk of they and last, the whole people in general. verse 2.. how poor soever, they have evidence from this record that they offer themselves. and what will they? deny that, offer themselves and willing to this employment. and then god have here afford this honourable mention of they who do assist he. he lay also a heavy note upon such who, for collateral respect, prevaricate or withdraw themselves from his service: verse 16.. particular upon reuben, who be divide by greatness of heart, and upon dan, verse 17.. who remain in his ship. and therefore, to the encouragement of those who do assist he in any proportion, though their assistance be no way competent against so potent a enemy, god fight for himself too. they fight from heaven, the star in their order, fight against sisera. and these will be the branch or circumstance of our first part. for the particular of the second, we shall open they, more commodious for your memory and use then, when we come to handle they, than now. now we proceed to those of the first part, part 1, and into those i pass with this protestation that in all which i shall say this day be to speak often of god in that notion as he be lord of host and fight his own battle. i be far from give fire to they that desire war. peace in this world be a precious, earnest and a fair and lovely type of the everlasting peace of the world to come, and war in this world be a shrewd. and fearful emblem of the everlasting discord and tumult and torment of the world to come and therefore our bless, god bless we with this external and this internal, and make that lead we to a eternal peace. but i speak of this subject especial to establish and settle they that suspect god power or god purpose, to succour those who, in foreign part, groan under heavy pressure in matter of religion or to restore those who, in foreign part, be devest of their lawful possession and inheritance and because god have not do these great work yet, nor yet raise up mean in appearance and in their apprehension likely to effect it, that therefore god like not the cause and therefore they begin to be shake in. their own religion at home, since they think that god neglect it abroad. but belove, since god make all this world of nothing, can he recover any one piece thereof or restore any one piece? with a little in the creation, his production of specifique form and several creature in the several day be much, very much, but not very much compare with that which he have do immediate before, when he make heaven and earth of nothing. for for the particular creature god have, then he have stuff before he enough to cut out creature of the large size, his elephant of the earth, his whale and leviathan in the sea. in that matter there be semen, the seed of all creature in that stuff. but for the stuff itself, the heaven and earth. god have not semen, any such seed of heaven as that. he can say to it: do thou hatch a heaven. he have not any such semen as that. he can bid that grow up into a earth. there be nothing at all and all that be be produce from that. and than who shall doubt of his proceed if by a little he will do much. he suffer his great work to be parallel or to be counterfeit by pharaoh magician, but in his least, in the make of louse, he bring they to confess the finger of god, and that be enough. the arm of god, the hand of god need not, where he will work his finger, be enough. it be not that imagination, that dream of the rabbin that hinder the magician, who say that the devil can make any creature less than a barley corn. as it be with man, they misconceive it to be with the devil too hard to make a little clock, a little picture, any thing in a little, then in a large form. that be no part of the reason in that case. but since man ordinary esteem it so and ordinary admire great work in little form, why will he not be content to glorify god that way, in a faithful confidence that he can and will do great work by weak mean? shall god have stay to levy and arm and train and muster and present man enough to discomfit sennacherib. he take a near way, he slay almost two hundred thousand of they in one night by a angel. esa 37.36. shall god have trouble a angel to satisfy elisha, his servant, only by apparition in the cloud 2.. reg 5.16: he bring he to acknowledge that there be more with they, then with the enemy, when there be none, he trouble not so much as a cloud. he employ no creature at all against the philistine when they come up with thirty thousand, chariot 1.. sam 23: 5. but he breathe a damp, a astonishment into they. he imprint a divine terror in their heart and they fight against one another. god foresee a diminution of his honour, jud 6. in the augmentation of israel force, and therefore he reduce gideon thirty two thousand to three hundred person. it be so in person. god do much with few, and it be so in time. god do much though late. though god seem a long time to have forget his people, yet in due time, that be in his time, he return to they again. s augustine, make a useful historical note: that that land, to which god bring the child of israel, be their own land before they be the right heir to it lineal descend from he who be the first possessor of it after the flood, but they be so long out of possession of it as that they be never able to set their title on foot. nay, they do scarce know their own title, and yet god repossess they of it, reinvest they in it. it be so for person and time in his way in this world, much with few, much though late, and it be so in his way to the next world too. for person, elias know of no more but himself that serve the right. god aright, god make he know that there be seven thousand more. seven thousand be much to one, but it be little to all the world. and yet these seven thousand have people, heaven and send up all those colony thither, all those army of martyr, those flock of lamb, innocent child, those, father, the father of the church and mother, holy matron and daughter, bless virgin and learned and laborious doctor. these seven thousand have fill up the place of the fall angel. and repeople that kingdom and wheresoever we think they most wear out. god at this time have his remnant, as the apostle say, and god be able to make up the whole garment of that remnant, rom 11.5. so h^ do much with few in the way to heaven, and that he do much, though late, in that way too. thou may discern in his work upon thyself. how often have thou suffer thy soul to grow clean out of all reparation, into ruin by thy inconsiderate and habitual course of sin, and never repair it by any good use of hear the word or receive the sacrament in a long time, and when thou have at any time come to a survey of thy conscience, how have thou be affect with a inordinate apprehension of god anger and his inaccessibleness, his inexorableness towards thou, and sink even into the jaw of desperation. and yet, because the seed of god have remain in thou, 1. io 3.4. the holy ghost have sit upon that seed and hatch a new creature in thou. a modest but yet infallible assurance. of the mercy of thy god, recollect all in raise of siege and discomfit of army. in restore possession and reinue right heir, in repair the ruin of the kingdom of heaven, depopulate in the fall of angel, in reestablish peace of conscience in a presumptuous confidence or over-timorous diffidence in god. god glorify himself that way to do much with little. he do so, but yet he will have something. god be a good husband, a good steward of man. contribution, but contribution he will have. he will have a concurrence, a cooperation of person, even in that great work which we speak of at first, the first creation which be so absolute of nothing, yet there be a. let we we make man, though, but one. god, yet more person in that work christ have be able to have do as the devil will have, have he do to have make bread of stone, matt 4.3, when he have so great a number to feed in the wilderness. but he do not. so he ask his: how many loafe have you? and though they be but five, yet since they be some, he multiply they and feed above five thousand. with those five he will have a remnant of gedeon army to fight his battle, a remnant of israel believer, to make up his kingdom, a remnant of thy soul, his seed wrap up somewhere to save thy soul, and a remnant of thyself, of thy mind, of thy purse, of thy person. for thy temporal deliverance. god, go low and accept small sacrifice, a pigeon, a handful of flower, a few ear of corn, but a sacrifice he will have. the christian church imply a shrewd distress when she provide that reason, that clause in her prayer. give peace in our time, o lord, because there be no other that fight for we. if the bowel of compassion be eat out, if the band of the communion of saint be dissolve, we fight for none, none fight for we. at last, neither we nor they shall fight for christ, nor christ for they nor we. but all become a prey to the general enemy of the name of christ. for god require something, some assistance, some concurrence, some cooperation, though. he can fight from heaven and the star in their order can fight against sisera. and therefore, though god give his glory to none, his glory that be to do all with nothing. yet he give they their glory that do any thing for he or for themselves. and as he have lay up a record for their glory and memorial, who be remarkable for faith- for the eleven chapter to the hebrew be a catalogue of they. so, in this song of deborah and barake, he have lay up a record for their glory- who express their faith in work and assist his service. that which be say in general, the memory of the just be bless, prou 13.7. but the name of the wicked shall rot. that be apply and promise in particular by he who can perform it, by christ, to that woman who anoint he that wheresoever his gospel shall be preach in the whole world, mat 26.13. there shall also this that this woman have do be tell for a memorial of she. she assist at his funeral. as christ himself interpret her action, that she do it to bury he and have her glory. how shall he glorify they that advance his glory. she have her reward in his death. what shall they have that keep he and his gospel alive? not a verse in deborah and barak song, and yet that be honourable evidence. not a commemoration at the preach of the gospel, and yet that be the honourable. testimony in this place and at these exercise of such as have contribute to the conveniency of these exercise. but they shall have a place in the book of life, indelible in the book of life, if they proceed in that devotion of assist god cause and do not think that they have do all or do enough if they have do something. some one time the moral man have say well and well, apply it. plutar a ship, be a ship for ever if you repair it. so say he: honour be honour. and so say we: a good conscience be a good conscience for ever if you repair it. but say he, well, honour will putrify, and so will a good conscience too, if it be. not repair. he that have do nothing must begin, and he that have do something for god cause must do more. if he will continue his name in the book of life, though, god leave no one particular action. do for his glory without glory, as those who assist his glory here have a glorious commemoration in this song, in the fifteen verse: prince, have their place, the prince of issachar be with deborah. when the king go to the field, many who be in other case privilege be by their tenor, bind to go. it be a high tenure to hold by a crown, and when god of who and who, only they hold that hold. so go into the field. it become they to go with. he. but as god sit in heaven and yet go into the field, so they of who god have say: you be god, the king of the earth may stay at home and yet go too. they go in their assistance to the war, they go in their mediation for peace. they go in their example when from their sweetness and moderation in their government at home their flow out a instruction, a persuasion to prince abroad: king, go many time and be not thank, because their way be not see. and christ himself will not always be see in the eight of john, he will not be see when they take up stone to stone, he, he withdraw himself invisible. he will not be see when prince find that open action exasperate. they do best if they be not see in the six of john christ. will not be see when they will have put upon he that which be not fit for he to take. when they will have make he king, he withdraw himself. and be not see when prince be tempt to take territory or possession in to their hand to which other prince have just pretence. they do best if they withdraw themselves from engagement in unnecessary war. for that, 2. reg 23.29, that only be josiahs ruin. king can always go in the sight of man and so they lose their thanks. but they can go out of the sight of god and there they never lose their reward. for the lord that see they in secret shall reward they open with peace in their own state and honour in their own chronicle, as here. for assist his cause, he give the prince of issachar a room, a strain, in deborah and barake song, and in the nine verse, the governor, the great officer, have their place in this praise. my heart be towards the governor of israel that offer themselves willing, it be not themselves in person, great officer can do so. they be intelligence that move great sphere, but they must not be move out of they, but their glory. here be their willingness that, before they be inquire into how they carry themselves in their office, before they be intimidate or souple with fine and ransom, voluntary, they assist the cause of god. some in the roman church write that the cardinal of that church be so incorporate into the pope so much of his body and so blood of his blood that in a fever they may not let blood without his leave. true, the great person and governor in any state be so noble and near part of the king as that they may not bleed out in any subvention and assistance of such cause underhand. as be not avowd by the king, for it be not evident that that cause be god cause, at least not evident that that way be a assistance of god cause, but a good and tractable and ductile disposition in all course, which shall lawful be declare to be for god. glory then not, but not against, but beside, not in oppose, but in prevent, the king will, before he urge, before he press, to be willing and forward in such assistance. this give great person, governor and officer, a verse in barak and deborahs song, and deborah and barak song be the word of god, the merchant, have their place in that verse too. for, as we say before, those who ride upon white ass, which be as honourable a transportation as coach be. now, be by peter, martyr among we, and by serarius the jesuit among other. well, understand to be the merchant. the greatness and the dignity of the merchant of the east be sufficient, express in those of babylon, thy merchant be the great man of the earth, apoc 18.23. and for the merchant of the west, we know that in diverse foreign part, their nobility be in their merchant. their merchant be their gentleman and certain. no place of the world for commodity and situation better dispose then this kingdom to make merchant great. you can show your greatness more then in serve god with part of it. you do serve before you be free, but here you do both at once. for his service. be perfect freedom. i be not here to day to beg a benevolence for any particular cause on foot. now. there be none. but my errand in this first part be first to remove jealousy and suspicion of god, neglect his business because he do it not at our appointment, and then to promove and advance a disposition to assist his cause and his glory in all way which shall be declare to conduce thereunto, whether in his body, by relieve the poor, or in his house, by repair these wall, or in his honour, in employment more public, and to assure you that you can have a better debtor, a. better paymaster than christ jesus for all your entail and all your perpetuity. do not so nail, so hoop in so rivet a estate in your posterity as to make the son of god your son too and to give christ jesus a child part with the rest of your child. it be note, perchance but out of levity, that your child do not keep that which you get. it be but a calumny or but a fascination of ill wisher. we have many happy instance to the contrary. many noble family derive from you, one enough to ennoble a world. queen elizabeth be the great granchild of a lord mayor of london. our bless god. bless all your estate and bless your posterity in a bless enjoy. thereof. but true, it be a good way to that, among all your purchase to purchase a place in barak and deborahs song, a testimony of the holy ghost that you be forward in all due time in the assistance of god. cause that testimony in this service. in our text have the judge of the land in the same verse too. you that sit in judgement, certain man exercise in judgement, be likely to think of the last judgement. man accustom to give judgement, likely to think of the judgement they be to receive. and at that last judgement, the malediction of the left hand fall upon they that have not harbour christ, not feed he, not clothe he, and when christ come to want those thing. in that degree that his kingdom, his gospel himself, can subsist where it do without such a sustentation, a omission in such a assistance be much more heavy. all judgement end in this: to give every one his own. give god his own and he have enough. give he his own in his own place, and his cause will be prefer before any civil or natural obligation. but god require not that pay every other man. first, owe nothing to any man. pay your child, apportion they convenient portion, pay your estimation, your reputation. live in that good fashion which your rank and calling call for. when all this be do of your superfluity, begin to pay god, and even for that you shall have your room in. deborah and baraks song for assistant and coadjutor to he for a far unlikely sort of people than any of these have that in the same verse also, they that walk up and down idle discource man. man of no call, of no profession, of no sense, of other man, misery, and yet they assist this cause. man that suck the sweet of the earth and the sweat of other man. man that pay the state nothing in do the office of mutual society and embrace particular vocation. man that make themselves but pipe to receive and convey and vent rumour but sponge to suck in and pour out foul water. man that do not spend time but wear time. they trade not, they plough, not they preach. not, they plead not but walk and walk upon the way till they have walk out their six month for the renew of band. even these have some remorse in god cause. even these get into deborah and barak song for assist there and less that be poor than these. for in the second verse the people be as forward as the governor in the nine. they offer themselves willing. they may offer themselves their person. it be likely they do, and likely that many of they have nothing to offer but themselves. and when man of that poverty offer part easy with that which be hardly get, how acceptable to god that sacrifice be. we see in christ, testimony of that widow who, among many great giver, give her mite that she give more than all they because she give all, which testify not only her liberality to god but her confidence in god that though she leave nothing, she shall not lack for that right. use do saint augustine make of that example. a rich man, give and feel it not fear no want because he be sure of a full chest at home. a poor man, give and feel it as little because he be sure of a bountiful god in heaven. god, then, can work alone there we set out. yet he do require assistance, that way we go, and to those that do assist he give glory here. so far we be go, but yet this remain, that he lay note of blame and reproach upon they who, collateral respect, withdraw from this assistance. for there be a kind of reproach and increpation lay upon reuben in that question. why abode thou among the sheepfold the division of reuben? be great thought of heart, verse 16. ambition of precedency in place of employment, greatness of heart and a loathness to be under the command of any other, and so a incoherence, not concur in counsel and execution, retard oftentimes even the cause of god. so be there also a reproach and increpation upon dan in that question, verse 17.. why do dan remain in his ship? a confidence in their own strength, a sacrifice to their? own net, a attribute of their security to their own wisdom or power, may also retard the cause of god. that stay dan behind, thus than they have their thanks, that do thus their mark. that do not assist in god cause, though god to encourage they that do accomplish his work himself. they fight from heaven, the star in their order, fight against sisera. they fight, say the text, but do not tell we who, lest man, shall direct their thanks for that which be past or their prayer for future benefit to any other, even in heaven. then, to god himself, the star be name. it can not be fear that man will pray to they, sacrifice to they. angel and saint be not name man may come to ascribe to they that which appertain to god. only now these star say the text: fight in their course. they fight not disorderly. it be no enchantment, no sorcery, no disorder of the frame or the power or the influence of these heavenly body in favour of the israelite. god will not be behold to the devil or to witch for his best friend. it be no disorderly enchantment, nor it be no miracle that disorder these star, as in josuahs time, the sun and moon be disorder in their motion. but, as josephus, who relate this battle more particular say with, who all agree, the natural influence of these heavenly body at this time have create and gather such storm and bail as blow vehement in the enemy face, be the cause of this defeat. for so we may have say in that deliverance which god give we at sea, they fight from heaven, the star in their order fight against the enemy without conjure, without miracle, from heaven, but yet by natural mean, god preserve we. for that be the force of that phrase and of that manner of express. it, the star, contain themselves in their order. fight and that phrase induce our second part, the accommodation, the occasional application of these word: god will not fight, nor be fight for disorderly. and therefore, in illustration and confirmation of those word of the apostle, let all thing be do decent and in order. aquinas, in his commentary upon that place, city, and apply this text as word to the same purpose and of the same signification. you say, saint paul, you who be star in the church, must proceed in your warfare, decent and in order for the star of heaven. when they fight for the lord, they do their service, contain themselves in their order a^d. so in our order we be come to our second. part in which we owe you by promise, make at first a analysis, a distribution of the step and branch of this part now, when we be come to the handle thereof. and thus we shall proceed. first, the war which we be to speak of here be not, as before, a worldly war, it be a spiritual war. and then, the munition, the provision for this war be not, as before, temporal assistance of prince, officer, judge, merchant, all sort of people, but it be the gospel of christ, jesus and the preach thereof. preach be god ordinance. with that ordinance he fight from heaven and batter down all error. and three to maintain this war he have make preacher star, and woe be unto they if. they do not fight if they do not preach. but yet, in the last place, they must fight, as the star in heaven do, in their order. in that order and according to those direction which they, to who it appertain, shall give. they for that be to fight in order, and in these four branch, we shall determine this second part. first, then, we be in contemplation of a spiritual war. now, though, there be a beatie, a blessing reserve to peacemaker, to the peacemaker, our peacemaker, who have sometime effect it in some place and always serious and chargeable and honourable, endeavour it in all place. yet there be a spiritual war, in which curse be they that go about to make peace and to make all one the war between christ and belial. let no man sever those who god have join, but let no man join those who god have sever neither. and god have sever christ and belial, and that be god action, the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent. we and the devil shall never have fall out, we agree, but too well. but god have put a enmity between we. god have put truth and falsehood, idolatry and sincerity so far asunder and infuse such a incompatibility and imprint such a implacability between they as that they can flow into one another. and therefore there it be a opposition against god by any colourable modification to reconcile opinion diametral, contrary to one another. in fundamental thing, day and night may join and meet in, and the dawn of the day in the morning and the shut in of the day in the evening make day and night so much one as sometime you can tell which to call they. but light and darkness, midnight and noon never meet, never join. there be point which passion of man and vehemence of disputation have carry far a sunder then need, and these indeed have make the great noise because upon these for the most part depend the matter of profit, and bless be that labour and that labourer that can reconcile those. thing, and of that there may be hope, because it be often. but the person that fight it be not the thing, the matter be not so different, but then there be matter so different as that a man may sit at home and weep and wish, praise god that he be in the right, and pray to god for they that be in the wrong, but to think that they be indifferent, and all one, he that have bring such a peace, have bring a curse upon his own conscience and lay not a satisfaction but a stupefaction upon it. a turk may perchance say in scorn of we both. they call you heretic, you call they idolater. why may not idolater and heretic agree well enough? together. but a true christian will never make contrariety in fundamental thing indifferent, never make foundation and superedification, the word of god and the tradition of man all one. every man be a little world, say the philosopher. every man be a little church too. and in every man there be two side, two army, the flesh fight against the spirit. this be but a civil war. nay, it be but a rebellion indeed, and yet it can never be absolute quench. so every man be also a soldier in that great and general war between christ and belial the word of god and the will of man. every man be bind to hearken to a peace in such thing as may admit peace in difference where man differ from man, but bind also to shut himself up against all overture of peace in such thing as be in their nature irreconcilable in difference where man differ from god. that war god have kindle and that war must be maintain and maintain by his way and his way and his ordinance in this war be preach. if god have not say to noah fac, and when he have say so, if he have not give he a design, a model, a platform of that ark, we may doubt credible, whether ever man will have think of a ship or of any such way of trade and commerce: ship be god own invention. and therein, as david say, let the land rejoice. so also, if christ have not say to his apostle: go and preach, and when he have say so, say thus: much more he that believe not your preach shall be damn. certain man will never have think of such a way of establish a kingdom as by preach. no other nation have any such institution as preach in the roman state there. be a public officer who, upon great emergent occasion, deprecation of imminent danger or gratulation for evident benefit, do make particular collect answerable to those occasion and some such occasional panegyriques and gratulatory oration for temporal benefit they have in that state, but a fix and constant course of contain subject in their religious and civil duty by preach only god, ordain only his child. enjoy christ when he send his apostle. do not give they a particular command: go and pray in the public congregation. all nation be accustom to that christ. make no doubt of any man oppose or question public prayer. and therefore for that he only say: not go and pray, but when you pray pray. thus he instruct they in the form, the. duty be well know to all before. but for preach, he himself be anoint. for that, the spirit of the lord be upon i, esa 61.1. because the lord have anoint i to preach his unction be his function. he be anoint with that power and he have anoint we with part of his own unction. all power be give unto, i say he, in heaven and in earth. and therefore, as he add, there go you math 28, 19 and preach, because i have all power for preach, take you part of my power and preach too, for preach be the power of god unto salvation and the savour of life unto life. when therefore the apostle say 1 thes 5.19, quench, not the spirit, say aquinas. quench it not in yourself by forbear to hear the word preach. quench it not in other by discourage they that do preach for. so saint chrysostom, and not he alone, understand that place that they quench the spirit who discountenance preach and dishearten preacher, saint chrysostom, take his example from the lamp that burn by he when he be preach it seem. therefore he do preach in the afternoon and he say: you may quench this lamp by put in water and you may quench it by take out the oil. so a man may quench the spirit in himself if he smother it, suffocate it with worldly pleasure or profit, and he may quench it in other if he withdraw that favour or that help which. keep that man who have the spirit of prophecy, the unction of preach in a cheerful discharge of his duty. preach then, be god. ordinance to beget faith, to take away. preach be to disarm god and to quench the spirit, for by that ordinance he fight from heaven. and to maintain that fight he have make his minister star. as they be call in the first of the revelation, and they fight against sisera. that be. they preach against error, they preach out of necessity. necessity be lay upon i to preach, say the apostle 1 cor 9.16, and upon a heavy penalty if they do not. woe be unto i. if i do not preach the gospel, neither be that. speak there with the case of a future, as the roman translation. have it, elivangelizavero. if i do not hereafter preach, if i preach not at one time or other, if i preach not when i see how thing will go, what kind of preach will be most acceptable? but it be if i preach not now. now though i have preach yesterday, for so saint ambrose preach his sermon of the good thief yesterday, i tell you, etc. so saint augustin, preach his sermon upon all saint day, and so do saint bernard his twelve sermon upon the. now though i preach but late before, and now though i have but late warning to preach now. so st basil preach his 2. sermon upon the hexameron, the. six day work when he have, but that morning for meditation, and more than so in his 2. sermon, for it seem he preach that without any premeditation. now though i have not time to labour a sermon, and now though i preach in another man place for so saint augustine preach his sermon upon the 95. psalm, where he say: severus, our brother severus, shall by promise have preach here, but since he come not, i will now that be whensoever god good people may be edify by my preach. woe be unto i if i do not preach the dragon draw a three part of the star from heaven, apoc 12.3. antichrist, by his persecution and excommunication, silence many. all that will not magnify. he and many among we have silence themselves, abundance silence some, and laziness and ignorance some, and some their own indiscretion, and then they lay that upon the magistrate. but god have place we in a church and under a head of the church where none be silence, nor dicountenan'cd, if be star. call to the ministry of the gospel and appoint to fight, to preach there. they fight. within the discipline and limit of this text, contain themselves in order, in this phrase, as we tell you before, out of aquinas, the same thing be intend as in that place of saint paul. let all thing be do decent and in order, that the edition read honest and then say saint ambrose. honest fit, fit that be do honest and decent, which be do quiet and peaceable, not with a peace and indifferency to contrary opinion in fundamental doctrine, not to shuffle religion together and make it all one which you choose, but a peace with person, a abstinence from contumely and revile. it be true that we must hate god enemy with a perfect hatred, and it be true that saint chrysostom say: odium that be not a perfect hatred that leave out any of their error unhated, but yet a perfect hatred be that too, which may consist with perfection and charity. be perfection. a perfect hatred be that which a perfect, that be a charitable man may bear, which be still to hate error, not person, when their insolence provoke we to speak of they. we shall do no good therein if therein we proceed not decent and in order. christ say of his church cant 6.3. it be powerful as a army, but it be as a army, discipline and in order, for without order a army be but a great riot, and without this decency, this peaceableness, this discretion, this order, zeal be but fury and such preach be but to the obduration of ill, not to the edification of good christian. saint paul, in his absence from the colossian col 2.5, rejoice as much in behold their order. as in their steadfastness in the faith of christ jesus. nay, if we consider the word well, as saint chrysostom have do, we shall see that it be only their order that he rejoice in, for say that, father, it be not their faith but that which establish their faith. that be their order, that occasion his joy. for when there be not a uniform, a comely, a orderly present of matter of faith, faith itself grow loose and lose her estimation, and preach in the church come to be as plead at the bar, and not so well. there the counsel speak, not himself, but he that send, he. here we shall preach, not he who send we christ jesus, but ourselves. study, to be quiet and to do your own business. 1 thes 4.11: be the apostle commandment to every particular man among the thessalonian. it seem some among they disobey that, and therefore he write no more to particular person but to the whole church. in his other epistle, and with more vehemence than a small matter will have require, we command you in the name of our lord jesus christ. 2 thes 3.6, that you withdraw yourself from all that walk, inordinate as the read that in one place and inquiete as they translate the same word in another. disorderly, unquiet from all, such as preach suspicious and jealous and be the garden never so fair, will make the world believe there be a snake under every. leaf be the intention, never so sincere, will presage and prognosticate and predivine sinister and mischievous effect from it. a trouble spirit be a sacrifice to god, psal 51.7. but a trouble some spirit be far from it. i be glad that our ministry be call order, that when we take this call we be say to take order. you be call trade and occupation and mystery. law and physic be call science and profession. many other have many other name. we be order when by his majesty leave we meet in our convocation and be meet. have his further leave to treat of remedy for any disorder in the church. our constitution be canon, canon be rule, rule be order. parliament determine in law, judge in decree. we in order and by our service in this mother church we be canon, regular, orderly man, not canonistae, man that know order, but man that keep they where we be, also call prebendary rather then, rather for give example of obedience to order, then for any other respect in the roman church, the most disorderly man be their man in order. i speak not of the viciousness of their life, i be no judge of that, i know not that. but they be so out of all order that they be within rule of no temporal law, within jurisdiction of no civil magistrate, no secular judge. they may kill king and yet can be no traitor. they assign their reason because they be no subject. he that. kill one of they shall be real hang, and if one of they kill he shall be metaphorical hang, he shall be suspend. we enjoy, grateful, and we use modest, the privilege which godly prince, out of their piety, have afford we and which their godly successor have give we again by their gracious continue of they to we. but our profession of itself, natural though the very nature of it, dispose prince to a gracious disposition to we, exempt we not from the tie of their law. all man be in deed, we be in deed, and in name too, man of order and therefore aught to be most ready of all other to obey. now belove aquin. order always presume a head, it always imply some. by who we be to be order and it imply our conformity to he who be that god, certain, without all question god. but between god and man we consider a twofold order: one, as all creature depend upon god as upon their beginning, for their very be, and so every creature be wrought upon immediate by god and, whether he discern it or no, do obey god order, that be that which god have ordain, his purpose, his providence be, execute upon he and accomplish in he. but then the other order be not as man depend upon god as upon his beginning, but as he be to be reduce and bring back to god as to his end, and that be do by mean in this. world. what be that mean for those thing which we have now in consideration? the church, but the body speak, not the head. do it be the head of the church that declare to we those thing whereby we be to be order? this, the royal and religious head of these church, within his dominion, have late have occasion to do, and in do this, do he innovate any thing, offer to do any new thing? do we repent that canon and constitution in which, at his majesty first come, we declare with so much alacrity as that it be the second canon we make, that the king have the same authority in cause ecclesiastical that the godly king of judah and the christian emperor in the primative? church have? or be we ignorant what those king of judah and those emperor do we be not? we know they well take it where the power of the empire may seem somewhat declind in charles the great, we see by those capitulary of he that remain. yet what order he give in such cause. there he say in his entrance to they let no man call this that i do a usurpation to prescribe order. in these case we have red what josiah do, and we know that we have the same authority that josiah have, but that emperor consult with his clergy before he publish those order. it be true he say he do. but he from who we have receive these order, do more than so. his majesty forbear till a representation of some inconvenience by disorderly preach be make to he by those in the high place in our clergy and other grave and reverend prelate of this church. they present it to he and thereupon he enter into the remedy. but that emperor do but declare thing constitute by other counsel before, but yet the give the life of execution to those constitution in his dominion be introductory and many of the thing themselves be so. among they his 70. capitularie be appliable to our present case. there he say that the bishop take care that all preacher preach to the people. the exposition of the lord prayer, and he enjoin they too, that no man preach any new opinion of his own, nay, though it be the opinion of other learned man in other place. yet if it be not declare in the universal church, not declare in that church in which he have his station, he may not preach it to the people. and so he proceed there to catechistical doctrine. that be not new, then, which the king of judah do and which the christian emperor do, but it be new to we, if the king of this kingdom have not do it, have they not do it? how little the king of this kingdom do in ecclesiastical cause, then, when, by their connivance, that power be. devold into a foreign prelate hand. it be pity to consider, pity to remember, pity to bring into contemplation. and yet true even then, our king do exercise more of that power than our adversary who oppose it will confess. but since the true jurisdiction be vindicate and reapply to the crown, in what just height henry the eight and those who govern his son minority, edward the six, exercise that jurisdiction in ecclesiastical cause, none that know their story know not. and because ordinary we settle ourselves best in the action and precedent of the late queen of bless and everlasting memory. i may have leave to remember they that know and to tell they that know not one act of her power and her wisdom to this purpose, when some article concern the fall away from justify, grace and other point that beat upon that haunt have be ventilate in conventicle and in pulpit too and preach on both side past and that some person of great place and estimation in our church, together with he who be the great of all among our clergy, have, upon mature deliberation, establish a resolution what shall be think and teach, hold and preach in those point and have thereupon send. down that resolution to be publish in the university, not vulgar neither to the people, but in a sermon only. yet her majesty be inform thereof, declare her displeasure so as that scarce any hour before the sermon be to have, be there be a countermand, a inhibition to the preacher for meddle with any of those point. not that her majesty make herself judge of the doctrine, but that nothing, not former, declare to be so, aught to be, declare to be the tenet and doctrine of this church. her majesty not be acquaint nor suplicate to give her gracious allowance for the publication thereof. his sacred majesty, then, be herein, upon the step of the king of judah, of the christian emperor, of the king of. england of all, the king of england that embrace the reformation of queen elizabeth herself, and he be upon his own step too. for it be a seditious calumny to apply this which be do now to any occasion that rise. but now, as though the king have do this now for satisfaction of any person at this time for some year since, when he be, please to call the head of house from the university and intimate to they the inconvenience that arise from the preach of such man as be not at all conversant in the father in the school, nor in the ecclesiastical story, but have shut up themselves in a few late writer and give order to those governor for remedy herein then he. begin than he lay the foundation for that in which he have proceed thus much further now to reduce preach near to the manner of those primitive time when god give so evident and so remarkable blessing to man preach. consider more particular that which he have do now. his majesty have accompany his most gracious letter to the most reverend father in god, my lord grace of canterbury, with certain direction, how preacher ought to behave themselves in the exercise of that part of their ministry. these be derive from his grace in due course to his reverend brethren, the other bishop, our worthy diocesan, ever vigilant for the peace and unity of the church, give a speedy, very speedy intimation thereof to the clergy of his. jurisdiction, so do other to who it appertain so to do in they, since that, his majesty, who always take good work in hand, love to perfect his own work, have vouchsafe to give some reason of this his proceed, which be signify by he, to who the state and church owe much the right, reverend father in god, the bishop of lincoln lord, keeper of the great seal, and after by he also, who begin at first. his majesty pleasure appear thereby, as he be too great and too good a king to seek corner or disguise for his action, that these proceed shall be make public. i be not willing only, but glad to have my part therein- that, as in the fear of god, i have always preach to you the gospel of christ jesus, who be the god of your salvation. so, in the testimony of a good conscience, i may now preach to you the gospel of the holy ghost, who be the god of peace, of unity and concord. these direction, then, and the reason of they: by his majesty particular care, every man in the ministry may see and write out in the several register office with his own hand, for nothing and for very little if he use the hand of another perchance you have at your convenience. you may see they when you do, you shall see. that his majesty general intention therein be to put a difference between grave and solid, from light and humorous preach. origen do so when, upon the epistle to the roman, he say there be a great difference. and a man may teach a auditory, that be make they know something that they know not before, and yet not preach, for preach be to make they know thing appertain to their salvation. but when man do neither neither teach nor preach, but, as his majesty observe the manner to be to soar in point, too deep to muster up their own read, to display their own wit or ignorance in meddle with civil matter or, as his majesty add, in rude and undecent revile of person, this be that. which have draw down, his majesty pierce eye to see it and his royal care to correct it. he correct it by christ own way, by consider how it be at first, for, as himself to right purpose city tertullian, that be best. which be first. he will therefore have. we, conversant in antiquity for nazianzen, ask that question with some scorn. can any man hope to make a good preacher as soon as a good picture in three or four day, or with three or four book? his majesty therefore call we to look what be first in the whole church, and again when we receive the reformation in this kingdom, by what mean, as his majesty express it, papistry be drive out and puritanisme keep out. and we deliver from the superstition of the papist and the madness of the anabaptist as before he express it, and his religious and judicious eye see clear that all that doctrine, which wrought this great cure upon we in the reformation, be contain in the two catechism, in the 39 article and in the 2. book of homily. and to these, as to head and abundary, from whence all knowledge necessary to salvation may abundant be derive, he direct the meditation of preacher: be these new way, no way new, for they be our first way in receive christianity and our first way in receive the reformation. take a short view of they all, as it be in the catechism, as it be in the article, as it be in the homily. first you be call back to the practice of catechise. remember what catechise be it be. and in the primitive church, when those person who come from the gentile to the christian religion may have be scandalize with the outward ceremonial and ritual worship of god in the church for ceremony be stumble block to they who look upon they without their signification and without the reason of their institution. to avoid that danger though they be not admit to see the sacrament administer nor the other service of god perform in the church. yet in the church they receive instruction, institution by word of mouth, in the fundamental article of the christian religion, and that be catechise. the christian have it from the beginning and the jew have it too for their word chanach, be of that signification to enter, train up a child in the way he shall go, pro 22.6, and when he be old he will not depart from it. train up, say our translation in the text, catechise, say our translator, in the margin, according to the natural force of the hebrew word, and sepher chinnuch, which be that be of catechism, be a book well know among the jew every where, where they be now, their institution be their catechism. and if we shall tell some man that caluins institution be a catechism, will they not love catechise, the better for that name, and will they not love it the better if they give i leave to tell they that of which i have the experience. a artificer of this city bring his child to i to admire, as true there be much reason, the capacity, the memory especial of the child, it be but a girl and not above nine year of age. her parent say less, some year less, we can scarce, propose any verse of any book or chapter of the bible, but that that child will go forward without book. i begin to catechise this child and true, she understand nothing of the trinity. nothing of any of those fundamental point which must save we. and the wonder be double how she know so much, how so little the primitive church discern this necessity of catechise, and therefore they institute a particular office, a call in the church of catechiser, which office, as we see in saint cyprian 4.2 epistle, that great man optatus exercise at carthage and origen at alexandria. when s augustine take the epistle and the gospel and the psalm of the day for his text to one sermon, do he think you much more than paraphrase, then catechise? when athanasius make one sermon, and god know, a very short one too, to overthrow all heresy in one sermon, do he think you any more than propose fundamental doctrine? which be true, the way to overthrow all heresy. when saint chrysostom enter into his sermon upon the 3. chapter to the galatian, with that preparation, say he, for it be no ordinary matter that i propose there. he propose catechistical doctrine of faith and work. come to low time when, make six or seven sermon upon the creed and not a several sermon upon every several article, but take the whole creed for his text in every sermon and scarce any of those sermon a quarter of a hour long. will you not allow this manner of preach to be catechise? go as low as can be. go to the jesuite and that great catechiser among they, canisius, say we, we jesuite, make catechise our profession. i. doubt not. but they do recreate themselves sometime in other matter too, but that they glory in that they be catechizer. and in that profession, say he, we have saint basil, saint augustine, saint ambrose, saint cyrill in our society, and true, as catechizer they have. as state-frier, as jesuit, they have not. and in the first capacity they have he who be more than all. for, as he say, right christ, own preach, be a catechise. i pray god that jesuite- conclusion of that epistle of he- be true still there- he say, if nothing else yet this alone shall provoke we to a great diligence in catechise labour, and that our adversary, the protestant, do spend so much time, as he say, day and night in. catechise now, if it be so, then when he write, and be not so still among we. we have intermit one of our best advantage and therefore, god, have gracious, raise a bless and a royal instrument to call we back to that which advantage we, and so much offend the enemy that man may sleep with a good conscience of, have discharge his duty in his ministry, that have preach in the forenoon and catechise after, say tertullian, and he say that with indignation. will any man doubt, say he, whether that man be a idolater? that catechise child and servant in idolatry? will any man doubt whether he be painful in his ministry? that catechise child and servant in the sincere religion of christ jesus, the? roman church have still make her use of we, of our fortune when she govern here and of our example, since she do not, they do as they see we do, and thereupon they come to that order in the council of trent that upon sunday and holiday they shall preach in the forenoon and catechise in the afternoon. till we do both, they do neither. mat 18.3. except you become as little child. you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, say christ, except you, you, the people, be content at first to feed on the milk of the gospel and not present to fall to gnaw of bone of controversy and unrevealed mystery. and except you, the minister and preacher of the gospel, descend and apply yourselves to the capacity of little child and become as they and build not your estimation only upon the satisfaction of the expectation of great and curious auditory. you stop they, you lose your own way to the kingdom of heaven. not that we be to shut up and determine ourselves in the knowledge of catechistical rudiment, but to be sure to know they first. the apostle put we upon that progress, heb 6.1. let we learn the principle of the doctrine of christ and go on to perfection. not leave at they, but yet not leave they out. endeavour to increase in knowledge, but first make sure of the foundation and that increase of. knowledge be royal and fatherly, present to we in that which be another limne of his majesty direction. the 39 article. the foundation of nceessary knowledge be in our catechism, the superedification, the extension in these article, for they carry the understanding and the zeal of the able man high enough and deep enough. in the three article there be a orthodox assertion of christ descent into hell. who can go deep? in the 17. article there be a modest declaration of the doctrine of predestination. who can go high? neither do these article only build up positive doctrine. if the church have no adversary, that be enough. but they embrace controversy too. in point that be necessary, as in the two and twenty article of purgatory, of pardon, of image, of invocation, and these not in general only, but against the romish doctrine of pardon, of image of invocation, and in the eight and twenty article against transubstantiation and in such term as admit no meeting, no reconciliation, but that it be repugnant to the plain word of scripture and have give occasion to many superstition. and in one word, we may see the purpose and scope of these article, as they be intend against the roman church, in that title, which they have in one edition, in which, though, there be some other thing that just give offence. yet none be give nor take in this that these article be conceive and publish to condemn the heresy of the manichee, of the arrian, of the nestorian, of the papist and other, and therefore, in these reason which his majesty have descend to give of his direction himself, be please to assign this that the people may be season in all the head of the protestant religion, not only of the christian against jew, turk and infidel, but of the protestant against the roman. church, the foundation be in the catechism, the growth and extension in the article, and then the application of all to particular auditory in the homily which, if his majesty have not name yet, have be employ in his recommendation of the article. for the five and thirty article appoint the read of they both, those which be publish in the time of edward the six and those which after, in the first book, the very first homily, be of the sufficiency of scripture and of the absolute necessity of read. they sufficient, oppose against that which have be say in that church, both of the impertinency of scripture as not absolute, necessary, and of the insufficiency of these scripture, if scripture be necessary, and in the second book, the second homily, be against idolatry and so far against all approach towards it by have any image in church as that perchance. moderate man will rather think that homily to severe in that kind, then suspect the homily of declination towards papistry, be it the name of homily that scandalise they will. they have none. saint cyril' 30. paschall sermon, which he preach in so many several easter day at his arch-bishoprike of alexandria, and his christmas day sermon too, be ordinary. exscribe and rehearse over again by the most part of the clergy of those part, and in their mouth they be but homily and caluins, homily upon job, as beza in his preface. before they call they be ordinary, repeat over again in many place of france, and in their mouth they be but homily. it be but the name that scandalise. and yet the name of and a homily and a sermon be all one. and if some of these be speak and not read and so exhibit in the name of a sermon, they will like they well enough. certain his majesty mistake it not that in our catechism, in our article, in our homily, there be enough for positive, enough for controverted divinity for that? jesuit that intend to bring in the whole body of controverted divinity into his book, who we name before desire, no other subject, no other occasion to do that, but the catechism of that church. neither need any sober man that intend to handle controversy, ask more or go further. his majesty, therefore, who, as he understand his duty to god, so do he his subject duty to, he may just think that these so well ground direction might, as himself say, be receive upon implicit obedience. yet he vouchsafe to communicate to all who desire satisfaction the reason that move he, some of which i have relate, and all which all may, when they will see and have of all which the sum be his royal and his pastoral care that by that primitive way of preach his subject may be arm against all kind of adversary. in fundamental truth, and when he take knowledge that some few churchman, but many of the people have make sinister construction of his sincere intention, as he be grieve at the heart to give you his own word, to see every day so many defection from our religion to popery and anabaptism, so without doubt he be grieve with much bitterness that any shall so pervert his. meaning as to think that these direction either restrain the exercise of preach or abate the number of sermon or make a breach to ignorance and superstition, of which three scandal he have. be please to take knowledge. what can any calumniator, any libeler on the other side, have imagine more opposite, more contrary to? he then approach towards ignorance or superstition. let we say, for he can so learned, so abundant learn, a prince be suspect to plot for ignorance. and let we bless god that we hear he say now that he do constant, profess himself a open adversary to the superstition of the papist, without any mild modification, and to the madness of the anabaptist, and that the preach against either of their doctrine be. not only approve but much commend by his royal majesty if it be do without rude and undecent revile. if he have affect ignorance in himself, he will never have read so much. and if he have affect ignorance in we, he will never have write so much and make we so much the more learned by his book. and if he have have any declination towards superstition, he will not have go so much far than his rank and quality press he to do in declare his opinion. concern antichrist as out of zeal, and zeal with knowledge he have, do we have he now, and long long o eternal god, continue he to we. we have he now for a father of the church, a foster-father. such a father as constantine, as theodosius, be our posterity shall have, he for a father, a classic father, such a father as ambrose, as austin be, and when his work shall stand in the library of our posterity among the father. even these paper, these direction and these reason shall be pregnant evidence for his constant zeal to god truth and in the mean time, as arrow shoot in their eye that imagine so vain a thing as a defection in he to their superstition. thus far he be from admit ignorance and from superstition thus far, which seem to be one of their fear, and for the other two, which concur in one, that these direction shall restrain the exercise of preach or abate the number. of sermon. his majesty have declare himself to those reverend father to be so far from give the least discouragement to solid preach or to discreet and religious preacher, or from abate the number of sermon that he expect at their hand. that this shall increase their number by renew, upon every sunday in the afternoon, in all parish church throughout the kingdom, that primitive and most profitable exposition of the catechism, so that here be no abate of sermon but a direction of the preacher to preach useful and to edification. and therefore to end, all you, you who god have make star in this firmament, preacher in this church, deliver yourselves from that imputation. job 25.5. the star be not pure in his sight. the preacher. be not obedient to. he in the voice of his lieutenant, and you, you who be god, holy people and zealous of his glory, as you know from st paul, 1 cor 15, 14.. that star differ from star in glory, but all conduce to the benefit of man. so when you see these star preacher, to differ in gift yet, since all their end () your salvation, encourage () ^^izer, as well as the curious preacher () so far towards your way to heaven, as to the firmament, and consider there that that star by which we sail and make great voyage, be none of the star of the great magnitude, but yet it be none of the lest, neither but a middle star. those preacher which must save your soul. be not ignorant, unlearned, extemporal man, but they be not over curious man, neither your child be you and your servant be you, and you do not provide for your salvation if you provide not for they, who be so much you as that, they be you. no man be save as a good man if he be not save as a good father and as a good master too, if god have, give he a family. that so, priest and people, the whole congregation, may, by their religious obedience and fight in this spiritual warfare in their order, minister, occasion of joy to that heart which have be grieve in that fullness of joy which david express, psal 21.. the king shall rejoice in thy strength (), lord, and in thy salvation. how great^^ () rejoice thou have. give he his () ^nd thou have not withhold the () his lip, for the king trust in the lord, and by the mercy of the most high he shall not be move. and with that psalm, a psalm of confidence in a good king and a psalm of thanksgiving for that blessing, i desire that this congregation may be dissolve. for this be all that i intend for the explication, which be our first, and for the application, which be the other part. propose in these word: act 1.8. but you shall receive power. after that, the holy ghost be come upon you and you shall be witness. unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. there be reckon in this book two and twenty sermon of the apostle. and yet the book be not call the preach but the practice, not the word but the act of the apostle. and the act of the apostle be to convey that name of christ jesus and to propagate his gospel over all the world. belove you, be actor upon the same stage too, the uttermost part of the earth. be your scene. act over the act of the apostle. be you a light to the gentile that sit in darkness. be you content to carry he over these sea who dry up one red sea. for his first people and have pour out another red sea, his own blood, for they and we. when man be fall, god clothe he make he a leather garment. there, god, descend to one occupation. when the time of man redemption be come, than god as it be to house, he become a carpenter son. there, god descend to another occupation. natural, without doubt, man will have be his own tailor and his own carpenter. something in these two kind man will have do of himself, though he have have no pattern from god. but in preserve man who be fall to this redemption by which he be to be raise. in preserve man from perish in the flood, god, descend to a three occupation: to be. his shipwright to give he the model of a ship, a ark, and so to be the author of that which man himself, in likelihood, will never have think of a mean. to pass from nation to nation. now, as god teach we to make clothes, not only to clothe ourselves but to clothe he in his poor and naked member here. as god teach we to build house, not to house ourselves but to house he in erect church to his glory, so god teach we to make ship, not to transport ourselves but to transport he, that when we have receive power after that, the holy ghost be come upon we. we may be witness unto he, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. as i speak now, principal to they who be concern in this plantation of virginia. yet there may be diverse in this congregation who, though they have no interest in this plantation, yet they may have benefit and edification by that which they hear i say. so, christ, speak the word of this text principal to the apostle who be present and question he at his ascension. but they be in their just extension and due accommodation, appliable to our present occasion of meet here. as christ himself be alpha and omega, so first as that he be last too. so these word which he speak in the east belong to we who be to glorify he in the west that we have receive power. after that, the holy ghost be come upon. we may be witness unto he, both in jerusalem and in all judea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. the first word of the text be the cardinal word, the word, the hinge upon which the whole text turn. the first word but be the but that all the rest shoot at first. it be a exclusive word, something the apostle have require, which may not be, have not that, and it be a inclusive. word. something, christ, be please to afford to the apostle, which they think not of, not that, not that which you beat upon, but but yet something else, something better, then, that you shall have. that which this but exclude, be that which the apostle express in the verse immediate before the text: a temporal kingdom. will thou restore again, the kingdom of israel? no, not a temporal kingdom. let not the riches and commodity of this world be in your contemplation, in your adventure, or, because they ask more, will thou now restore that? not yet. if i will give you riches and commodity of this world, yet, if i do it not at first, if i do it not yet, be not you discourage, you shall. not have that, that be not god first intention, and though that be in god intention to give it you hereafter. you shall not have it yet. that be the exclusive part, but there enter the inclusive. you shall receive power. after that, the holy ghost be come upon you and you shall be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth, in which second part we shall pass by these step. the holy ghost shall come upon you, the spirit shall witness to your spirit and rectify your conscience, and then, by that, you shall receive power, a new power beside the power you have from the state, and that power shall enable you to be witness of christ, that be, to make his doctrine the more credible by your testimony, when you conform yourselves to he and do as he do. and this witness, you shall bear, this conformity. you shall declare first in jerusalem, in this city, and in judaea, in all the part of the kingdom, and in samaria, even among they who be depart from the true worship of god the papist, and to the uttermost part of the earth, to those poor soul to who you be continual send summary: if from the holy ghost you have a good testimony in your own conscience, you shall be witness for christ. that be as he do. you shall give satisfaction to all, to the city, to the country, to the calumniate adversary and the natural of the place, to who you shall present both spiritual and temporal benefit to. and so you have the model of. the whole frame and of the partition. we proceed now to the furnish of the particular room 1. part first, then this first word, but exclude a temporal kingdom. the apostle have fill themselves with a expectation, with a ambition of it, but that be not, intend they. it be no wonder that a woman can conceive such a expectation and such a ambition as to have she two son sit at christ right hand- mat 20.20- and at his left in his kingdom. when the apostle expect such a kingdom as may afford they honour and preferment upon earth, more than once they be in the disputation in which christ deprehend they, which of they shall be the great in his kingdom, mat 1.81. neither have the bishop of rome any thing wherein he may so proper call himself apostolical. as this error of the apostle, this their infirmity, that hei evermore too conversant upon the contemplation of temporal kingdom, they do it all the way when christ be with they. and now, at his last step, when christ be not ascend but in part ascend, when one foot be upon the earth and the other in the cloud that take he up. they ask he now, will thou, at this time, restore the kingdom? so, woman, put their husband and man, their father and friend upon their torture at their last gasp, and make their death bed a rack to make they stretch and increase jointure and portion and legacy. and sign schedule and codicil with their hand. when his hand that present, they be ready to close his eye, that shall sign they. and when they be upon the wing for heaven, man tie lead to their foot, and when they be lay hand fast upon abraham bosom, they must pull their hand out of his bosom again to obey importunity of man and sign their paper. so underminable be the love of this world which determine every minute. god, as he be, three person, have three kingdom. there be the kingdom of power, and this we attribute to the father. it be power and providence. there be the kingdom of glory, this we attribute to the sonn and to his purchase, for he be the king. that shall say mat 25.34. come you bless, of my father, inherit the kingdom, prepare for you from the foundation of the world, and then, between these three, be gratiae, the kingdom of grace, and this we attribute to the holy ghost. he take they who the king of power, almighty god, have, rescue from the gentile- mat 4.11- and as the king of grace, he give they the knowledge of the mystery of the kingdom of god that be of future glory by sanctify they with his grace in his church. the two first kingdom be in this world, but yet neither of they be of this world, because both they refer to the kingdom of glory, the kingdom of the father, which be the providence of. god. do, but preserve we the kingdom of the holy ghost, which be the grace of god. do but prepare we to the kingdom of the son, which be the glory of god and that be in heaven, and therefore, though to good man, this world be the way to that kingdom. yet this kingdom be not of this world, say chest himself, though the apostle themselves, john 18.36, as good a school as they be breed in, can never take out that lesson. yet that lesson, christ, give and repeat to all. you seek a temporal kingdom, but say the text, stop there. a kingdom, you must not have, belove in he who kingdom and gospel you seek to advance in this plantation, our lord and saviour. christ jesus. if you seek to establish a temporal kingdom there, you be not rectify. if you seek to be king in either acceptation of the word, to be a king signify liberty and indepency and supremacy. to be under no man. and to be a king signify abundance and omnisufficiency- to need no man. if those that govern there will establish such a government as shall not depend upon this, or if those that go thither propose to themselves a exemption from law to live at their liberty, this be to be king, to divest allegiance to be under no man. and if those that adventure thither propose to themselves present benefit and profit, a sudden way to be rich and a abundance of all desirable commodity. from thence this be to be sufficient of themselves and to need no man and to be under no man and to need no man be the two acceptation of be king who liberty draw to go or present profit draw to adventure. be not yet in the right way. o if you can once bring a catechism to be as good ware among they as a bugle, as a knife, as a hatchet. o if you will be as ready to hearken at the return of a ship- how many indian be convert to christ jesus- as what tree or drug or die that ship have bring than you be in your right way, and not till then, liberty and abundance be character of kingdom and a. kingdom be exclude in the text. the apostle be not to look for it in their employment, nor you in this, your plantation at lest. christ express himself thus far in this answer that if he will give they a kingdom, he will not give it they. yet they ask he: will thou at this time restore the kingdom? and he answer it. be not for you to know the time whatsoever god will do. man must not appoint he his time. the apostle think of a kingdom present after christ departure, the come of the holy ghost who lead they into all truth. soon deliver they of that error. other man in favour of the jew. interpret all the prophecy which be of a spiritual kingdom. the kingdom of the gospel into which the jew shall be admit in a literal sense. have think that the jew shall have not only a temporal kingdom in the same place in jerusalem again, but because they find that kingdom, which be promise that be the kingdom of the gospel, to be express in large phrase and in a abundant manner, apply all that largeness to a temporal kingdom. they think that the jew shall have such a kingdom as shall swallow and annihilate all other kingdom and be the sole empire and monarchy of the world. after this very great man in the church, upon these word of one thousand year after the resurrection, have imagine a temporal kingdom of the saint of god here upon. earth, apo 20.. before they enter the joy of heaven, and saint augustine himself, civit 20.7, have at first some declination towards that opinion, though he dispute powerful against it. after that there shall be that, as the world be to last, six thousand year in trouble, there shall be a seven thousand in such joy as this world can give and some other who have avoid both. the temporal kingdom, imagine by the apostle present after the ascension, and the imperial kingdom of the jew before the resurrection, and the carnal kingdom of the chiliast the millenarian, after the resurrection. though they speak of no kingdom, but the true kingdom, the kingdom of glory. yet they err as much in assign a certain time when that kingdom shall begin, when the end of this world, when the resurrection, when the judgement shall be. say christ to his apostle then, and lest it may be think that they may know these thing when the holy ghost come upon, they christ deny that he himself know that, as man and as man, christ know more than ever the apostle know whatsoever. therefore, christ intend to his apostle. here. he will not give it present. he will not bind himself to a certain time. it belong not to we to know god time belove, use godly mean and give god his leisure. you can beget a son and tell the mother i will have this son bear within five month. nor, when he be bear, say you will have he past danger of wardship within five year. you can sow your corn to day and say it shall be above ground to morrow and in my barn next week. how soon the best husbandman sow the best seed in the best ground. god cast the promise of a messiah as the seed of all in paradise. in the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent. head. and yet this plant be four thousand year after before it appear, this messiah, four thousand year before he come. god, show the ground where that shall grow. two thousand year after the promise in abraham family: in in thy seed all nation shall be. bless god, hedge in this ground. almost one thousand year after that, in micheas time, bethlem, thou, bethlem shall be the place. and god, water that and weed that, refresh that dry expectation with a succession of prophet. and yet it be so long before this expectation of nation, this messiah, come. so god promise the jew a kingdom, in jacobs prophecy to juda, gen 49., that the sceptre shall not depart from his tribe in two hundred year more, he say. no more of it, deut 17.14. then he ordain some institution for their king when they shall have one, and then it be four hundred year after that before they have a king. god mean from the first hour to people the whole earth, and god can have make man of clay as fast as they make brick of clay in egypt. but he begin upon two, and when they have be, multiply and replenish the earth one thousand six hundred year, the flood wash all that away and god be almost to begin again upon eight person, and they have serve to people, earth and heaven too. be not you discourage if the promise which you have make to yourselves or to other be not so soon. discharge, though you see not your money, though you see not your man, though a flood, a flood of blood have break in upon they, be not discourage great creature. lie long in the womb. lion be litter, perfect, but beare-whelpe, lick unto their shape. action which king undertake, be cast in a mould. they have their perfection. quick action of private man and private purse require more hammer and more file. to their perfection only. let your principal end be the propagation of the glorious gospel. and though there be a exclusive in the text, god do not promise you a kingdom, ease and abundance in all thing, and that which he do intend to you, he do not promise present. yet there be a inclusive too. not that, but but something equivolent at least. but you shall receive power. after that. the holy ghost be come upon you and you shall be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth, 2. part now our saviour christ. do not say to these man, since you be so importunate, you shall have no kingdom now nor never. it be not yet. but sed, he do not say you shall have no kingdom nor any thing else. it be not that, but the importunity of beggar. sometime draw we to such a froward answer for this importunity, i will never give you any thing. our pattern be not so froward. he give they not. that, but as good as that, samuel be send to super-induct a king upon saul 1. sam 16. to anoint a new king, he think his commission have be determine in eliab, sure, this be the lord anoint. but the lord say: not he nor the next aminadab, nor the next shammah, nor none of the next seven, but but yet there be one in the field. keep sheep anoint he david. be he saint paul, pray earnest and frequent to be. discharge of that stimulus, god say: no, not that, but thou shall have grace to overcome the tentation, though the tentation remain. god say to you: no kingdom, not ease, not abundance, nay, nothing at all. yet the plantation shall not discharge, the charge, not defray. itself yet, but yet already now, at first, it shall conduce to great use. it shall redeem many a wretch from the law of death from the hand of the executioner upon who, perchance a small fault, or perchance a first fault, or perchance a fault hearty and sincere, repent perchance, no fault but malice have otherwise cast a present and ignominious death. it shall sweep your street and wash your door from idle person and the child of idle person and employ they- and true if the whole country be but such a bridewell to force idle person to work. it have a good use, but it be already not only a spleen to drain the ill humour of the body but a liver to breed good. blood already the employment breed, mariner, already the place give essay, nay, fraight of merchantable commodity already it be a mark for the envy and for the ambition of our enemy. i speak, but of our doctrinal, not nationall enemy. as they be papist, they be sorry. we have this country, and sure twenty lecture in matter of controversy, do not so much vex they as one ship that go and strengthen that plantation. neither can i recommend it to you by any better rhetoric than their malice. they will glad have it and therefore let we be glad to hold it thus than this text. proceed sanctus and gather upon you all that you will have by this plantation. you shall not have god bind, not himself. to measure all that you shall have. you have not yet. god bind not himself to time, but something you shall have. nay, you have already some great thing, and of those that in the text be, the holy ghost shall come upon you. we find the holy ghost to have come upon man four time in this book. first, upon the apostle act, 2, 1.. at pentecost, then, when the whole congregation be in prayer for the imprisonment of peter and john, 4, 31.. again, when peter preach in cornelius, his house, 10, 44. the holy ghost fall upon all they that hear he and four. when saint paul lay his hand upon they, 19, 6. who have be former baptize. at ephesus, at the three latter. time it be evident that the holy ghost fall upon whole and promiscuous congregation and not upon the apostle only. and in the first, at pentecost, the contrary be not evident. nay, the father, for the most part, that handle that concur in that. that the holy ghost fall then upon the whole congregation, man and woman. the holy ghost fall upon peter before he preach, and it fall upon the hearer when he preach, and it have fall upon every one of they who have find motion in themselves to propagate the gospel of christ. jesus. by this mean, the son of god, do not abhor the virgin womb when he will be make man, when he be man, he do not disdain to ride upon a. ass into jerusalem the three person of the trinity, the holy ghost, be as humble as the second. he refuse no conveyance, no door of entrance into you, whether the example and precedent of other good man, or a probable imagination of future profit, or a willingness to concur to the vexation of the enemy. what collateral respect soever draw thou in. if now thou be in thy principal respect, be the glory of god that occasion, whatsoever it be. be that be the petard that break open thy iron gate, that be the chariot by which he enter into thou and now he be fall upon thou. if thou do not depose, lay aside all consideration of profit for ever, never to look for return, no, not. sepose. leave out the consideration of profit for a time, for that and religion may well consist together, but if thou do but post-pose the consideration of temporal gain and study first the advancement of the gospel of christ jesus, the holy ghost be fall upon you, for by that you receive power, say the text. there be a power root in nature and a power root in grace. a power issue from the law of nation and a power grow out of the gospel. in the law of nature and nation, a land never inhabit by any, or utter, derelict and immemorial abandon by the former inhabitant, become they that will possess it. so also be it if the inhabitant do not in some measure fill the land so as the land may bring forth her increase for the use of man. for as a man do not become proprietary of the sea because he have two or three boat fish in it, so neither do a man become lord of a main continent because he have two or three cottage in the skirt thereof. that rule, which pass through all municipal law in particular state interest, the state must take order that every man improve that which he have for the best advantage of that state, pass also through the law of nation, which be to all the world as the municipal law be to a particular state interest. the whole world. all mankind must take care that all place be improve as far as may be to the best advantage of mankind in general. again, if the land be people and cultivate by the people, and that land produce in abundance, such thing for want whereof their neighbour or other be not enemy perish. the law of nation may justify some force in seek by permutation of other commodity which they need to come to some of they. many case may be put when not only commerce and trade but plantation in land not former our own, may be lawful, and for that you have your commission, your patent, your charter, your seal from he upon who act. any private subject in civil matter may safe. rely, but then you shall receive power, say the text you shall, when the holy ghost be come upon you, that be when the instinct, the influence, the motion of the holy ghost enable your conscience to say that your principal end be not gain nor glory, but to gain soul to the glory of god. this seal, the great seal, this justify justice itself, this authorise authority and give power to strength itself. let the conscience be upright and then seal and patent and commission be wing. they assist he to fly the fast. let the conscience be lame and distort and he that go upon seal and patent and commission go upon weak and feeble. crutch. when the holy ghost be come upon you, your conscience. rectify, you shall have power, a new power, out of that. what to do that follow to be witness unto christ. infamy be one of the high punishment that the law inflict upon man, for it lie upon he even after death. infamy be the worst punishment, and intestabilitie to be make intestable be one of the deep wound of infamy. and then the worst degree of intestabilitie be not to be believe, not to be admit to be a witness of any other. he be intestable that can make a testament, not give his own good, and he intestable that can receive nothing by the testament of another. he be intestable in who behalf no testimony may be accept, but he be the most miserable intestable of. all the most detestable intestable that discredit another man by speak well of he and make he the more suspicious by his commendation. a christian in profession that be not a christian in life. be so intestable. he discredit christ and harden other against he. john baptist, be more than a prophet because he be a witness of christ and he be a witness because he be like he. he do as he do, he lead a holy and a religious life. so he be a witness. that great and glorious name of martyr be but a witness. saint stephen be proto-martyr christ. first witness because he be the first that do as he do, that put on his colour, that drink of his cup, that be baptize. with his baptism, with his own blood, so he be a witness to be witness for christ. be to be like christ to conform yourselves to christ and they in the text, and you be to be witness of christ in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria and unto the uttermost part of the earth. saint hierome, note that john baptist be not bid to bear witness in jerusalem, jerusalem in the city, but in the wilderness. he and none but he. there be but few man to witness to there, and those few that be come thither with a good disposition to be wrought upon there and there. there be few witness to oppose john testimony, few tentation, few worldly allurement, few worldly business one. be enough for the wilderness, but for jerusalem, for the city, where all the excuse in the gospel do always meet. they have buy commodity and they must utter they. they have duchase land and they must state they. they have marry wife and they must study they to the city, to jerusalem. christ send all his apostle and all little enough. he have send a great many apostle, preacher to this city, more than to any other that i know. religious person, as they call they, cloister friar, be not send to the city by their first canon. they shall not preach abroad, but for those who be to do that service, there be more in this city, then in other, for there be more parish church. here, then in other. now belove. if in this city you have take away a great part of the revenue of the preacher to yourselves, take thus much of his labour upon yourselves too as to preach to one another by a holy and exemplar life and a religious conversation. let those of the city who have interest in the government of this plantation be witness of christ, who be truth itself to all other, governor of company in all true, and just proceed that, as christ say to they who think themselves great, except you become as this little child. so we may say to the governor of the great company, except you proceed with the integrity, with the justice, with the clearness of your little sister. this plantation you do not take, you do not follow a good example. this be to bear witness of christ in jerusalem, in the city, to be example of truth and justice and clearness to other in and of this city. judaea the apostle, be to do this in judaea too. their service lie in the country as well as in the city. bird that be keep in cage may learn some note which they shall never have: sing in the wood or field, but yet they may forget their natural note too. preacher that bind themselves always to city and court and great auditory may learn new note. they may become occasional preacher and make the emergent affair of the time their text and the humour of the hearer their bible. but they may lose their natural note, both the simplicity and the boldness that belong to the preach of the gospel, both their power upon low understanding to raise they and upon high affection to humble they. they may think that their errand be but to knock at the door to delight the ear and not to search the house to ransack the conscience. christ, leave the ninety and nine for one sheep. populous city be for the most part best, provide remote part. need our labour more and we shall not make such difference. yeoman and labourer and spinster, be distinction upon earth in. the earth in the grave, there be no distinction. the angel that shall call we out of that dust will not stand to survey who lie naked, who in a coffin, who in wood, who in lead, who in a fine, who in a courser sheet. in that, one day of the resurrection, there be not a forenoon for lord to rise first and a afternoon for mean person to rise after christ. be not whip to save beggar and crown with thorn to save king. he die, he suffer all for all, and we who bear witness of he be to do as he do, must confer our labour upon all, upon jerusalem and upon judaea too, upon the city and upon the country too. you who be his witness too, must do so too. preach in your just action as to the city, to the country too, not to seal up the secret and the mystery of your business within the bosom of merchant and exclude all other, to nourish a incompatibility between merchant and gentleman. that merchant shall say to: they in reproach, you have play the gentleman and they in equal reproach, you have play the merchant. but as merchant grow up into worshipful family, and worshipful family let fall branch among merchant again. so for this particular plantation you may consider city and country to be one body and as you give example of a just government to other company in the city, that be your bear witness in. jerusalem, so you may be content to give reason of your proceed and account of money levy over the country, for that be your bear witness in judaea. but the apostle diocese be enlarge far than jerusalem, far than judaea. samaria they be carry into samaria you must bear witness of i in samaria. belove when i have remember you who the samaritan be. man that have not renounce god but mingle other god with he. man that have not burn the law of god but make tradition of man equal to it. you will easy guess to who i apply the name of samaritan. now a jesuit have tell we. a ill intelligencer, i confess. but even his intelligencer, the devil himself, say true sometime, maldonate say. the samaritan be odious to the jew upon the same ground as heretic and schismatic to we, and they we know be odious to they, for mingle false god and false worship with the true. and if that be the character of a samaritan, we know who be the samaritan, who the heretic, who the schismatic of our time. in the high reproach to christ, the jew say: samaritanus, thou be a samaritan, and have a devil. in our just detestation of these man, we just fasten both those upon they. for as they delight in lie and fill the world with weekly rumour, they have a john 8.44 as they multiply assassinat upon prince and massacre upon people, they have a devil as they toss and tumble. and dispose kingdom. they have a devil math, 4.10 be the devil compliment. but as they mingle truth and falsehood together in religion, as they carry the word of god and the tradition of man in a even balance, samaritani they be, samaritan at first. christ forbid his apostle to go into any city of the samaritan after 10.5. they do preach in, many of they bear witness, first in jerusalem, act 8.25, and in judaea, give good satisfaction, especial to those of the household of the faithful in the city and country, but yet satisfy even those samaritan too. they will be satisfy what miracle you work in virginia and what people you have convert to the christian faith there. if we can as easy call natural effect miracle or casual accident, miracle or magical illusion, miracle as they do to make a miraculous draw of a tooth, a miraculous cut of a corn, or, as justus baronius say when he be convert to they, that he be miraculous cure of the cholique by stoop to kiss the pope foot. if we will pile up miracle so fast as pope john 22. do in the canonization of he wrought as many miracle as he resolve question, we may find miracle too. in truth, their great miracle to i be that they find man to believe their miracle. if they rely upon miracle, they imply a confession that they induce new doctrine, that that be old and receive needs. no miracle. if they require miracle because, though that be ancient doctrine, it be new, bring into those part. we have the confession of their jesuit acosta, that they do no miracle in those indies, and he assign very good reason why they be not necessary, nor to be expect there. but yet bear witness to these samaritan. in the other point, labour to give they satisfaction. in the other point of their charge. what heathen you have, convert to the faith, which be that which be intend in the next, which be the last branch. you be to be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. literal five. the apostle be to be. such witness for christ. be they so. do the apostle in person, preach the gospel over all the world. i know that it be not hard to multiply place of the father in confirmation of that opinion that the apostle do, actual and personal, preach the gospel in all nation, math 24.14. in their life christ say the gospel of the kingdom shall be preach in all the world. and there he tell the apostle that they shall see something do after that. therefore they shall live to it. so he say to they, mark 13.9, you shall be bring before ruler and king for my sake, but the gospel must first be publish among all nation. in one evangelist there be the commission. luke 24.47. preach in my name to all nation and in another, the execution of this commission mark 16.20. and they go and preach every where and after the apostle certify and return the execution of this commission, col. 1.5. the gospel be come and bring forth fruit to all the world. and upon those and such place. have some of the father be please to ground their literal exposition of a actual and personal preach of the apostle over all the world. but have they dream of this world which have be discover since, into which we dispute with perplexity and intricacy enough, how any man come at first or how any beast especial, such beast as man, be not likely to carry. they will never have doubt to have admit a figure in that luke, 1.1. the gospel be peach to all the world. for when augustus his decree go out, that all the world shall be tax, the decree and the tax go not certain into the west indies. when saint paul say, rom, 1.8, that their faith be speak of throughout the whole world, 16.19, and that their obedience be come abroad unto all man sure, the west indies have not hear of the faith and the obedience of the roman. but as in moses time they call the mediterranean sea the great sea, because it be the great that those man have then see. so in the apostle time they call that all the world which be know and trade in then and in all that they preach the gospel so that as christ, when he say to the apostle, mar vlt, vlt. i be with you unto the end of the world, can not intend that of they in person, because they do not last to the end of the world, but in a succession of apostolic man. so when he say the apostle shall preach he to all the world, it be of the succession too. those of our profession that go, you that send, they who go, do all a apostolical function. what action soever, have in the first intention thereof a purpose to propagate the gospel of christ. jesus, that be a apostolical action before the end of the world come, before this mortality shall put on immortality, rom 8.. before the creature shall be deliver of the bondage of corruption under which it groan, before the martyr under the altar shall be silence, before all thing shall be subdue to christ, his kingdom perfect and the last enemy, death, destroy. the gospel must be. preach to those man, to who you send to all man further and hasten you this, bless this joyful, this glorious consummation of all and happy reunion of all body to their soul by preach the gospel to those man, preach to they doctrinal, preach to they practical. enamore they with your justice and, as far as may consist, with your security, your civility, but inflame they with your godliness and your religion. bring they to love and reverence the name of that king that send man to teach they the way of civility in this world, but to fear and adore the name of that king of king that send man to teach they the way of religion for the next world. those amo^gst you that be old now shall pass out of this world with this great comfort that you contribute to the begin of that common wealth and of that church, though they live not to see the growth thereof to perfection. apollo water ^ cor 3.6, but paul plant, he that begin. the work, be the great man, and you that be young now may live to see the enemy as much impeach by that place, and your friend yea, child aswell accommodate in that place as any other you shall have. make this island, which be but as the suburb of the old world, a bridge, a gallery to the new, to join all to that world that shall never grow old, the kingdom of heaven. you shall add person to this kingdom and to the kingdom of heaven, and add name to the book of our chronicle and to the book of life, to end all as the orator which declaim in the presence of the roman emperor in their panegyriques: take that way to make those emperor. see what they be bind to do, to say in those public oration that those emperor have do so, for that increase the love of the subject to the prince to be so, tell that he have do those great thing, and then it convey a counsel into the prince to do they after as their way be to procure thing to be do by say they be, do so belove. i have take a contrary way, for when i, by way of exhortation, all this while have seem to tell you what shall be do by you, i have indeed but tell the congregation what have be do already. neither do i speak to move a wheel that stand still, but to keep the wheel in due. motion, nor persuade you to begin but to continue a good work, nor propose foreign but your own example to do still as you have do hitherto. for for that, that which be especial in my contemplation, the conversion of the people, as i have receive, so i can give this testimony- that of those person who have send in money and conceal their name, the great part, almost all, have limit their devotion and contribution upon that point: the propagation of religion and the conversion of the people for the building and beautify of the house of god and for the instruction and education of their young child. christ jesus himself be yesterday and to day and the same for ever, in the advance of his glory. be you. so too, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, here and hereafter, when time shall be no more, no more yesterday, no more to day. yet for ever and ever you shall enjoy that joy and that glory which no ill accident can attain to diminish or eclipse it. prayer, we return to thou again, o god, with praise and prayer as for all thy mercy, from before minute begin to this minute, from our election to this present beam of sanctification which thou have shed upon we now, and, more particular, that thou have afford we that great dignity to be this way witness of thy son christ jesus and instrument of his glory. look gracious and look powerful upon this body which thou have be now some year in building and compact together this plantation. look gracious upon the head of this body, our sovereign, and bless he with a good disposition to this work and bless he for that disposition. look gracious upon they who be as the brain of this body, those who, by his power, counsel and advise and assist in the government thereof. bless they with disposition to unity and concord and bless they for that disposition. look gracious upon they who be as eye of this body, those of the clergy who have any interest therein. bless they with a disposition to preach there, to pray here, to exhort every where for the advancement thereof. and bless they for that disposition. bless they who be the foot of this body who go thither, and the hand of this body who labour there, and they who be the heart of this body, all that be hearty affect and declare actual that heartiness to this action. bless they all with a cheerful disposition to that and bless they for that disposition. bless it so, in this calm, that when the tempest come, it may ride it out safe. bless it so with friend, now, that it may stand against enemy. hereafter, prepare thyself a glorious harvest there and give we leave to be thy labourer. that so the number of thy saint be fulfil. we may, with better assurance, join in that prayer. come, lord. jesus, come quick and so meet all in that kingdom which the son of god have purchase for we with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood, to which glorious son of god, etc. amen, john 10.22. and it be at jerusalem the feast of the dedication and it be winter, and jesus walk in the temple in salomon porch, saint basill in a sermon upon the 114. basill psalm, upon the like occasion as draw we together now the consecration of a church, make this the reason and the excuse of his late come thither to do that service. that he stay, by the way, to consecrate another church- i hope every person here have do so- consecrate himself, who be a temple of the holy ghost. before he come to assist or to testify the consecration of this place of the service of god, bern ser. 1. say, saint bernard, this festival belong to we because it be the consecration of that place which be we, but it be more proper, our festival because it be the consecration of ourselves to god. service for your soul. be holy by the inhabitation of god, holy spirit who dwell in they. your body. be holy by the inhabitation of those. sanctify these wall. be holy because the saint of god meet here within these wall to glorify he. but yet these place be not only consecrate and sanctify by your come, but to be sanctify also for your come. that so, as the congregation, sanctify the. place. the place may sanctify the congregation too. they must accompany one another. holy person and holy place. if man will wash sheep in the in the font, those sheep be not christen. if profane man or idolatrous man pray here after their way, their prayer be not sanctify by the place, neither if it be after pollute. do the place retain that sanctity which be this day to be derive upon it and to be imprint in it. our text settle we upon both these consideration: the holy place and the holy person. it be the feast of the dedication. there be the holiness of the place and the holy person be holiness itself, in the person of christ jesus who walk in the temple in salomon. porch. these two will be our two part, and the first of these we shall make up of these piece. first, we shall see a lawful use of feast, of festival day, and then of other feast than be institute by god himself. diverse be so, this be not. and three, not only a festival, solemnize of some one thing at some one time for the present, but a anniversary, return to that solemnity every year. and last, in that first part, this festival in particular, the feast of the dedication of the temple that sanctify the place that shall determine that part. in the second part, the holiness of the person. we shall carry your thought no far, but upon this, that even this holy person, jesus himself, will have recourse to this place, thus dedicate, thus sanctify, and upon this that he will do that especial, at such time as he may countenance and authorise the ordinance and institution of the church which have appoint this festival, and this say the text. he do in the winter. first, though it be winter, he come and walk in the porch- a little inconvenience keep he not off. and because it be winter, he walk in the porch, which be cover, not in the temple, which be open, so that here, with modesty and without scandal, he condemn not the favour of a man, health even in the temple. and it be at jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it be winter and jesus walk in the temple in salomon porch, in our first part, holy place, 1. part, we look first upon the time of our meeting there. holy day, the root of all those be the sabbath that god plant himself, even in himself, in his own rest from the creation. but the root and those branch which grow from that root be of the same nature and the same name, and therefore as well of the flower as of the root of a rose or of a violet, we will say: this be a violet, this be a rose. so as well to other feast of god institution as to the first sabbath. god give that name. he call those several feast which he institute sabbath, enjoin the same thing to be do upon they, inflict the same punishment upon they that break they 23. so that there be one morality that be the soul of all sabbath, of all festival, howsoever. all sabbath have a ceremonial part in they. yet there be a moral part that inanimate they all. they be element of ceremony but they animate with morality, and that morality be in they all rest. for if adam can name creature according to their nature, god can name his sabbath according to the nature of it, and sabbath be rest. it be a rest of two kind: our rest and god rest. our rest be the cessation from. labour. on those day, god rest be our sanctify of the day, for so in the religious sacrifice of noah, when he be come out of the ark, genes 8.. god be, say, to have smell the savour of rest upon those day. we rest from serve the world and god rest in our serve of. he and, as god, take a ten part of our good in tithe, but yet he take more too. he take sacrifice. so though, he take a seven part of our time in the sabbath, yet he take more too. he appoint other sabbath, other festival, that he may have more glory and we more rest for all wherein those two concur be sabbath. vacate and say god, psal 46.10. first vacate. rest from your bodily labour, distinguish the day and then come hither into the lord presence and worship the lord, your god. sanctify the day and in all the sabbath there be still a 23. and a humiliate bodily rest and spiritual sanctify of the day. holy day, then, that be day sepose for holy use and for the outward and public service of god. be in nature and in that moral law which be write in the heart of man that such day there must be, be moral, and this be moral too. that all thing in the service of god be do in order, and this also. that obedience be give to superior in those thing wherein they be superior, and therefore it be to the jew as well, moral to observe the certain day which god have. determine as to observe any at all, not that god commandment, limit the day, infuse a morality into those particular day, for morality be perpetual. and if that have be moral, it must have be so before and it must be so still. god determine the day, do not infuse, not induce a morality there, but it awaken a former morality that be a obedience to the commandment for that time which god have appoint, that for they, for this obedience and order be perpetual and so moral. we depart, therefore, from that error which those ancient heretic, the ebionite, begin and some labour to refresh in saint gregory time and which continue in practice, in some place of the world still to observe both the jew sabbath and the christian saturday and sunday too, because the sabbath be call exod 31.. for to that any of saint augustine answer will serve: either that it be call everlasting because it signify a everlasting rest. where be please to note, by the way, that holy day, sabbath be not only institute for order, but they have their mystery and their signification for holy day, col 2. 2.16, as the text, call they there and new moon and the sabbath be but shadow of thing to come, or else the sabbath be call everlasting to they, because it bind they everlasting and they may never intermit it as some other ceremony they may, but their sabbath bind not we. we depart from they who think so, and so we do from they who think we be bind to no festival at all, or at least to none but the sabbath. for god require as much service from we as from the jew and to they. he enlarge his sabbath and make they diverse, but those be of god, immediate institution, but all that the jew observe be not so, and that be our next consideration. festival institute by the church, mandato at first. when god be alone, it be. but let we, we, the trinity, make man this be. when god be as we may say in. but after god have, take his spouse, marry the church than it be cant. 2.15. do you take the little fox, you the church, for our vine have grape the vine be we, you and i say christ to the church and therefore do you look to they as well as i. the table of the law, god himself write and give. they write to moses. he leave none of that to, he not a power to make other law like those law, but for the tabernacle which concern the outward worship of god, that be. to be make by moses, exod 25.9. according to the pattern which god have show, he god have give the church a pattern of holy day in those sabbath which he himself institute. and according to the pattern the church have institute more and aug. they who disdain not the name of son of the church, refuse not to celebrate the day which be of the church institution. there be no immediate commandment of god for that holy day which mordechai by his letter establish, ester 9.23. but yet the jew undertake to do as mordechai have write to they. there be no such commandment for this holy day in the text, and yet that be observe as long as they have any be. and where the reason. remain the practice. may the jew do, we may institute new holy day, and not only transitory day for a present thanks give, for a present benefit, but anniverssary, perpetual memorial of god deliverance. and that be our next step, both the holy day which we name before, which be institute with out special commandment from god. be so that of mordechai, he command to be keep every year for two day, and this in the text, judas maccabeus command to be keep yearly for eight day, which be more than be appoint to any of the holy day institute by god himself for the festival alone, according to which pattern one bishop of rome ordain that the festival of the dedication of church shall be yearly celebrate. in those place, greg and another, extend the festival to eight day, at least at the first dedication thereof, if not every year. that god may not only be put into the possession of the place but settle in it. deut 31.19. god by moses, make the child of israel a song, because, as he say, howsoever they do by the law, they will never forget that song and that song shall be his witness against they. therefore, will god have we institute solemn memorial of his great deliverance, that if, when those day come about, we do not glorify he, that may aggravate our condemnation. every five of august, the lord rise up to hearken whether we meet to glorify he for his great deliverance of his. majesty. before he bless we with his presence in this kingdom and when he find we zealous in our thanks for that he give we far blessing. certain he be up as early every five of november to hearken if we meet to glorify he for that deliverance still, and if he shall find our zeal less than heretofore, he will wonder why god, principal his radical holy day, the sabbath, have a weekly return. his other sabbath institute by himself, and those which be institute by those pattern, that of mordechai, that of the maccabee and those of the christian church, they all return once a year. god will keep his court once a year and see whether we make our appearance as heretofore, that if not, he may know it. feast in general, feast institute by the church alone, feast in their yearly return and observation, have their use, and particular those feast of the dedication of church, which be proper and literal, the feast of this text. it be the feast of dedication. eucania, as it diminish not not god, eternity that we give he his certain time of invocation. god be not the less yesterday temple and to day and the same for ever, because we meet here to day and not yesterday. so it diminish not not god ubiquity and omnipresence that we give he his certain place for invocation. that be not the less true act 7.48 that the most high dwell not in temple. make with hand though god accept at our hand our dedication of certain place to his service and manifest his work more effectual, more energetical in those place then in any other. for when we pray our father which be in heaven, chrysostom, it be not say, saint chrysostom, that we deny he to be here where we kneel when we say that prayer, but it be that we acknowledge he to be there where he can grant and accomplish our prayer. it be as origen have very well express it, origen, that still we look for god in the best place. look for he as he hear our petition here in the best place of this world, in his house, in the church. look for he as he grant our petition in the best place of the next world, at the right hand and in the bosom of the father. deut 30.13. when moses say that the word of god be not beyond sea, he add: it be not so beyond sea, as that thou must not have it without send thither. when he say there it be not in heaven, he add: not so in heaven, as that one must go up before he can have it. the word of god be beyond sea, the true word, true preach in many true church there, but yet we have it here within these sea too. god be in heaven, but yet he be here within these wall too. and therefore the impiety of the manichean exceed all the gentile who conclude the god of the old testament to be a impotent, a unperfect god, because he command moses first to make he a tabernacle and then solomon to make he a temple, as though he need a house. god do not need a house, but man do need that. god shall have a house and therefore the first question that christ, first disciple ask of he be they will know his stand: house where he have. promise to be always within and where, at the ring of the bell, some body come to answer you, to take your errand, to offer your prayer to god, to return his pleasure in the preach of his word to you. the many and heavy law with which sacred and secular story abound, against the profanation of place appropriate to god service and that religious custom that pass almost through all civil nation, that a oath which be the bond between man and man, have the strong obligation, if that be, take in the church, in the presence of god. for such be the practice of rome towards her enemy tango arras, to make their vow of hostility in the church and at time of divine service, and such be their practice. still, they seal their treason in the sacrament. such be rome practice towards other, and such be the practice of other towards rome. for so hannibal say that his father, amilcar, swear he at the altar that he shall never be reconcile to rome. and such be your practice. still, as often as you meet here, you renew your band to god that you will never be reconcile to the superstition of rome. all these and all such as these, and such as these be infinite, heap up testimony that even in nature there be a disposition to apply and appropriate certain place to god service, and this impression in nature be illustrate in the law. as the time, so the place be distinguish. you shall keep my sabbath, levi 19.30. there be the time, and you shall reverence my sanctuary. there be the place, but that they may be reverence. that they may be sanctuary, they be to be sanctify and that be the, the dedication, even in those thing which accrue unto god and become he by another title. then, as he be lord of all by creation, that be by appropriation, by dedication to his use and service. there be a lay dedication and a ecclesiastical dedication. i hope the distinction of laiety and clergy, the word, scandalize no man. luther and caluin too, may have just cause to decline the word, as they do when so much be over-attributed to that clergy which they intend as that they be, so the lord portion as that the world have no portion in they, and yet they have the great portion of the world. and how little. soever, they have to do with god. yet no state, no king may have any thing to do with they. but as long as we declare that by the laiety we intend the people glorify god in their secular calling and by the clergy person sepose by his ordinance for spiritual function, the laiety no far remove than the clergy, the clergy no far entitle than the laiety in the blood of christ jesus, neither in the effusion of that blood upon the cross nor in the participation of that blood in the sacrament. and that a equal care in clergy and laiety of do the duty of their several calling give they a equal interest in the joy and glory of heaven. i hope no man be. scandalize with the name. the lay dedication, then, be the voluntary surrender of this piece of ground. thus build to god. for we must say, as saint peter say to ananias, act 5.4: while it remain, be that not your own. and now, when that be raise, save that there be a purpose from the beginning to appropriate it to this holy use. may you not, till this hour, have, make this room your hall if you will, but this be your dedication that you have cheerful. pursue your first holy purpose and deliver now into the hand of this servant of god, the right reverend father, the bishop of this see, a place to be present to god for you, by he not misbecome the majesty of the great god who be please to dwell thus among we. what be spend in salomon temple, be not tell we what be prepare before it be begin. be such a sum as certain if all the christian king that be will send in all that they have at once to any one service, all will not equal that sum. they give there till. they who have the over-seeing thereof complain of the abundance and proclaim a abstinence. yet there be one who give more than all. they, for christ, say the poor widow give more than all the rest because she give all she have. there be a way of give more than she give. and i, who, by your favour, be no stranger to the begin of this work and a often refresher of it to your memory, and a poor assistant in lay the first stone, the material stone, as i be now a poor assistant again in this lay of this first formal stone, the word and sacrament, and shall ever desire to be so in the service of this place, i, i say, can true testify that you speak of the whole society together, of the public stock, the public treasury, the public revenue. you give more than the widow. who give all, for you give more than all. a stranger shall not intermeddle with our joy. as solomon say, stranger shall not know how ill we be provide for such a work when we begin it, nor with what difficulty we have wrestle in the way. but stranger shall know, to god glory, that you have perfect a work of full, three time as much charge as you propose for it at beginning. so bountiful do god bless and prosper intention to his glory with. enlarge your heart within and open the heart of other abroad, and this be your dedication and that which, without prejudice and for distinction, we call a lay dedication, though from religious heart and hand there be another dedication that we have. call ecclesiastical appoint by god, so as god speak in the ordinance and in the practice of his church, haereditary king be beget and conceive the natural way. but that body, which be so beget of the blood of king, be not a king, no, nor a man. till there be a soul infuse by god, here be a house, a child, conceive, we may say bear of christian parent, of person, religious dispose to god glory, but yet that be to receive another influence, a inanimation, a quicken by another consecration hold even in the child of christian parent. when they be bear, they must be bear again by baptism. when this place be thus give by you, for it must be give again to god by he who receive it of you, it must there seem a necessity to be, imply because even in nature there be a consecration of holy place. jacob, in his journey, gen 28.20, before the law, consecrate even that stone which he set up in intention to build god a house there in the time of the law, num 7.1. this feast of dedication, be in practice, first in the tabernacle. that and all that appertain to it be anoint and sanctify. so be salomon temple. after so be that which be re-edify after their return from babylon, and so be. this in the text: after the heathen have defile and profane the altar thereof and a new one be erect by judas maccabeus. thus in nature, thus in law and thus far, thus in the gospel too, that as sure as we be that the people of god have material church in the apostle first time, so sure we be that those place have a sanctity in they. if that place of saint paul, 1 cor 11.22, despise you, the church of god, be to be understand of the local, of the material church and not of the congregation. you see, there be a rebuke for the profanation of the place and consequent a sanctity in the place, but assoon as the church come evident by the favour. of prince to have liberty to make law and power to see they practise it. be never pretermit to consecrate the place before that we find a ordinance by pope hyginus: he be within 150.. after christ and the eight bishop of that see, after saint peter, even of particular in the consecration, but after athanasius, in his apology to constantius, athanas make that protestation for all christian that they never meet in any church till it be consecrate. and constantine the emperor, lest he shall be at any time unprovided of such a place, as we read in the ecclesiastical story, in all his war, carry about with he a tabernacle which be consecrate in nature, in the law, in the gospel, in precept, in practice. these consecration be? establish? this they do, but to what use do they consecrate? they not to one use only, and therefore it be a frivolous contention whether church be for preach or for pray, but if consecration be a kind of christen of the church and that at the christen it have a name. we know what name god have appoint for his house. my house shall be call the house of prayer. and how impudent and inexcusable a falsehood be that, in bellarmine, that the lutheran and calvinist do admit church for sermon and they dislike that they shall be for prayer, when, as caluin himself, who may seem to be more subject to this reprehension than luther, for there be no such liturgy in the. caluinists church, as in the lutheran, yet in that very place which bellarmine city say, and for sing in church, which in that place of caluin can be only mean of psalm, for it be of that manner of sing which be former in use in the eastern church s ambrose in his time, bring into the church of milan, and so it be derive over the western church. which be the modulation and sing of versicles and antiphons and the like this sing say caluin, be in use among the apostle themselves: l 3.20 @ 32.. it be a most holy and most profitable institution, still consider consecration to be a christen of the place, and though we find they often call for our sacrifice of prayer. and of praise and of the merit of christ, and often call church in respect of congregation for preach, and often call for preserve, with respect and honour, the body of martyr and other saint of god there bury, and often, often, by other name: dominica, basilica and the like. yet the name that god give to his house be not nor sacramentarium, but the house of prayer, and therefore, without prejudice to the other function too. for as there be a upon i if i preach not myself, so may that be multiply upon any who will draw that holy ordinance of god into a dis-estimation or into a slackness. let we never intermit that duty to present ourselves to god in these place, though, in these. place there be, then, no other service but common prayer. for than do the house answer to that name which god have give it? if it be a house of prayer, thus then be these place to receive a double dedication: a dedication which be a donation from the patron, a dedication which be a consecration from the bishop, for to his person and to that rank in the hierarchy of the church, the most ancient canon limit it, and to those purpose which we have speak of, of which prayer be so far from be none as that there be none above it. a little shall be say before we shut up this part of the manner, the form of consecration in which, in the primitive church, assoon as consecration come into free use. they be full of ceremony and many of those ceremony derive from the jew and not unlawful for that. the ceremony of the jew, which have their foundation in the prefiguration of christ and be type of he, be unlawful after christ be come because the use of they then employ a denial or a doubt of his be come. but those ceremony which, though the jew use, they have their foundation in nature as bow of the knee, lift up the eye and hand, and many, very many other which either testify their devotion that do. they or exalt their devotion. that see, they do be not therefore exclude the church because they be in use among the jew, that pope who we name. before hyginus the eight, after saint peter, he institute ne basilica, that no church be consecrate without a mass. if this must bind we to a mass of the present roman church, it be hard, and yet not very hard, true, for they be easy. have but that word. mass be in saint ambrose, in saint augustine, in some very ancient counsel, and sure intend nothing to this purpose but the service, the common prayer of the church then in use there. and when the bishop panigarola say in his sermon upon whitsunday that the holy ghost find the bless virgin and the apostle at mass, i presume he mean no more then that they be meet at such public prayer, as at those time they may make sure pope clemens and pope hyginus mean the same thing when one say and the other one say, let the consecration be with a mass, the other with divine service, the liturgy, the divine service be then the mass, in a word, a constant form of consecration. we find none that go through our ritual, the ceremony be still more or less, as they be more or less obnoxious or may be subject to scandalize or to be misinterpret, and therefore i be not here either to direct or so much as to remember that which appertain to the manner of these consecration. only in concur in that which be the soul of all humble and hearty prayer that god will hear his servant in this place. i shall not offend to say that i be sure my zeal be inferior to none and more. i say not of the first part, the holy place, and but a little more of the other, though at first it be propose for a equal part the holy person, that at the feast of the dedication, jesus walk in the temple in salomon porch, 2. part. in this second part we do not spread the word nor shed our consideration upon many particular. the first be jesus, in that even jesus himself have recourse to this holy place in the new jerusalem in heaven. there be no temple, apo 21.22. i see no temple there. say saint john, for the lord, god almighty, and the lamb be the temple of it in heaven, where there be no danger of fall, there be no need of assistance. here the temple be call gnazar 2.. paral 4.9. that be a helper, the strong that be need the help of the church, and it be call by saint hierom, psal 78.69, a place that be not only make holy by consecration but that make other holy by god in it, and therefore christ himself, who person and presence may consecrate the will yet make his often repair to this holy place. not that he need this subsidy of local holiness in himself, but that his example may bring other who do need it and those who do not, and that even his own preach may have the benefit and the blessing of god. ordinance in that place, he say of himself, math 26.. and, as in the act, the angel that have deliver the apostle out of prison, send they to church, act 5. the apostle be send to preach, but to preach in the temple, in the place appropriate and consecrate for that holy use and employment. he come to this place and he come at those time which no immediate command of god but the church have institute, say the text: it be the feast of the dedication. we know what dedication this be: that of solomon. be much great. a temple build where none be before that of esdras at the return, be much great than this. a entire reedification of that demolish temple where it be before. this be but a zealous restore of a altar in. the temple which have be profane by the gentile, the jew themselves throw down and erect a new and dedicate that salomon dedication be call a feast, 2 chr 5.3. a holy day by the very same name that the feast of unleavened bread and the feast of the tabernacle be call so often in scripture, ezra 6.16, which be kag the dedication of ezra be sufficient, declare to be a solemn feast too. but neither of these feast, though of far great dedication, be anniversarie, neither command to be keep every year. and yet this, which be so much lesser than the other, the church have put under that obligation to be keep every year. and christ himself contemn not, condemn not, dispute not the institution of. the church. but as for matter of doctrine, he send even his own disciple to they who sit in moses chair. so, for matter of ceremony, he bring even his own person to the celebrate, to the authorise, to the countenance of the institution of the church and rest in that. now it be winter, say the text: hiems christ come, hiems though it be winter, so small a inconvenience, keep he not off, belove it. be not always cold upon sunday, then upon saturday, nor at any time. cold in the chapel, then in westminster hall. a thrust: keep some off in summer and cold in winter. and there be more of both these in other place where, for all that, they be more content to be. remember that peter be warm himself. and he deny christ. they who love a warm bed, let it be a warm study, let it be a warm profit better than this place. they deny christ in his institution. that therefore, which christ say: pray that your flight be not in the winter, mat 24.20- nor upon the sabbath we may apply thus: pray that upon the sabbath, i tell you at first what be sabbath: the winter. make you not fly, not abstain from this place. put off thy shoe, exod 35.. say god to moses, for the place be holy ground when god, ordinance by his church, call you to this holy place. put off those shoe, all those earthly respect of ease or profit. christ come. hiems, hiems, but then hiems because it be winter. he do walk in salomon porch, which be cover, not in in that part of the temple which be open and expose to the weather. we do not say that infirm and weak man may not favour themselves in a due care of their health in these place, that he who be not able to raise himself must always stand at the gospel or bow the knee at the name of jesus or stay some whole hour altogether uncover here, if that increase infirmity of that kind. and yet, court of prince, be strange, bethesdae, how quick they recover any man that be bring into that pool, how much a little change of air do, and how well they. can stand and stand bare many hour in the privy chamber, that will melt and flow out into rheum and catarrh in a long gospel here. but a man may favour himself in these place. but yet this excuse, not the irreverent manner which have overtake we in all these place, that any master may think himself to have the same liberty here as in his own house, or that that servant that never put on his hat in his master presence all the week, on sunday, when he and his master be in god presence, shall have his hat on perchance before his master. christ shall make master and servant equal, but not yet, not here, nor ever equal to himself. how ever they become equal to. one another. god service be not a continual martyrdom, that a man must be here and here in such a posture and such a manner, though he die for it. but god house be no ordinary neither, where any man may pretend to do what he will and every man may do what any man do. christ sleep in a storm. i dare not make that general. let all do so. christ favour himself in the church. i dare not make that general. neither to make all place equal or all person equal in any place. it be time to end basil saint basill himself, as acceptable as he be to his auditory, in his second sermon upon the 14. psalm. take knowledge that he have preach a hour and therefore break off. i see it be a compass that all age have think sufficient. but as we have contract the consideration of great temple to this lesser chapel, so let we contract the chapel to ourselves. let this be the feast of the dedication of ourselves too. god christ call himself a john 2.19. destroy this temple. 1 cor 3.16 and 6.19, and saint paul call we so twice. know you not that you be the temple of the holy ghost? signify a renew aug. and saint augustine say that in his time if any man put on a new garment he call it by that name. much more. be it so if we renew in ourselves the image of god and put off the old man and put on the lord jesus christ. this be true to dedicate, to renew ourselves nazian, and so nazian in a sermon or oration upon the like occasion, as this calls our turn to god in a true repentance, or renew our dedication. let i charge your memory, but with this note more, that when god forbid david the build of a house because he be a man of blood, at that time david have not imbrue his hand in vriahs blood, nor shed any blood, but lawful in just war. yet even that make he uncapable of this favour to provide god a house, some calling be. in their nature more obnoxious and more expose to sin than other, be accompany with more tentation and so retard we more in holy duty. and therefore, as there be particular sin that attend certain place, certain age, certain complexion and certain vocation, let we watch ourselves in all those and remember that not only the high degree of those sin, but any thing that conduce thereunto profane the consecration and dedication of this temple ourselves to the service of god. it annihilate our repentance and frustrate our former reconciliation to he almighty god. work in you a perfect dedication of yourselves at this time that so receive it from hand, dedicate to god he who, holy office this be, may present acceptable this house to god in. your behalf and establish a assurance to you that god will be always present with you and your succession in this place. amen, psalm 11.3. if the foundation be destroy, what can the righteous do? we be still in the season of mortification, in lent, but we search no long for text of mortification. the almighty hand of god have shed and spread a text of mortification over all the land. the last sabbath day be his sabbath. who enter then into his everlasting rest? be this our sabbath to enter into a holy and thankful acknowledgement of that rest which god afford. we in continue to we our foundation. for if foundation be destroy, what can the righteous do? i scarce know any word in the word. of god, in which the original be more ambiguous and consequent, the translation more various and therefore necessary, also the exposition more diverse. then, in these word, there be one thing in which all agree, that be the argument and purpose and scope of the psalm, and then in what sense the word of the text may conduce to the scope of the psalm. we rest in this translation, which our church have accept and authorize and which agree with the first translation. know to we, by way of exposition, that be the chalde paraphrase: if foundation be destroy, what can the righteous do, the church of god, ever delight herself in a holy officiousness in the commemoration of martyr. almost all their solemn and extraordinary meeting and congregation in the primitive church be for that, for the honourable commemoration of martyr, and for that they come soon to institute and appoint certain liturgy, certain office, as they call they, certain service in the church which shall have reference to that, to the commemoration of martyr as we have in our book of common prayer, certain service for marriage, for burial and for such other holy celebration. and in the office and service of a martyr the church do use this. psalm, this psalm which be in general a protestation of david that, though he be so vehement, pursue by saul as that all that wish he well say to his soul, fly as a bird to the mountain. as it be. in the first verse, though, he see that the wicked have bend their bow and make ready their arrow upon the string that they may privy, shoot at the upright in heart, as it be. in the second verse, though, he take it almost as grant that foundation be destroy. and then what can the righteous do? as it be in the three verse, which be our text. yet in this distress he find what to do. for as he begin in the first verse, in thou lord put i my trust. so, after he have pass the enumeration of his danger in the second and three verse, in the four he pursue it as he begin: the lord be in his holy temple, the lord throne be in heaven, and in the five he fix it. thus: the lord try the righteous. he may suffer much to be do for their trial, but the wicked and he that love violence, his soul hate. this then be the syllogism, this be the argumentation of the righteous man in collateral thing, in circumstantial thing, in thing that be not fundamental. a righteous man, a constant man, shall not be shake at all, not at all scandalize, that be true. but then, in a second place, sometime it come to that that foundation be destroy, and what can the righteous do then? why, even then, this be a question not of desperation that nothing can be do, but of consultation with god. what shall be do? i know, say david, i shall not be, and thou know, o god, i have not be. move with ordinary trial. not though my friend. have dis-avowed i and bid i fly to the mountain as a bird, not though my enemy. prepare and prepare arrow and shoot and shoot privy, bestow their labour and their cost and their wit to ruin i. yet these have not move. i, because i have fix myself upon certain foundation: confidence and assurance of deliverance from thou. but if, o lord, i see these foundation destroy, if thou put i into my enemy hand, if thou make they thy sword, if their fury draw that sword and then thy almighty arm sinew, even with thy own indignation, strike with that sword, what can i, how righteous soever i be, do so, then for the explication and application of these word, there will need no more but to spread they by way of paraphrase upon these three: consideration: first, that the righteous be bold as a lion, not easy shake, but then foundation themselves may be destroy, and so he may be shake if he. be, yet he know what to do or where to ask counsel. for these be not word of desperation but of consultation. if foundation be destroy, etc. 1. part first. then we fix ourselves upon this consideration that the prophet in propose this thus: if foundation be destroy, intimate, pregnant, that except there be danger of destroy foundation, it be the part of the righteous man, the godly man, to be quiet. study to be quiet, say the apostle, study 1 thess 4.11. that be a action of the mind. and then say the vulgate edition, labour to be quiet and labour be a action of the body. indeed, it be the proper business of the mind and body too, of thought and action too, to be quiet. and yet, alas, how many break their sleep in the night about thing that disquiet they in the day too, and trouble themselves in the day about thing that disquiet they all night too. we disquiet ourselves too much in be over tender, over sensible, of imaginary injury, say the moral man. let many injury pass over for seneca plaera, he that know not of a injury or take no knowledge of it. for the most part have no injury, say he. they that be too inquisitive, what other man say of they? they disquiet themselves for that which other will but whisper they publish, and therefore that which he add there for moral and civil matter hold in a good proportion in thing of a more divine. nature in such part of the religious worship and service of god as concern not. we must not too jealous, suspect, not too bitter, condemn, not too peremptory, conclude that what soever be not do as we will have it do or as we have see it do in former time, be not well do, for there be a large latitude and by necessity of circumstance, much may be admit and yet no foundation destroy and till foundation be destroy, the righteous shall be quiet. now, this shall not prepare, this shall not incline any man to such a indifferency as that. it shall be all one to he, what become of all thing, all one, whether we have one or two, or ten or no religion, or that he shall not be awake and active and diligent in assist truth and resist all approach of error. for god have say of all, into who hand he have commit power. you be god. now, they be not god but idol if, as the prophet say, psal 115.6, they have eye and see, not ear, and hear not, hand and strike not. nay, as he add there, if they have nose and smell not, if they smell not out. a mischievous practice before it come to execution. for god, eye be upon the way of man, job 33.21. and he see all his go. those who be in the number of they, of who god have say they be, god must have their eye upon the way of man and not upon their end, only upon the path of mischief and not upon the bed of mischief, only upon the actor of mischief and not upon the act. only god eye see our way, say david too, that be, he can see they when he will. but there be more in the other prophet. god eye be open upon all our way, jere 32.19. always open, and he can choose but see, so that a wilful shut of the eye, a wink, a connivency, be not a assimilation to god. and then abac, 1.13: god eye. be pure, then to behold evil and they can look upon iniquity, so that, in a indifferency whether time or person be good or bad, there be not this assimulation to god, hebr 4.13 again, all thing be naked and open to the eye of god, so that in the disguise and palliate and extenuate the fault of man, there be not this assimilation to god. thus far they falsify god word who have say they be god, for they be idol and not god. if they have eye and see, not so be it also in the consideration of the ear too. for as david say, psal 94.9- shall not he that plant the ear hear? so we may say: shall he upon who god have plant a ear, be deaf. god ear, be so open, so tender, so sensible of any motion, psal 39.12, as that david form, one prayer. thus, o lord, hear my tear, he put the office of the eye too upon the eare. and then, if the magistrate stop his ear with wool, with staple bribe, profitable bribe, and with cyvet in his wool, perfume of pleasure and preferment in his bribe, he falsify god word who have say: they be god, for they be idol and not god if they have ear and hear not. and so it be also of the hand too, in all that job suffer. he say no more, but that the hand of god have, touch he, but touch he. in respect of that he can have do. for when job say to man, why persecute you? i job 19.22, as god, he mean, as god can do so vehement, so ruinous, so destructive, so irreparable. there be no phrase often in the scripture then that god deliver his people. in the hand of moses and the hand of david and the hand of the prophet, all their ministerial office be call the hand. and therefore, as david pray to god that he will pull his hand out of his bosom and strike, so must we ever exhort the magistrate that he will pluck his hand out of his pocket and forget. what be there and execute the cause, commit to he, for as we at last shall commend our spirit into the hand of god. god have commend our spirit, not only our civil peace, but our religion too, into the hand of the magistrate. and therefore, when the apostle say, study to be quiet, it be not quiet in the blindness of the eye, nor quiet in the deafness of the ear, nor quiet in the lameness of the hand. the just discharge of the duty of our several place be no disquiet to any man. but when private man will spend all their thought upon their superior action, this must necessary disquiet they, for they be off of their own centre and they be out of their own distance and compass and they can possible discern the end to which their superior go. and to such a jealous man, when his jealousy be not a tenderness towards his own action, which be a holy and a wholesome jealousy, but a suspicion of his superior action. to this man every wheel be a drum and every drum a thunder and every thunder-clapp a dissolution of the whole frame of the world. if there fall a break tile from the house, he think foundation be destroy. if a crazy woman or a disobedient child or a needy servant fall from our religion, from our church, he think the whole church must necessary fall. when all this, while there be no foundation destroy, and till foundation be destroy, the righteous shall be quiet. hence have we just occasion first to condole among ourselves who, for matter of foundation, profess one and the same religion, and then to complain of our adversary who be of another. first that among ourselves, for matter not doctrinal, or if doctrinal yet not fundamental, only because we be subdivide in diverse name, there shall be such exasperation, such exacerbation, such vociferation, such eiulation, such defamation of one another, as if all foundation be destroy. who will not tremble to hear those infernal word speak by man to man of one and the same religion, fundamental as indiabolificata, perdiabolificata and superdiabolificata? that the devil and all the devil in hell, and worse than the devil, be in their doctrine and in their divinity. when god in heaven know if their own uncharitableness do not exclude he, there be room enough for the holy ghost on both and on either side, in those fundamental thing which be unanime, profess by both. and yet every mart we see more book write by these man against one another, then by they both for christ. but yet, though this torrent of uncharitableness among they be too violent, yet it be within some bank, though it be a sea, and too tempestuous it be. limit within some bound. the point be certain: know limit and do not grow upon. we every year and day, but the uncharitableness of the church of rome towards we all be not a torrent, nor it be not a sea, but general flood, a universal deluge that swallow all the world. but that church and churchyard, that town and suburb themselves and those that depend upon they and will not allow possibility of salvation to the whole ark, the whole christian church, but to one cabin in that ark, the church of rome. and then deny we this salvation, not for any positive error that ever they charge we to affirm, not because we affirm any thing that they deny, but because we deny some thing which they, in their afternoon, be come to affirm if they be righteous, right and just. deal man, they will not raise such duste and then blind man eye with this dust of their own, raise in thing that concern no foundation. it be true that all heresy do concern foundation. there be no heresy to be call little great heresy, proceed from thing in appearance, small at first, and seem to look but towards small matter. there be great heresy that be but verbal heresy in some word, that great storm that shake the state and the church in the council of ephesus and come to faction and commotion in the secular part and to exautoration and excommunication among the bishop, so far as that the emperor come to declare both side to be heretic. all this be for a error in a word, in the word deipara, whether the bless virgin marie be to be call the mother of god or no, there have be verbal heresy and heresy that be but syllabicall little praeposition make heresy. not only state-praepositions, precedency and prerogative of church above church occasion, great schism, but literal praeposition, praeposition in grammar occasion, great heresy. that great heresy of the acephali against which bend himself in his book, be ground in the preposition in, they will confess, but not in, that christ be make of two nature but that he do not consist in two nature. and we all know what difference have be raise in the church in that one point of the sacrament by these three. preposition, con and sub. there have be great heresy, but verbal but syllabicall, and as great but literal, the great heresy that ever be, that of the arrian, be but in one letter. so then, in heresy there be nothing to be call little, nothing to be suffer. it be excellent say of heretic, though, by one who, though not then declare nestorius be then a heretic in his heart. it be a fault not only to be too indulgent to a heretic, but to be too compassionate of a heretic, too, sorry for a heretic. it be a fault to say, alas, let he alone, he be but a heretic, but to say, alas, hope well of he till you be better. sure that he be a heretic, be charitable, speak, god know. the sharp and sour name of heretic be too soon let loose and too fast spread in many place of the world. we see that in some of the first catalogue that be make of heretic man be register for heretic that have but expound a place of scripture, otherwise then that place have be former expound, though there be no harm in that new exposition. and then when once that infamous name of heretic be fasten upon a man, nothing be too heavy for any thing be believe of. that man, and from thence it be without question that we find so many so absurd, so senseless opinion impute to those man who be then call heretic, as can not in truth with any possibility fall into the imagination or fancy of any man, much less be doctrinal or dogmatical- deliver and then upon this there issue law from particular state against particular heresy, that trouble those state then, as namely against the arrian or macedonian and such, and in a short time these law come to be extend to all such opinion as the passion of succeed, time call heresy and at last the roman church have constitute that monopoly that she only shall declare what shall be heresy and have declare that to be heresy. which oppose or retard the dignity of that church. now they call in all those sentence of father or counsel that mention heresy and they call in all those law which punish heresy. and whereas these father and counsel and state intend by heresy, opinion that destroy foundation, they bend all these against every point which may endamage not the church of god but the church of rome, nor the church of rome but the court of rome, nor the court of rome but the kitchen of rome, not for the heart but for the belly, not the religion but the policy, not the altar but the exchequer of rome. but the righteous look to foundation before he will be scandalize himself or condemn another when they call. saint peter, their first pope, and be remember how he deny his master. say then that be but a act of infirmity, not of infidelity, and there be no foundation destroy in that. we press not that evidence against saint peter. we forbear and we be quiet when we charge some of saint peter imaginary successor, some of their pope with actual and personal sacrifice to idol, some with subscribe to formal heresy with their own hand, many with so enormous a ill life as that their own author will say that for many year together there live not one pope of who salvation any hope can be conceive. and they answer to all this that all these be but personal fault and destroy no foundation. we can be content to bury their fault with their person and we be quiet when we remember they. how many of the father excuse officious lie and think some kind of lie to be no sin. how very many of they herd in the heresy of the millenarian that the saint of god shall enjoy a thousand year of temporal felicity in this world after their resurrection, before they ascend into heaven. and that they say to all this, the father say these thing before the church have decree any thing to the contrary, and till that it be lawful for any man to say or think what he will. we do not load the memory of those, bless father, with any heavy press, but we be quiet yet we can choose. but tell they that, tell we this: that they have take a hard way to make that say true, that all thing be grow dear in our time, for they have make salvation dear. threescore year ago a man may have be save at half the price he can now. threescore year ago he may have be save for believe the apostle creed. now it will cost he the trent creed too. evermore they will press for all and yield nothing. and there be indeed their specification, there be their character, that be their catholic, their universal, to have all, as in athanasius, his time, when. the emperor, press he to afford the arrian one church in alexandria where he be bishop, and he ask, but one church in antioch where the arrian prevail, not doubt. but he shall draw more to the true church in antioch than they shall corrupt in alexandria. yet this will not be grant. it will not be grant at rome. if we shall ask a church, for a church. in a word, we charge they with uncharitableness and charity. be without all controversy, a foundation of religion that they will so peremptory, exclude we from heaven for matter that do not appertain to foundation. for if they will call all foundation that that church have or do or shall decree, we must learn our catechism upon our deathbed. and inquire for the article of our faith when we be go out of the world, for they may have decree something that morning. no one, author of they, deny pope joane till they discern the consequence that by confess a woman pope, they shall disparage that succession of bishop which they pretend. and this succession must be foundation. no author of our side deny saint peter be at rome till we discern the consequence that upon his personal be there they ground a primacy in that sea, and this primacy must be foundation. much may be admit in case of indifferency, even in the nature of the thing, much in case of necessity for the importance of circumstance, much in case of conveniency for the supply of. boisterous and for the becalm of tempestuous humour, but when every thing must be call foundation, we shall never know where to stop, where to consist. if we shall believe their, their unbloody sacrifice in the mass, if we do not believe their too, that there be a power in that church to sacrifice the blood of king, we shall be say to be defective in a fundamental article. if we shall admit their metaphysic, their transcendent transubstantiation, and admit their chimique, their purgatory fire, and their mythology and poetry, their apparition of soul and spirit, they will bind we to their mathematics too, and they will not let we be save, except we will reform our almanac to their ten day and reform our clock to their four and twenty. for who can tell when there be a end of article of faith in a arbitrary and in a occasional religion? when then this prophet say: if foundation be destroy, what can the righteous do? he mean that till that the righteous shall be quiet, except it be in fundamental article of faith. ourselves shall not be so bitter towards one another. our adversary shall not. be so uncharitable against we all and far. we need not extend this first consideration. the second be: 2. part to surpay some such foundation as fall within the frailty and suspicion and possibility of this text that they may be destroy. for when the prophet say, if they be, they may be, now say the law. when we speak of foundation, we intend a house, and here we extend this house to four consideration, for in four house have every one of we a dwelling for. first, the church be a house, it be god house and in that house we be of the household of the faithful if, as it be testify of moses, we be faithful in all his house. hebr 3.5. as servant you. see there be a faithfulness require in every man, in all the house of god, not in any one room. a disposition require to do good to the whole church of god, every where and not only at home. second: the commonwealth, the state, the kingdom be a house, and this be that which be call so often israel, the house of israel, the state, the government of the jew, and in this house god dwell as well as in the other, in the state as well as in the church. for these word the lord have choose zion, he have desire it for a habitation. psa 132.13 be speak of the whole body, church and state. three, there be domi^liu^, a house to dwell in and to dwell with a family. and in this house, god dwell too. for, as david say, of the building, we may say of the dwelling, ^^cept the lord (@) the house- psal 127.1- they labour in vain. so, except the lord dwell in the house, it be a desolate habitation. and then, last, there be a house which be the master of the house, for as every man be a little world, so every man be his own house and dwell in himself. and in this house, god dwell too. for the apostle seem so much to delight himself in that metaphor as that he repeat it almost in all his that the holy ghost dwell in we. now, of all these four, house that house which have no wall but be spread over the face of the whole earth, the church. and that house which, with we, have no other wall but the sea, the state, the kingdom. and that house which be wall with dry earth, our dwell house, our family. and this house which be wall with dry earth, this loam of flesh, ourself. of all these four house, those three of which and in which we be, and this four which we ourself be. god be the foundation, and so foundation can be destroy, but as though the common foundation of all building be (@) earth. yet we make particular foundation for particular building of stone or brick or pile as the soil require. u^^. shall we also be consider such particular foundation of these four house as may fall within the frailty and suspicion, within the possibility and danger of the text of be destroy of the first house, then, which be the church, the foundation be christ, other foundation can no man lay. 1 cor 3.11. then that which be (@), which be jesus christ, say saint augustine, eccles c 16.. we do not say that our church be catholic, therefore, because optatus say so and because ambrose say so, and yet optatus and ambrose, the father be good witness. neither do we say it, say he, because some synod and counsel. of man of our own religion have, say it be catholic. and yet a harmony of confession be good evidence, say he. we call it not catholic because so many miracle be wrought in it, for we oppose god. many miraculous deliverance of this state and church to all, their imaginary miracle of rome, say still that father, all this do not make our church catholic. nay, all this do not declare it to be catholic. all these be no infallible mark thereof, but only this one, say he, because the lord jesus himself be the foundation of this church. but may not this be subject to reason, to various disputation, whether we have that foundation or no? it may, but that will go far in the clear. thereof, which the same father say in another book, eccles, cat c 25.. nothing be safe for the find of the catholic church, then, to prefer authority before my reason to submit and captivate my reason to authority. this the roman church, pretend to embrace but apish like a ape: it kill with embrace for it. evacuate the right authority. the authority that they obtrude be the decretal of their own bishop. the authority which saint augustine, literal and express, declare himself to ^eane, be the authority of the scripture. christ, then, that be the doctrine of christ, be the foundation of this first house, the church. 2 chro, 3.3 say the vulgate edition. these be the foundation that solomon lay, and then our translation have it these. be the thing in which solomon be instruct. one call it foundation, the other instruction. all be one, the instruction of christ, the doctrine of christ, the word, the scripture of christ be the foundation of this house. for when the apostle say- ephes 2.20- christ, jesus himself, be the chief corner stone. yet he add: there you be build upon the prophet and apostle. for the prophet and apostle have their part in the foundation, in the lay, though not in the be of the foundation, the wall of the city. apoc 21. 21.14 say saint john have twelve foundation and in they the name of the twelve apostle, but still in that place they be apostle of the lamb, still they have relation to christ, for they who, by inspiration of the holy ghost, write of christ and so make up the body of the scripture, have their part too in this foundation. beside these, it be say, in the build of the material temple 2, reg 5.17- the king command and they bring great stone and costly stone and hew stone to lay the foundation of the house. the care of the king, the labour of man conduce to the foundation. and beside this, in that place of the revelation, the foundation of the wall be say to be garnish with all manner of precious stone, garnish but not make of that kind of precious stone. so then, salomon, hew stone and costly stone may, in a fair accommodation, be understand to be the determination and resolution, canon and decree of general counsel and saint john. garnishment of precious stone may, in a fair accommodation, be understand to be the learned and laborious, the zealous and the pious commentary and exposition of the father for counsel, and father assist the foundation, but the foundation itself be christ himself in his word, his scripture, and then, certain they love the house best, that love the foundation best, not they that. impute to the scripture such a obscurity as shall make they in-intelligible to we, or such a defect as shall make they insufficient in themselves. to deny we the use of scripture in our vulgar translation, and yet to deny we the use of they in the original tongue too. to tell we: we must not try controversy by our english or our latin bible, nor by the hebrew bible, neither to put such a majesty upon the scripture as that a lay man may not touch they, and yet to put such a diminution upon they as that the writing of man shall be equal to they. this be a wrinch, a shrink, a sink, a undermine, a destroy of foundation, of the foundation of this first. house, which be the church, the scripture, enter we now into a survey of the second house, the state, the kingdom, the commonwealth, and of this house, the foundation be the law. and therefore saint hierome refer this text, in a literal and primary signification, to that to the law. for so, in his commentary upon the psalm, he translate this text, he make the evacuate of the law, this destroy of, say, the law itself. the law be the mutual, the reciprocal surety between the state and the subject. the law be my surety to the state that i shall pay my obedience, and the law be the state surety to i that i shall enjoy my protection. and therefore, therein do the jew just exalt themselves. above all other nation, that god be come so much near to they, then to other nation, by how much they have law and ordinance more righteous than other nation have. now, as it be say, of the foundation of the other house, the temple, the king commaund^d in the lay thereof. the king have his hand in the church. so be it also in this house. the state, the commonwealth, the king have his hand in and upon the foundation, here also, which be the law, so far as that every forbear of a law be not a euacuate of the law. every pardon, whether a post-pardon by way of mercy after a law be break, or a prae-pardon by way of dispensation in wisdom before a law be break, be not a destroy of this foundation. for when such thing as these be do ju^, not upon colourable disguise nor private respect, but true for the general good, all these pardon and dispensation conduce and concur to the office and contract, the nature of the foundation itself, which, be that the whole body may be the better support. but where there be a induce of a super-soveraigne and a super-supremacie and a sea above our four sea and a horn above our head and a foreign power above our native and natural power, where there be dogmatic positive assertion that man bear of we and live with we and by we be, yet none of we, no subject, owe no allegiance, this be a wrinch, a shrink, a sink, a undermine, a destroy of foundation, the foundation of this second house, which be the state, the law, the three house that fall into our present survey, be our dwelling house or family. and of this house. the foundation be peace for peace compact all the piece of a family together: husband and wife in love and in obedience, father and son in care and in obedience, master and servant in discipline and in obedience. still obedience be one ingredient in all peace. there be no peace where there be no obedience. now, every smoke, do not argue the house to be on fire. every domestic offence, take or give, do not destroy this foundation, this peace within door. there may be a thunder from above and there may be a earthquake from below, and yet the foundation of the house safe from above. there may be a defect in the superior, in the husband, the father, the master, and from below, in the wife, the son, the servant. there may be a jealousy in the husband, a morosity in the father, a imperiousness in the master, and there may be a inobsequiousnesse and a indiligence in the wife. there may be levity and inconsideration in the son, and there may be unreadiness, unseasonableness in a servant. and yet foundation stand and peace maintain, though not by a exquisite perform of all duty, yet by a mutual support of one another. infirmity, this destroy no foundation. but if there be a window open in the house to let, in a jesuitical firebrand that shall whisper though not proclaim, deliver with a that. though it be not a declare tenet of the church. yet he think that in case of heresy, civil and natural and matrimonial duty cease. no civil, no natural, no matrimonial tribute due to a heretic. or if there be such a fire kindle within door that the husband jealousy come to a substraction of necessary mean at home or to defamation abroad, or the wife levity induce just imputation at home or scandal abroad. if the father wastfulnesse amount to a disinherit because he leave nothing to be inherit, or the son incorrigibleness occasion a just disinherit, though there be enough. if the master make slave of servant and macerate they, or the servant make prize of the master and prey upon he. in these case and such as these, there be a wrinch, a shrink, a sink, a underm, a destroy of foundation, the foundation of this three house, which be the family peace. there remain yet another house, a four house, a poor and wretched cottage, worse than our statute cottage, for to they the statute lay out certain acre, but for these cottage we measure not by acre but by foot, and five or six foot serve any cottager so much as make a grave. make up the best of our glebe that be of the inferior and the best of their temporalty, that be of the superior clergy and the best of their demesne, that be in the great sovereignty in this world. for this house be but ourself and the foundation of this house be conscience. for this proceed with a good conscience in every particular action, be that which the apostle call 1 tim 6. 6.19, the lay up in store for ourselves, a good foundation against the time to come. the house come not till the time to come, but the foundation must be lay here. abraham, look for a city- heb 11.10- that be a future expectation, but say that text, it be a city that have a foundation. the foundation be lay already, even in this life, in a good conscience, for no interest, no mansion shall that man have in the upper-roome of that jerusalem that have not lay the foundation in a good conscience here. but what be conscience? conscience have but these two element: knowledge and practise. for he that do any thing with a good conscience, know that he shall do it and why he do. it, he that do good, ignorant, stupid, inconsiderate, implicit, do good, but he do that good, ill conscience be upon certain premise. well, debate, i conclude that i shall do it, and then i do it now, for the destroy of this foundation. there be sin which by god, ordinary grace, exhibit in his church, prove but alarm, but sentinel to the conscience. the very sin, or something that do natural, accompany that sin, poverty or sickness or infamy, call upon a man and awaken he to a remorse of the sin, which make saint augustine say that a man get by some sin, some sin help he in the way of repentance for sin. and these sin do not destroy the foundation. but there be sin, which in their nature preclude repentance and batter the conscience, devastate, depopulate, exterminate, annihilate the conscience and leave no sense at all or but a sense of desperation. and then the case be reduce to that sap 17.11. that wickedness, condemn by she own wickedness, become very timorous, so as the conscience grow afraid that the promise of the gospel belong not to she. and, as it be add, there be press with conscience always forecast grievous thing that whatsoever, god lay upon he here, all that be but his earnest of future. worse torment when it come to such a fear as, as it be add in the next verse, betray the succour that reason offer he, ver 12.. that whereas in reason. a man may argue: god have pardon great sin and great sinner, yet he can find no hope for himself. this be a shrink, a sink, a undermine, a destroy of this foundation, of this four house, the conscience. and far. we proceed, not in this survey. we be now upon that which we propose for our last consideration: 3. part till foundation be shake. the righteous stir not. in some case, some foundation may be shake. if they be, what can the righteous do? the holy ghost never ask the question what the unrighteous, the wicked, can do. they do well enough, best of all. in such case, demolition and ruin be their raise, trouble be their peace, tempest be their calm, fire and combustion be their. refresh, massacre be their harvest and destruction be their vintage. all their river run in eddy and all their centre be in wheel and in perpetual motion. the wicked do well enough. best of all, then, but what shall the righteous do? the first entrance of the psalm, in the first verse, seem to give a answer. the righteous may fly to the mountain as a bird. he may retire, withdraw himself. but then the general scope of the psalm give a reply to the answer for all expositor. take the whole psalm to be a answer from david and give, with some indignation against they who persuade he to fly or retire himself, not that david will constitute a rule in his example that it be unlawful. to fly in a time of danger or persecution, for it will not be hard to observe at least nine or ten, several flight of david, but that in some case such circumstance of time and place and person may accompany and invest the action as that it may be inconvenient for that man at that time to retire himself. as oft as the retire amount to the forsake of a call, it will become a very disputable thing how far a retire may be lawful. saint peter, vehement zeal in dissuade christ from go up to jerusalem, mat 16.21, in a time of danger. be so far from retard christ in that purpose. as that it draw a more bitter increpation from christ upon peter. then at any other time. so then in the text we have a rule: employ something, be leave to the righteous to do though some foundation be destroy for the word, be word of consultation, and consultation with god. when man can afford no counsel, god can and will direct those that be he the righteous. what to do? the word give we the rule, and christ give we the example in himself. first he continue his innocence and avow that the destroy of foundation do not destroy his foundation innocence. still, he be able to confound his adversary, joh 8.46, with that which of you can convince i of sin? and then he pray for the remove of the persecution. calix, let this cup pass. when that may not be, he pray even for they who inflict this persecution. father, forgive they. and when all be do, he suffer all that can be do unto he. and he call his whole passion horam. it spend night and day, his whole life be a continual passion. yet how long soever, he call it but a hour, and how much soever it be their act, the act of their malignity that do it. yet he call it he because it be the act of his own predestination as god upon himself, as man. and he call it by a more acceptable name, then, that he call his passion his cup, because he bring not only a patience to it but a delight and a joy in it, for for the joy that be set before he- hebr 12.2- he endure the cross. all this, then, the righteous can do. though foundation be destroy, he can withdraw himself if the duty of his place make not his residence necessary. if it do, he can pray, and then he can suffer, and then he can rejoice in his suffering, and he can make that protestation our god be able to deliver. we dan. 3.17, and he will deliver we, but if not, we will serve no other god. for the righteous have evermore this refuge, this assurance that, though some foundation be destroy, all can be for first the foundation of god. stand sure, 2 tim 2.19, and he know who be he. he be safe in god and then he be safe in his own conscience. pro 10.25. for the righteous be a everlasting foundation, not only that he have one, but be one, and not a temporary, but a everlasting foundation, so that foundation can never be so destroy, but that he be safe in god and safe in himself. for such thing, then, as concern the foundation of the first house, the church be not apt to call. superedifications foundation, collateral divinity, fundamental divinity, problematical, disputable, controvertible point, point essential and article of faith. call not superedifications foundation. nor call not the furniture of the house foundation, call not ceremonial and ritual thing essential part of religion and of the worship of god. otherwise then, as they imply, disobedience for obedience to lawful authority be always a essential part of religion. do not anti-^ate misery, do not prophesy ruin, do not concur with mischief, nor contribute to mischief so far as to over-feare it before, nor to misinterpret their way. who end you can know. and do not call the crack of a pane of glass a destroy of foundation, but every man do the particular duty of his distinct call for the preservation of foundation. pray and preach and do and counsel and contribute too. foundation be never destroy. the righteous shall do still as they have. do enjoy god manifest in christ^. ^. and christ apply in the scripture, which be the foundation of the first house, the church for thing concern the foundation of the second house, the commonwealth, which be the law. dispute not law, but obey they when they be make in those counsel where law be make or reform dispute, but there also, without particular interest, without private affection, without personal relation, call not every entrance of such a judge, as thou think insufficient, a corrupt entrance, nor every judgement which he enter and thou understand not or like not, a corrupt judgement, as in natural thing it. be a weakness to think that every thing that i know not how it be do, be do by witchcraft. so be it also in civil thing. if i know not why it be do to think it be do for money. let the law be sacred to thou and the dispenser of the law reverend. keep the law and the law shall keep thou, and so foundation be, never destroy. the righteous shall do still as they have do, enjoy their possession and honour and themselves by the overshadow of the law which be the foundation of the second house, the state, for those thing which concern the foundation of the three house, the family. call not light fault by heavy name. call not all sociableness and conversation, disloyalty in thy wife, nor all levity or pleasurablenesse, incorrigibleness in thy son, nor all negligence or forgetfulness, perfidiousness in thy servant. nor let every light disorder within door shut thou out of door or make thou a stranger in thy own house. in a smoky room it may be enough to open a window without leave the place in domestic unkindness and discontent. it may be wholesome to give they a concoction at home in a discreet patience, or to give they a vent at home in a moderate rebuke. then to think to ease they or put they off with false divertion abroad as state subsist, in part by keep their weakness from. be know. so be it the quiet of family to have their chancery and their parliament within door and to compose and determine all emergent difference there. for so also foundation be keep undestroyed. the righteous shall do as they shall do. enjoy a religious unity and a civil unity, the same soul towards god, the same heart towards one another, in a holy and in a happy peace. and peace be the foundation of this three house, the family last for those thing which concern the foundation of the four house ourselves mis. interpret not god former correction upon thou, how long, how sharp soever. call not his physic poison, nor his fish scorpion, nor his bread stone. accuse not god for that he have do nor. suspect not god, for that he may do as though god have make thou only because he lack a man to damn in all scruple of conscience, say with saint peter: lord, whither shall i go? thou have the word of eternal life, and god will not leave thou in the dark, in all oppression from potent adversary. say with david against thou, o lord, only have i sin, and god will not make the malice of another man his executioner upon thou. cry to he, and if he have not hear thou cry loud and cry often, the first way that god admit thou to he be by water, the water of baptism. go still the same way to he, by water, by repentant tear, and remember. still that when ezechias weep, god see his tear, his tear in the singular. god see his first tear every several tear. if thou think god have not do so by thou, continue thy tear till thou find he do. the first way that christ come to thou be in blood when he submit himself to the law in circumcision, and the last thing that he bequeath to thou be his blood in the institution of the bless sacrament. refuse not to go to he the same way too, if his glory require that sacrifice. if thou pray and have a apprehension that thou hear god say, he will not hear thy prayer. do not believe that it be he that speak if thou can not choose. but believe that it be he. let i say in a pious sense: do not believe he. god will not be, believe in denounce of judgement so absolute, so peremptory as to be think to speak unconditional, illimited god. take it well at david hand that when the prophet have tell he the child shall sure die. yet he believe not the prophet so peremptory, but that he proceed in prayer to god for the life of the child. say with david: thou have be a strong tower to i psal 61.4.62.7. i will abide in thy tabernacle. i will never go out. i know thou have a church, i know i be in it and i will never depart from it. and so foundation be never destroy. the righteous shall do as the righteous have always do: enjoy the evidence and the verdict and the judgement and the possession of a good conscience which be the foundation of this four house. first, govern this first house thyself well, and, as christ say, he shall say again: thou have be faithful. in a little take more. he shall enlarge thou in the next house thy family, and the next the state, and the other the church, till he say to thou, as he do to jerusalem after all his other: blessing, now i have, bring thou up to a kingdom, a kingdom where not only no foundation can be destroy but no stone shake, and where the righteous know always what to do to glorify god. in that incessant acclamation: salvation to our god who sit upon the throne, and to the lamb and to this lamb of god, who have take away the sin of the world and but change the sun of the world, who have complicate two wondrous work in one to make our sun to set at noon and to make our sun to rise at noon too. that have give he glory and not take away our peace. that have exalt he to vpper-roome and not shake any foundation of we. to this lamb of god, the glorious son of god and the most almighty father, and the bless spirit of comfort, three person and one god be ascribe by we and the whole church, the triumphant church where. the father of bless memory reign with god and the militant church where the son of bless assurance reign. for god all power. praise may majesty, glory and dominion now and for ever. amen.