by the king, whereas at the humble suit and request of sundry our love and well dispose. subject: intend to deduce a colony and to make a plantation in virginia, we, for the enlarge of our government, increase of navigation and trade, and especial for the reduce of the savage and barbarous people of those part to the christian faith, do incorporate diverse nobleman, gentleman and other adventurer in the say plantation and grant unto they sundry privilege and liberty, among which, for their better help and assistance, to raise some competent sum of money to prosecute the same plantation to a happy end. we do grant they licence to set forth, erect and publish lottery to continue for one year after the open of the same and. prosecute the same plantation to a happy end, we do grant they licence to set forth, erect and publish lottery to continue for one year after the open of the same and further during our pleasure, which liberty have be by the same company put in use diverse year past. now, forasmuch as we be give to understand that although we in grant the say licence have our eye fix upon a religious and princely end and design, yet the say lottery have now for a long time be put in use, do daily decline to more and more inconvenience, to the hindrance of multitude of our subject, we who care continual wait upon the general welfare of our people have think it expedient for the general good. more and more inconvenience, to the hindrance of multitude of our subject. we who care continual wait upon the general welfare of our people have think it expedient, for the general good of our subject to suspend the further execution of the say lottery until upon further deliberation and advisement. we shall be more full inform of the inconvenience and evil thereby arise and may ordain due remedy for the same. without any conceit of withdraw our favour in any degree from the say company or plantation and good work by they intend, and therefore we do hereby express charge and command the say company and their successor and all their officer, minister and servant and all other, that from henceforth they desist and forbear to use or do hereby express charge and command the say company and their successor and all their officer, minister and servant and all other, that from henceforth they desist and forbear to use or execute any manner of grant or licence from we for the keep and continue of any lottery, or to keep or continue any lottery within this our realm of england or the dominion thereof, until such time as we shall declare our further pleasure therein. and we likewise require all justice officer and minister whatsoever from henceforth diligent and careful to see this our pleasure execute and to punish the infringer thereof. as contemner of our royal command give at our palace of westminster the eight day march in the eighteen year of our reign of pleasure execute and to punish the infringer thereof. as contemner of our royal command, give at our palace of westminster the eight day march in the eighteen year of our reign of great britain, france and ireland. god save the king.