by the king a proclamation touch tobacco. whereas our most dear father of bless memory decease for many weighty and important reason of state, and at the humble suit of his commons in parliament do late publish two several proclamation. the one date the nine and twenty day of september, now last past, and the other, the second of march, follow for the utter prohibit of the importation and use of all tobacco which be not of the proper growth of the colony of virginia and the summer island or one of they. with such cautious and under such pain and penalty as be in those proclamation at large express we tender the prosperity of those colony and plantation and hold it to be a matter of great. consequence unto we and to the honour of our crown, not to desert or neglect those colony whereof the foundation, with hopeful success, have be so happy lay by our father. be give to understand that diverse person intend only their private gain and neglect all consideration of the public. in this short time, while we have be necessary take up in order of the great affair of our kingdom and state, have take the boldness, secret and by stealth to import and utter great quantity of tobacco which be not of the growth of the plantation aforesaid, to the utter destruction of those plantation as much as in they lie, we have think fit for the prevent of those inconvenience which may otherwise ensue to the irrecoverable. damage of those plantation and of our service, to publish and declare our royal pleasure for the present touch the premise. until upon more mature deliberation we shall see cause to alter or add unto the same in any part, and we do therefore strait, charge and command that no person whatsoever, of what degree or quality soever, do at any time hereafter either direct or indirect import, buy, sell or utter plant, cherish or use or cause to be import, sell or utter, cherish, plant or use in our realm of england or ireland or dominion of wales or in any isle or place thereunto belong, any tobacco of any sort whatsoever which be not of the proper growth of the, say, colony or one of they. and that no person whatsoever, by any shift or device whatsoever, do receive or conceal or colour the tobacco of any other so import, plant, buy, sell, utter or use within our say realm or dominion or the isle or place aforesaid or any part thereof. upon pain of forteiture unto we of all such tobacco so to be import, buy, sell, plant, utter or use, contrary to the true meaning of these present, in who hand soever the same shall be find, and upon such further pain and penalty as, by the law and statute of these, our realm or by the censure of our court of star-chamber in either of our say kingdom respective, can or may be inflict upon the offender for contempt of this. our royal command and to be repute and take as enemy to our proceed and to those plantation which so much concern our honour and the honour and profit of our state. and our further will and command be that all the foreign tobacco, of what sort soever, which be not of the proper growth of those plantation, or one of they shall, before the four day of may now next ensue, be transport out of our realm and dominion, as by the say former proclamation. it be direct and command upon pain of forfeiture thereof and upon the other pain and penalty aforesaid to be inflict upon the offender. and our pleasure be that all such foreign tobacco may be free export by any person whatsoever without pay to we or to our use. any subsidy or other duty for the same give at our court at white-hall this nine day of april, in the first year of our reign of great britain, france and ireland. god save the king.