@ by the king @ a proclamation for the order of tobacco. the king, most excellent majesty, and his royal father of bless memory, have at several time and upon several occasion publish their proclamation concern tobacco as well that which have be endeavour to be plant within this realm, as that which be of the growth of virginia and the summer island and other english colony and plantation, and also concern spanish and other foreign tobacco and find that the inordinate desire of take tobacco and the unmoderate thirst of gain by the plant and sell of tobacco can otherwise be allay or moderate. have at the last, by the advice of his privy counsel, determine upon this final resolution: touch all sort of tobacco in manner. sell of tobacco can otherwise be allay or moderate. have at the last, by the advice of his privy counsel, determine upon this final resolution: touch all sort of tobacco in manner: follow first: his majesty, do hereby declare his royal pleasure to be, and do hereby will and command that no person whatsoever do at any time hereafter plant, cherish or preserve any tobacco within these his realm of england or ireland or dominion of wales or any the isle, part or place of or belong to they or any of they, and if any be now plant or grow there, that the same be present, pluck up and utter, destroy by the owner, planter, tender or dresser thereof, and lest they or any of they shall. be now plant or grow there, that the same be present, pluck up and utter, destroy by the owner, planter, tender or dresser thereof, and lest they or any of they shall adventure to neglect the performance hereof. his majesty, do further strait, charge and command all constable, tything-man, headborough and other officer within their several limit and jurisdiction, careful and effectual, to see the same execute and perform according. and his majesty do further will and command all justice of peace mayor, sheriff and other principal officer in their several place within the compass of their several jurisdiction and authority, upon complaint to they make, to cause the same to be due, perform and execute without partiality, as they and every of they will answer their contempt. their several jurisdiction and authority, upon complaint to they make, to cause the same to be due, perform and execute without partiality, as they and every of they will answer their contempt in that behalf at their uttermost peril. and that the tobacco of his majesty own plantation and colony may not be plant and import hither without limitation or measure or under colour thereof. the tobacco of the growth of spain and other foreign part may not be bring into these his realm or sell or utter here to the overthrow of his colony abroad and to the waste of the wealth and treasure of his kingdom at home. his majesty do further will and strait command that no person whatsoever do at any time hereafter import. and to the waste of the wealth and treasure of his kingdom at home. his majesty do further will and strait command that no person whatsoever do, at any time hereafter, import any tobacco of the growth of spain and other foreign part out of his own dominion, nor sell, utter or offer to sell or utter or otherwise dispose or keep any such tobacco to the intent to sell or utter the same, without his majesty special commission in that behalf, upon pain of confiscation and forfeiture thereof, in who hand soever the same shall be find, and upon such further pain and penalty as by the law of these his realm or by his prerogative royal, which in this case he will not admit to be. be find, and upon such further pain and penalty as by the law of these, his realm or by his prerogative royal- which in this case he will not admit to be dispute may be inflict upon the offender. and because such foreign tobacco may not be receive and utter under the pretence of the tobacco of the growth of virginia, the summer-iland and other colony and plantation under and within his majesty own dominion, nor the planter, owner or adventurer of and in these plantation give themselves over to the plant of tobacco only to make a present return of profit and neglect to apply themselves to solid commodity fit for the establish of colony which will utter, destroy these and all other plantation his majesty do. make a present return of profit and neglect to apply themselves to solid commodity fit for the establish of colony, which will utter destroy these and all other plantation. his majesty do further will and command that from henceforth, no tobacco of the growth of virginia, the summer-iland, or any other plantation or colony of or within his own dominion be import into these his realm or dominion or any the port, haven, creek or place thereof, without his majesty especial licence in that behalf, under the great seal of england, and that upon the importation thereof, the same be deliver into the hand of such commissioner for his majesty own immediate use, as his majesty, under his great seal of england, shall appoint at and for such. thereof the same be deliver into the hand of such commissioner for his majesty own immediate use, as his majesty, under his great seal of england, shall appoint at, and for such price and rate to be pay for the same as shall be reasonable agree upon between the owner or factor of the same and the king commissioner on his majesty behalf, or if they shall not agree thereon, then to be transport again and sell elsewhere, upon pain of confiscation and forfeiture thereof and upon such further pain and penalty as by the law or his majesty prerogative royal may be inflict upon they. and further, his majesty do strait, charge and command that no person whatsoever presume to buy any sort of tobacco within these. or his majesty prerogative royal may be inflict upon. they, and further his majesty, do strait, charge and command that no person whatsoever presume to buy any sort of tobacco within these realm or dominion, or any haven, port, creek or place thereof, of any other person, then of his majesty commissioner, only to be authorise under the great seal of england, as aforesaid, and after the same shall be seal with a seal to that purpose appoint, and that they, upon the buy thereof, do express the true time when the same be buy, the quantity and quality thereof in and by a note in write indent between the buyer and seller, testify the same upon the pain and penalty aforesaid and if, during these time of quantity and quality thereof in and by a note in write indent between the buyer and seller, testify the same upon the pain and penalty aforesaid. and if, during these time of hostility and tobacco shall be import by any of his majesty own ship or by the ship of any of his subject, by way of prize or letter of marque, his further will and pleasure, be that all such tobacco shall be deliver unto his majesty commissioner, at and for reasonable price, to be accountable, therefore, to his majesty use and his majesty do hereby strait, charge and command all customer controller, searcher, waiter and all other officer, minister of or belong to his custom, and also all justice of peace, mayor, sheriff, constable and other. hereby strait, charge and command all customer controller, searcher, waiter and all other officer, minister of or belong to his custom and also all justice of peace, mayor, sheriff, constable and other our officer, minister and love, subject in their several place and degree, to take knowledge of this his royal pleasure and commandment and to be aid, help and assist to his majesty, commissioner and their deputy, factor and servant in all thing touch and concern. this his service, whereof his majesty be resolve to require a due and strict account, give at his majesty court at windsor the nine day of august in the three year of his reign of england, scotland, france and ireland. god save the king. court at windsor the nine day of august in the three year of his reign of england, scotland, france and ireland. god save the king.