droit by the king. @ a proclamation forbid the disorderly trade with the saluage in new england in america, especial the furnish of the native in those and other part of america by the english with weapon and habiliment of war. whereas a proclamation be heretofore publish by our dear father, king james, of bless memory in the twenty year of his reign, for the better supportation and reiglement of the plantation within our territory of new england, in america, whereby, among diverse other thing, the insufferable abuse commit by diverse interlope and irregular merchant and disobedient fisherman and mariner be prohibit who seek only their present and private profit, do trade with the saluage of that country and to the great prejudice and danger of our love. disobedient fisherman and mariner be prohibit who seek only their present and private profit, do trade with the saluage of that country and to the great prejudice and danger of our love subject, the planter there do barter away to the saluage sword, pike, musket, fowl piece, match, powder shot and other warlike arm weapon and munition and teach they the use thereof, not only to their own present ruin- diverse of they have be slaughter by the barbarous people with their own weapon former sell by they- but also to the great hazard of the life of the english already plant there and to the apparent destruction of that hopeful plantation. we be inform that these abuse be still continue to the endanger of that plantation and life of the english already plant there and to the apparent destruction of that hopeful plantation. we be inform that these abuse be still continue to the endanger of that plantation and that the like abuse be also practise in other foreign plantation. out of our princely care for the prosperity of these colony, which be well govern, may be of great use to this nation for the reformation and prevention of these and the like enormity for the future, and to the end that the royal grant of our late father to the precedent and counsel of new england aforesaid may be maintain and uphold and that the planter there and adventurer thither may be encourage by all good way and mean to proceed in their worthy counsel of new england aforesaid may be maintain and uphold, and that the planter there and adventurer thither may be encourage by all good way and mean to proceed in their worthy design. have think it fit and do hereby strait, charge and command that none of our subject whatsoever who be not adventurer, inhabiter or planter authorise, by our precedent and counsel for new england, according to the say letter patent, do presume from henceforth to frequent those coast, to trade or traffic at all with the native people of those country or to intermeddle with the wood or ground of any of the planter or english inhabitant there. otherwise then, by the licence of the say precedent and counsel, or for the necessary use of their, with the wood or ground of any of the planter or english inhabitant there. otherwise then, by the licence of the say precedent and counsel, or for the necessary use of their fish on those coast, in which case of fish or under colour thereof, they be, not to use any trade or traffic there, nor to challenge any right to the soil there or the wood grow or be thereon and especial. we do charge and command that neither any interloper, fisherman or mariner or any other of our subject whatsoever, be of the say company of new england or otherwise, do at any time hereafter dare to sell, barter or any way to deliver or convey unto any of the saluage or native of america where company of new england or otherwise, do at any time hereafter dare to sell, barter or any way to deliver or convey unto any of the saluage or native of america, where any of our english colony be or shall be plant, any weapon or habiliment of war of any kind whatsoever, or to teach they or any of they the use of gun or how to make or amend they or any thing belong to they. upon pain of our high indignation and the confiscation, penalty and forfeiture express in the say royal grant of our say father, wherein we shall proceed against those who have offend or shall offend in any of the premise in such manner and measure as the quality of their offence shall. our say father, wherein we shall proceed against those who have offend or shall offend in any of the premise in such manner and measure as the quality of their offence shall deserve. and yet further. we leave it to the discretion of the say precedent and counsel for new england and to other, the governor and counsel in any other foreign english colony, in their several place respective, to proceed against the offender in any the kind aforesaid, according to the power already grant unto they and according to our law in that behalf, give at our court at whitehall the four and twenty day of november in the six year of our reign of great britain, france and ireland. god save the king. at our court at whitehall the four and twenty day of november, in the six year of our reign of great britain, france and ireland. god save the king.