@ by the king a proclamation concern tobacco. whereas in the reign of our most dear and royal father, king james of bless memory, and since our access to the crown, several proclamation have be make and publish concern tobacco. yet, notwithstanding all the care and providence which have hitherto be use, we find the unlimited desire of gain and the inordinate appetite of take tobacco have so far prevail that tobacco have be continue to be plant in great quantity in several part of this our realm and a vast proportion of unserviceable tobacco make and bring from our colony of virginia summer land and other our foreign plantation beside a incredible quantity of brasill and spanish tobacco import hither and secret convey on land and it. be now come to pass that those our foreign plantation that may become useful to this kingdom linger only upon tobacco be in apparent danger to be utter ruin unless we speedy provide for their subsistence. the body and manner of our people be also in danger to be corrupt and the wealth of this kingdom exhaust by so useless a weed as tobacco be, which be represent unto we by the humble petition of our love subject, the planter and adventurer in virginia, and also by the like humble petition of the retailer and seller of tobacco in and about our city of london and westminster. we have think it worthy of our princely care as a matter not only fit for our profit and the profit. of our people, but much concern we in our honour and government, so to regulate the same and compel due obedience thereto, that our foreign plantation and colony may be, support and encourage, and they make useful to this kingdom by apply themselves to more solid commodity that the health of our subject may be, preserve the wealth of this kingdom, enlarge and the manner of our people. so order and govern that the world may not just tax we that these be at once endanger only by the licentious use of tobacco, and therefore have serious advise hereof. we, by the advice of our privy council, have now resolve upon and publish these. our command follow concern: tobacco, which our royal will and pleasure be shall be. in all thing observe, upon pain of our high displeasure and of such pain, penalty and punishment as by our court of exchequer and court of star-chamber and by any other court and minister of justice, or by our prerogative royal, can be inflict upon the offender. and first our will and command be that no person whatsoever do at any time hereafter, plant, preserve or maintain any tobacco which be, have, be or shall be plant in our kingdom of england or ireland or dominion of wales or in the island of jersey or guernesey, but that the same be utter, displant and destroy, and that none presume or adventure to buy, sell or utter any such tobacco. the same be utter unwholesome to be take. and further, that no tobacco whatsoever be from henceforth import into these our realm, or any haven, port, creek or place thereof which be or shall be of the growth of any the part or place beyond the sea belong to or under the obedience of any foreign king, prince or state whatsoever, but such and so much thereof only as we shall special allow to be import until it shall be full settle between those foreign prince and we, according to those treaty which be between we, that our subject may not unthrifty vent the solid commodity of our own kingdom and return the proceed thereof in smoke. and further. we will and command that no tobacco of the growth of any of our english plantation in virginia, the summer island, caribee island or other island or place in america or the coast thereof be at any time hereafter import or bring into our kingdom of england or ireland or dominion of wales at any other port, then at or in our port of london only, and the same due enter in our custome-house there, nor that any great quantity thereof be import there than we, by the advice of our privy council, shall hold fit and under our privy seal, shall declare to be competent for the expense of these our kingdom. we not think it fit to admit of a immeasurable expense of so. vain and needless, a commodity which ought to be use as a drugge only and not so vain and wanton as a evil habit of late time have bring it unto. and these sort of tobacco which shall be thus bring from our own colony, we will take. present order shall be well, order and make up and so certify to be under the hand of the governor of that place, and when the same shall be bring hither, shall be again search, try and seal. that our subject be not abuse by corrupt tobacco, and our express command be that whatsoever tobacco shall be take which shall be import. contrary to this our proclamation, the same shall be forfeit and confiscate, and by the officer of that. port or place where it shall be take shall be immediate burn and for the order and govern of the expense and use of tobacco when it shall be import, we, by the advice of our privy council, shall speedy direct such a course as we shall hold fit, which we expect shall be also, in all thing observe, and we strait, charge and command all our customer, comptroller, searcher and all other, the officer and minister of our port, that they and every of they in their several place, do careful and faithful observe our royal command in and concern the premise, and if any of they shall be find remiss or negligent therein or to connive at any such offender, that he or they shall for. such their fault, without any remission, be remove from the place or place of he or their attendance. on our service and to the end our pleasure and command. hereby publish may be the better execute we do. hereby will require and command all major sheriff, justice of peace, bailiff, headborough and other, our officer and love subject whatsoever, to be aid and assist, and so much as in they lie, to take care that the premise herein mention be due, put in execution as they tender their duty and allegiance to we and will answer the contrary at their uttermost peril give at our court at whitehall, the six day of january in the six year of our reign. god save the king.