the first book of the natural and moral history of the east and west indies. of the opinion of some author which suppose that the heaven do not extend to the new-found world, the first chapter, the ancient be so far from conceit that this new-found world be people by any nation, that many of they can not imagine there be any land on that part and which be more worthy of admiration. some have flat deny that the heaven which we now behold can extend thither. for although the great part yea, the most famous among the philosopher, have well know that the heaven be round, as in effect it be, and by that mean do compass and comprehend within itself the whole earth, yet many yea of the holy doctor of great authority have disagree in opinion upon this point. suppose the frame of this universal world to be fashion like unto a house, whereas the roof that cover it environ only the upper part and not the rest. infer by their reason, that the earth shall else hang in the midst of the air, the which seem unto they void of sense. for, as we see in every build, the groundwork and foundation on the one side and the cover opposite unto. it. even so, in this great building of the world, the heaven shall remain above on the one part and the earth under it. the glorious chrysostom, a man better see in the study of holy scripture then in the knowledge of philosophy, seem to be of this opinion when, in his commentary upon the epistle to the hebrew, he do laugh at those chrysost homil 14 and 17.. in epist and hebre, which hold the heaven to be round and it seem the holy scripture do infer as much term the heaven, a tabernacle or frame build by the hand of god, and he pass far upon this point- say that which move and go chrys, hom 6.13 in gen^s and hom 12. pop antioch be not. the heaven, but the sun, moon and star which move in the heaven, even as sparrow and other bird move in the air, contrary to that which the philosopher hold, that they turn with the heaven itself as the arm of a wheel, do with the wheel. theodore^. theodoret, a very grave author, follow chrysostom in this opinion, and theophilus likewise, as he be accustom almost in all thing. theophil in capitul 8.. but lactantius, firmian above all, the rest hold the same opinion, lact lib 3. inst ca 24.. do mock the peripatetic and academic which give the heaven a round form, place the earth in the midst thereof. for that it seem ridiculous unto he that the earth shall hang in the air, as be before. say, by which his opinion he be conformable unto epicurus, who hold that on the other part of the earth there be nothing but a chaos and infinite gulf. and it seem that s jerome draw near to this opinion. jev in epist a^ ephes ^^^ 2. ^ 4. write upon the epistle to the ephesian in these word: the natural philosopher, by his contemplation pierce to the height of heaven, and on the other part, he find a great, vast in the depth and bowel of the earth. some likewise say that procopius affirm the which i have not see upon the book of genesis sixtu^, lib 5.. annot at 3. that the opinion of aristotle touch the form and circular motion of the heaven be contrary. and repugnant to the holy scripture. but whatsoever the ancient say or hold, touch this point, it must not trouble we, for that it be well know and verify that they have not be so studious in the knowledge and demonstration of philosophy, be busy in other study of far great importance. but that which be more to be admire, be that s augustine himself, aug lib 2.. gen c 9, so well see in all natural science. yea, very learned in astrology and physic, remain yet still in doubt, not able to resolve whether the heaven do compass in the earth on all part, id psal 35.. what care, i say he, if we suppose the heaven do environ the earth on all part, like unto a. bowl be in the midst of the world as a bottom be compass with thread, or that we say it be not so, and that the heaven cover the earth of one part only as a great basin that hang over it in the same place. he seem to show- nay, he speak plain- that there be no certain demonstration to prove the figure of the world to be round, but only by simple conjecture, in which place, cite and other, they hold the circular motion of the heaven very doubtful. but we ought not to take it offencive nor esteem less of the doctor of the holy church if in some point of philosophy and natural knowledge they have vary in opinion from that which be hold. for good philosophy, see all their study have be to know, preach and serve the creator of all thing. wherein they have be excellent and have well employ their study in cause of great weight, it be a small matter in they not to have know. all particularity concern the creature. but those vain philosopher of our age be much more to be blame. who have attain to the knowledge of the be and order of the creature and of the course and motion of the heaven, have not yet learned, wretched as they be to know the creator of all thing but busy themselves whole in his work, have not yet mount by their imagination to the knowledge of the sovereign author thereof, sapien 13.. rom 1.. as the holy scripture teach we, or if they have, know he they have not, serve and glorify he as they ought, blind with their imagination, whereof the apostle do accuse and blame they that the heaven be round on all part, move in his course of itself, chap 2. but come to our subject. there be no doubt but the opinion which aristotle and the other peripatetic hold with the stoic, that the figure of heaven be round and do move, circular in his course, be so perfect, true as we which do now live in peru see it visible, wherein experience shall be of more force than all philosophical demonstration, be sufficient to prove that the heaven be round and comprehend and contain the earth within. it of all part, and to clear any doubt that may grow, it suffice that i have see in this, our hemisphere, that part of heaven which turn about this earth, the which be unknown to the ancient and have observe the two pole whereon the heaven turn, as upon their axeltrees, i say the arctic or north pole, which those of europe behold, and the other antarctic or southern pole, whereof saint augustine be in doubt, the which we change and take for the north, here at peru, aug lib 2.. genes, cap 10. have pass the equinoctial line, final, it suffice that i have sail near 70. degree from north to south, that be forty of the one side of the line and 23. on the other, omit at this present the testimony of other which have sail much far than myself and in a great height, come near 70. degree towards the south. who will not confess? but the ship call the victori^ worthy doubtless of eternal memory, have win the honour and praise to have best discover and compass the round earth. yea, that great chaos and vast, which the ancient philosopher affirm to be under the earth, have compass about the world and circle the vastness of the great ocean. who be he then that will not confess by this navigation? but the whole earth, although it be big than it be describe, be subject to the foot of man, s^eing he may measure it. thus, without doubt, the heaven be of a round and perfect figure and the earth likewise, embrace and join with the water, make one globe or round bowl frame of these two element, have their bound and limit within their own roundness and greatness, the which may be sufficient, prove, by reason of philosophy and astrology, leave all subtle definition common object, that to the most perfect body, which be the heaven, we must give the most perfect figure, which without doubt be round, who? circular motion can not be firm nor equal in itself if it have any corner or nook of any side, or if it be crooked, as of necessity it must be, if the sun, moon and star make not their course about the whole world but leave. all these reason, it seem that the moon be sufficient in this case, as a faithful witness of the heaven itself, see that her eclipse happen, but when, as the roundness of the earth, oppose itself, diametral betwixt, she and the sun, and by that mean keep the sunbeam from shine on, she, the which can not chance if the earth be not in the midst of the world, compass in and environ by the whole heaven. some have doubt whether the light of the moon be borrow from the brightness of the sun. but it be needless see. there can be find no other cause of the eclipse, full and quarter of the moon, but the communication of the beam which proceed from the sun, aug. ep 109.. 4. in like sort, if we will careful examine this matter, we shall find that the darkness of the night proceed from no other cause but from the shadow which the earth make not suffer the light of the sun to pass to the other part of the heaven where his beam shine. not. if then it be so that the sun pass no far, neither do cast his beam on the other part of the earth, but only turn about and return to his set, make a ridge upon the earth by his turn, the which he must of force confess that shall deny the roundness of the heaven. see, according to their say, the heaven as a basin do only cover the face of the earth. it shall then plain follow that we can not observe the difference betwixt the day and night, the which in some region be short and long according to the season and in some be always equal, the which s augustine note in his book genes litter be august lib genes, cap 19, that we may easy comprehend the opposition, conversion, elevation, descent and all other aspect and disposition of planet and star, when we shall understand they move. and yet, notwithstanding the heaven remain firm and immovable, the which seem to i easy to comprehend and will be to all other, if it may be lawful to imagine that which my fancy do conceive, for if we suppose that every star and planet be a body of itself. and that it be lead and guide by a angel, dan 14.. as habacuc be, carry into babylon, who, i pray you be so blind, but see that all the diverse aspect which we see appear in planet and star may proceed from the diversity of motion which he that guide they do voluntary, give they. we can then, with any reason, affirm, but that this space and region, by which they feign that star do continual march and roll, be elementary and corruptible, see it divide itself when they pass the which undoubted do not pass by any void place. if, then, the region wherein the star and planet move be corruptible, the star and planet of their own motion shall be, by reason, likewise corruptible. and so, by consequence, they must alter, change and be final, extinct for natural. that which be contain be no more durable than that which contain, and to say that the celestial body be corruptible, it agree not with the psalm that god make they for ever, psal 148.. and it be less conformable to the order and preservation of this universal world. i say, moreover, to confirm this truth, that the heaven move and in they, the star march in turn, the which we can easy discern with our eye, see. we see that not only thestarre do move, but also the region and wh^le part of heaven. i speak not only of the shine and most resplendent part, as of that which we call and the vulgar s jaques way, but also of the dark and obscure part in heaven. for there we see, real as it be, spot and darkness which be most apparent, the which i remember not to have see at any time in europe, but at peru and in this other hemisphere i have often see they very apparent. these spot be in colour and form, like unto the eclipse of the moon, and be like unto it. in blackness and darkness they march fix to the same star, always of one form and bigness, as we have note by infallible observation. it may be this will seem strange to some. and they will demand whence these spot in heaven shall grow, to the which i can answer otherwise at this time. but as the philosopher do affirm that this or milken way be compound of the thick part of the heaven and for this cause it receive the great light, and contrariwise, there be other part very thin and transparent, the which receive less light seem more black and obscure. whether this be the true reason or no, i dare not certain affirm yet. be it true that, according to the figure these spot have in heaven, they move with the same proportion with their star, without any separation, the which be a true, certain and often note experience. it follow then, by all that we have say that the heaven contain in it all the part of the earth, circle continual about it, without any more doubt how the holy scripture teach we that the earth be in midst of the world, chap 3. although it seem to procopius gaza and to some other of his opinion that it be repugnant to the holy scripture to place the earth in the midst of the world and to say that the heaven be round, yet in truth, hest 13.. sap 1.27.11.18, psal 91.7.23.39.97, job 37. eccles. 1. this doctrine be not repugnant but conformable to that which it do teach we for lay aside the term which the scripture itself do use in many place: the roundness. of the earth and that which it say in a other place, that whatsoever be corporeal, be unviron and compass in by the heaven and contain within the roundness thereof, at the least thy can deny. but that place of ecclesiastes, be very plain where it be. say the sunnerise and set and return to the same place, and so begin to rise again. he take his course by the south, turn towards the north, this spirit march, compass about all thing and then return to the same place. in this place, the paraphrase and exposition of gregory, neocesarien or nazianzen say: the sun have run about the whole earth. return as it be, turn to the same point. that which solomon save be interpret by gregory can. not be true if any part of the earth be not environ with the heaven. and so s jerome do understand it. jerom cap 3.. ephes write upon the epistle to the ephesian. in this sort, the most common opinion affirm agree with ecclesiaste that the heaven be round, move circular like unto a bowl, and it be most certain that no round figure contain in it either longitude, latitude, height or depth for that all part be equal. whereby it appear, according to s jerome, that those which hold the heaven to be round be not repugnant to the holy scripture but conformable to the same basil hom li 1.. and although that s basile especial and s ambrose who do usual imitate he in his book. call hexameron, seem somewhat doubtful of this point. yet in the end they grant that the world be round. it be true that s ambrose do not yield to this quintessence, amb lib 10.. hexam, cap 6. which aristotle attribute to the heaven. without doubt it be a goodly thing to see with what a grace and excellent style the holy scripture treat of the situation and firmness of the earth to breed in we a wonderful admiration, and no less content to behold the unspeakable power and wisdom of the creator, psal 74.. for that, in one place, god himself say that it be he which plant the pillar which support the earth. give we to understand as s ambrose. do well expound it. that the unmeasurable weight of the whole earth be hold up by the hand of the divine power, amb 1.. the holy scripture do common. so call they and use this phrase, name they, the pillar of heaven and earth, not those of atlas, as the poet feign, but of the eternal word of god who, by his virtue, support both heaven and earth. moreover, the holy scripture, in a other place, teach that the earth, or a great part thereof, job 9, 26. be join to and compass in by the element of water. speak general that god place the earth upon the water. and in another place, heb 1, that he frame the roundness of the earth upon the sea. and although s augustine do not conclude upon this text, as a matter of faith, that the earth and the water make one globe in the midst of the world, pretend by this mean to give another exposition to the word of the psalm aug in ps 13^. yet notwithstanding, it be most certain that by the word of the psalm, we be give to understand that we have no other reason to imagine any other cement or unite to the earth than the element of water, the which, although it be pliant and movable, yet do it support and environ this great mass of the earth, the which be wrought by the wisdom of that great architect. they say the earth be build upon the water and upon the sea, but, contrariwise, the earth be rather under the water, for, according to common judgement and imagination, that which be on the other part of the earth which we inhabit, seem to be under the earth, and so, by the same reason, the water and sea. which do compass in the earth, on the other part, shall be underneath and the earth above. yet the very truth be that what be proper beneath that be always in the midst of the universal. but the holy scripture frame itself to our manner of conceive and speak. some may demand: see the earth be set upon the water, as the scripture say whereon the water be place, or what support have they? and if the earth and the water make one round globe, how can all this monstrous mass be sustain? to this the holy scripture answer they in another place. give we great cause to admire the power of the creator and say in these word: job 26. the earth, extend towards the north upon the vast, and stay, hang upon nothing, the which, in truth be very well, speak for that real. it seem this heap of earth and water be set upon nothing when we describe it in the midst of the air, as in truth it be. but this wonder which man so much admire, god himself have not lay open demand of the same job in these term, job 38. tell i, if thou can, who have lay the line or cast the lead for the build of the world, and with what mortar the foundation have be lay and join final to make we understand the fashion and model of this admirable frame of the world. the prophet david, accustom to sing and praise his divine work, say very well in a psalm make of this subject, psal 103.. in these word, thou, which have build the earth upon firmness itself that it can stagger nor move for ever and ever, mean to show the cause why the earth, set in the midst of the air, fall not nor stagger from place to place, for that, by nature, it have sure foundation lay by the most wise creator. to the end it may sustain itself without any other support. man imagination be therefore deceive in this place. seek other foundation of the earth and, for want thereof, do measure divine thing according to human reason, so that we need not to fear how great or heavy soever this mass of earth then hang in the air seem to be, that it can fall or turn topsy-turvy. be assure upon this point, for that the same psalmist say that it shall never be overthrow true david with reason. after he have behold and sing the wonderful work of the lord, do not cease to praise he in the same psal 103.. say: o how great and wonderful be the work of the lord. it appear that all spring from his knowledge. and in truth, if i shall free speak, my opinion touch this point often in. my travel pass the great gulf of the ocean and march by other region of so strange land, stay to behold and consider the greatness of these work of the lord. i feel a wonderful consolation of the sovereign wisdom and greatness of the creator who shine in his work, in comparison whereof all the palace castle and princely building, together with all the invention of man, seem nothing yea be base and contemptible in respect thereof. o how often have come into my mind and mouth that place of the psalm which say: thus: great comfort have thou give i, o lord, by thy work. i will not cease to rejoice in the contemplation of the work of thy hand, real and in truth, the work of god have i know not what secret and hide, grace and virtue, the which, although they be often behold, yet do they still cause a new taste and content, whereas, contrariwise, the work of man, although they be build with exquisite art, yet often see they be no more esteem but breed a distaste. be they most pleasant garden, palace or stately temple, be they pyramid of proud building, picture carve image or stone of rare work and invention, or whatsoever else adorn with all the beauty possible, yet be it most certain that view they twice or thrice with attention, the eye present turn away. be glut with the sight thereof. but if you behold the sea with attention, or some steep mountain grow from a plain to a strange height, or the field clad in their natural verdure with pleasant flower, or the rage course of some river beat continual against the rock, final, what work of nature soever, although it be often view, yet do it still breed a new content and never glutte the sight, the which be like unto a stately banquet of the divine wisdom, which do always cause a new consideration, without any loathe, contain a answer to that which be object out of the holy scripture against the roundness of the earth, chap 4.. return then to the figure of heaven, i know not out of what authority of the holy scripture they can prove that it be not round, nor his motion circular. neither do i see whereas s paul call the heaven a tabernacle or a tent which god make, heb 8.. and not man. how can it be apply to this purpose? for although he tell we that it be make by god, yet must we not therefore conjecture that the heaven cover the earth like to a roof on the one part only? neither that the heaven be frame without motion, as it seem. some will infer. the apostle in this place, treat of the conformity of the ancient tabernacle of the law, say thereupon that the tabernacle of the new law of grace be heaven, into the which the great priest jesus christ enter once by his blood, and thereby be understand that there be as great pre-eminence of the new above the old as there be difference betwixt the author of the new, which be god, and of the old, which be man, although it be most certain that the old be build by the wisdom of god who instruct his workman bezeleell, exo 36.. neither must we imagine that these comparison, parable and allegory do in all thing agree with that, whereunto they be apply, as the happy crysostome have learned speak. upon this point, chrisost in 20. cap, the other authority which s augustine say be allege of some to show that the heaven be not round, be this: the heaven stretch forth like unto a skin, psal 103.. whereby he conclude that it be not round but flat on the upper part, whereunto the same doctor do answer, very well and familiar, give we to understand that that place of the psalm be not proper to be understand of the figure of heaven, aug 2. gen. litteran ca 9. but only to show with what facility god build so great a heaven, be no more painful for he to build so huge a cover as the heaven. be, then to unfold a double skin, or else the psalmist. pretend to show we the great majesty of god, to who the heaven with his greatness and beauty do serve in like manner as our tent and pavilion in the field, the which be well express by a poet, call it the tent of the clear heaven, in like sort, the place of which say heaven, serve i as a chair and the earth for a footstool, isaiah 66.. but if we follow the error of the antromorphites which do attribute corporal member unto god according to his divinity, we shall have occasion upon this last text, to examine how it be possible the earth shall be a footstool to god foot, and how the same god can hold his foot of the one part and the other. and many head round about see that he be in all part of the world, which be a vain and ridiculous thing. we must therefore conclude that in the holy scripture we ought not to follow the letter which kill, 2. cori^ ^ 2, but the spirit which quicken, as say s paul, of the fashion and form of heaven at the new-found world, chap 5.. many in europe demand of what form and fashion heaven be in the southern part, for that there be no certainty. find in ancient book who, although they grant there be a heaven on this other part of the world, yet come they not to any knowledge of the form thereof, although in truth they make mention of a goodly great star. see in those part, plin, lib 6. c^p 22. which they call canopus. those which of late day have sail into these part have accustom to write: strange thing of this heaven that it be very bright, have many goodly star and in effect, thing which come far, be common, describe with increase. but it seem contrary unto. i hold it for certain that in our region of the north there be a great number and big star. find no star in these part which exceed the fisher or the chariot in bigness. it be true that the cross in these part be very fair. and please to behold, we call the cross four notable and apparent star which make the form of a cross set equal and with proportion. the ignorant suppose this cross to be the southern pole, for that they see the navigator take their height thereby, as we be accustom to do, by the north star. but they be deceive, and the reason why sailor do it in this ^orte be for that in the south part there be no fix star that mark the pole, as the north star do to our pole, and therefore they take their height by the star at the foot of the cross, distant from the true and fix pole, antarctic. thirty degree, as the north star be distant from the pole arctic three degree or little more, and so it be more difficult to take the height in those part. for that the say star at the foot of the cross must be right, the which chance? but in one hour of the night, which be in diverse season of the year, in diverse hour, and often time it appear not in the whole night, so as it be very difficult to take the height, and therefore the most expert pilot regard not the cross, take the height of the sun by the astrolabe, by which they know in what height they be. wherein common the portugal be more expert as a nation that have more discourse in the art of navigation than any other. there be also other star in these southern part which in some sort resemble those of the north, that which they call the milken way, be large and more resplendent in the south part. appear therein those admirable black spot whereof we have make mention. as for other particularity, let other speak of they with great curiositle and let this which we have say suffice for this time, that there be land and seavader, the two pole, chap 6.. be no small labour to have unfold this doubt with this knowledge and resolution, that there be a heaven in these part of the indies which do cover. they, as in europe, asia and a^^ri^ke- and this point serve often against many spaniard who be here, sigh for spain, have no discourse, but of their country they wonder, yea, they grow discontent with. we imagine that we have forget and make small account of our native soil, to who we answer that the desire to return into spain do nothing trouble. we be as near unto heaven at peru as in spain, as saint jerome say. well, write unto paulinus that the gate of heaven be as near unto brittany as to jerusalem. but although the heaven do compass in the world of all pa^ts, yet must we not imagine that there be land necessary on all part of the world for be so that the two element of earth and water make one globe or bowl, according to the opinion of the most renown ancient author? as plutarch testify and, as it be prove by most certain demonstration, plut blind cap 9 and 1^, we may conjecture that the sea do occupy all this part, which be under the antarctic or southern pole, so as there shall not remain any place in these part for the earth, the which saint augustine do, very learned, hold against. they that maintain the antipode, say that although it be prove, and we believe that the world be round like to a bowl, we may not therefore infer that in this other part of the world the earth be uncover, and without water. without doubt, aug lib 16.. 9, saint augustine, speak well upon this point. and as the contrary be not prove, so do it not follow that there be any land discover at the antarctic pole, the which experience have now plain, teach we, for although the great part of the world under the pole, antarctic, be sea, yet be it not altogether, but there be likewise land. so, as in all part of the world, the earth and water embrace one another, which true be. a thing to make. we admire and glorify the art of the sovereign creator. we know, then, by the holy scripture, that in the begin of the world, g^^es: 1. the water be gather together in one place, so as the earth remain uncover. moreover, the same holy writ do teach we that these gather together of the water be call sea. and as there be many, so of necessity there must be many sea. and this diversity of sea be not only in the mediterranean sea, whereas one be call euxine, another the caspian, a other the erethean, or red sea, a other the persian, a other of italy and so many other, but also in the great ocean, which the holy scripture do usual call a. gulf, although real and in truth it be but a sea. yet in many and diverse manner, as in respect of peru and all america, the one be call the north sea, the other the south, and at the east indies, the one be call the indian sea, the other that of china. and i have observe, as well by my own navigation as by the relation of other, that the sea be never divide from the land above a thousand league, and although the great ocean stretch far, yet do it never pass this measure. i will not, for all this, affirm that we sail not above a thousand league in the ocean, which be repugnant to truth. be well know that the ship of portugal have sail four time as much and more, and that the whole world may be compass about by sea, as we have see in these day, without any further doubt. but i say and affirm that of that which be at this day discover there be no land distant from a other firm land by direct line or from some island near unto it above a thousand league, and so, betwixt two firm land, there be no great distance of sea account from the near part of both the land, for from the end of europe or africa and their coast, to the canary, the isle of acore, cape and other in the like degree, be not above three hundred. league or five hundred, from the main land, from the, say, land run along to the west indies, there be scant nine hundred league, to the land of saint dominick the virgin, the happy island and the rest, and the same land run along in order to the island of barlovent, which be cuba, hispan^ola and boriquen. from the same land unto the main land be scarce two or three hundred league and in the near part far less. the firm land run a infinite space, from terra^florida to the land of patagon and on the other side of the south, from the straight of maggellan to the cape of mendoce. there run a long continent but not very large, for the large be the travers of peru. which be distant from brasil about a thousand league in this south sea, although they have not yet discover the end towards the west. yet of late they have find out the land which they call solomon, the which be many and great, distant from peru about eight hundred league, and for that we find by observation that whereas there be many and great island, so there be some firm land not far off. i myself, with many other, do believe that there be some firm land near unto the land of solomon, the which do answer unto our america, on the west part, and possible may run by the height of the south, to the strait of maggellan. some hold that nova guinea be firm land and some learned man describe it near to the land of solomon. so, as it be likely a good part of the world be not yet discover. see, at this day, our man sail in the south sea unto china and the philippines, and we say that to go from peru to those part, they pass a great sea. then in go from spain to peru. moreover, we know that by that famous straight of maggellan these two sea do join and continue one with a other. i say the south sea with that of the north, by that part of the antarctic pole which be in fifty one degree of altitude. but it be a great question, wherein many have busy themselves, whether these two sea join together in the north part. but i have not hear that any unto this day can attain unto this point. but by certain likelihood and conjecture, some affirm there be a other straight under the north, opposite to that of maggellan. but it suffice for our subject to know that there be a firm land on this southern part, as big as all europe, asiae and africa, that under both the pole we find both land and sea, one embrace a other, whereof the ancient may stand in doubt and contradict it for want of experience, to confute the opinion of lactantius who hold there be no antipode, chap 7. see it. be manifest that there be firm land upon the south part or pole antarctic. we must now see if it be inhabit, lact. lib 7.. in^^, cap 23. the which have be a matter very disputable in former time, lactantius, firmian and s augustine mock at such as hold there be any antipode which be as much to say aug lib 16. the ^u^tate c ^ 9 as man march with their foot opposite to we. but although these two author agree in these jest, yet do they differ much in their reason and opinion, as they be of very diverse spirit and judgement. lactantius follow the vulgar seem ridiculous unto he that the heaven shall be round and that the earth shall be compass in the midst. thereof like unto a ball, whereof he write in these term: what reason be there for some to affirm that there be antipode who step be opposite to we? be it possible that any shall be so gross and simple as to believe there be a people or nation, march with their fe^te upward and their head downward, and that thing which be place here of one sort be in that other part, hang topsy-turvy, that tree and corn grow downward and that rain, snow and hail fall from the earth upward. then, after some other discourse, the same lactantius use these word: the imagination and conceit which some have have, suppose the heaven to be round have be the cause to invent these antipode. hang in the. air. so, as i know not what to say of such philosopher who have once err, continue still obstinate in their opinion, defend one another. but whatsoever he say, we that live now at peru and inhabit that part of the world which be opposite to asia and their antipode, as the cosmographer do teach, we find not ourselves to be hang in the air, our head downward and our foot on high. true, it be strange to consider that the spirit and understanding of man can attain unto the truth without the use of imagination, and on the other part, it be impossible. but he shall err and be deceive if he shall whole forbear it. we can comprehend the heaven to be round as it be. and the earth to be in the midst of it without imagination. but if this imagination be not control and reform by reason, in the end we shall be deceive whereby we may certain conclude that in our soul there be a certain light of heaven, whereby we see and judge of the interior form which present themselves unto we and by the same we allow of or reject that which imagination do offer unto we. hereby we see that the rational soul be above all corporal power and as the force and etenall vigour of truth do rule in the most eminent part of man, yea, we plain see that this pure light be participant and proceed from that first great light that whoso know not this? or doubt thereof. we may well say that he be igmorant, or doubt whether he be a man or no. so if we shall demand of our imagination what it think of the roundness of heaven, without doubt she will answer- we, as lactantius, do- that if the heaven be round, the sun and star shall fall when, as they move and change their place, rise towards the south. even so, if the earth do hang in the air, those which inhabit the other part shall go with their foot upward and their head downward, and the rain which fall from above shall mount upward, with many other ridiculous deformity. but if we consult with the force of reason, she will make small account of all these vain. imagination, nor suffer we to believe they no more than a foolish dream. but reason will answer with this, her integrity and gravity, that it be a very gross error to imagine the whole world to be like unto a house, place the earth for the foundation and the heaven for the cover. moreover, she will say that, as in all creature, the head be the high part and most elevate, although all creature have not head place in one and the same sctuation. some be in the high part, as man, some athwart as sheep, other in the midst, as spider. even so, the heaven, in what part soever it be, remain above and the earth likewise, in what part soever, remain underneath. our imagination therefore be ground upon time and place, the which she can comprehend nor conceive in general. but in particular, it follow that when we shall raise it to the consideration of thing which exceed the time and place which be know unto she, then present, she shrink and can subsist if reason do not support she. in like sort, we see, upon the discourse of the creation of the world, our imagination stray to seek out a time before the creation thereof and to build the world. she describe a place, but she come not to consider that the world may be make after another fashion. notwithstanding reason, do teach we that there be no time before there be a motion, whereof time be the measure. neither be there any place before the universal which comprehend within it all place. arist 1. dd, cel, ca 3. wherein the excellent philosopher aristotle do plain, satisfy and in few word, that argument make against the place of the earth. help himself with our use of imagination when he sa^eth, and with truth, that in the world, the same place of the earth be in the midst and beneath, and the more a thing be in the midst, the more it be underneath. the which answer be produce by lactantius firmian. yet he do pass it over without confutation by reason, say that he can stay thereon and omit the handle of other matter. the reason why s augustine deny the antipode, chap 8.. the reason which move s augustine to deny the antipode be other then that former allege be of a high judgement, for the reason before mention that the antipode shall go upward, be confute by the same doctor in his book of sermon in these word: the ancient hold, aug lib c, 10. in tom^: 1. that the earth of all part be beneath and the heaven above, by reason whereof the antipode, which they say, go opposite unto we, have like unto we the heaven above their head. see then s augustine have confess this to be conformable to good philosophy. what reason, shall we say, do move so learned and excellent a man to follow the contrary opinion? doubtless he draw the motive and cause from. the bowel of divinity whereby the holy writ do teach we that all mankind do come from the first man, adam, and to say that man can pass to that new world, cross the great ocean, be uncredible and a mere lie. and in truth, if the success, a experience of what we have see in these age have not satisfy we in this point, we have yet hold this reason to be good, and although we know this reason neither to be pertinent nor true, yet will we make answer thereunto show in what sort and by what mean the first lineage of man may pass thither, and how and by what mean they come to people and inhabit the indies, and for that we mean hereafter. to entreat brief of this subject. it shall be fit now to understand what the holy doctor augustine dispute upon this matter in his book of the city of god. it be no point that we ought to believe, as some affirm, that there be antipode, lib 16. c^p 9, that be to say man which inhabit that other part of the earth in who region the sun rise when it set with we, and that their step be opposite and contrary to we. see, they affirm not this by any certain revelation which they have, but only by a philosophical discourse they make whereby they conclude that the earth be in the midst of the world, environ of all part and cover equal with the heaven of. necestitie that must be in the low place which be in the midst of the world. afterwards, he continue in these word, the holy scripture: do not err, neither be deceive in any sort. the truth whereof be well, approve, in that which it propound, of thing which be pass for as much as that which have benefore-told, have succeed in every point, as we see, and it be a thing void of all sense to say that man can pass from this continent to the new find world and cut through the vast ocean. see it be impossible for man to pass into those part any other way. be most certain that alman descend from the first man, wherein we see that all the difficulty s augustine. have find be nothing else but the incomparable greatness of this vast ocean. gregory nazianzen be of the same opinion. nazian epist 27. assure as a matter without any doubt that it be not possible to sail beyond the straits of gibraltar. and upon this subject he write in a epistle of: he i agree well with the say of pindarus that past cadiz that sea be not navigable. and he himself, in the funeral sermon he make for saint basil, say it be not tolerable for any one sail on the sea to pass the straight of gibraltar. and it be true that this place of pindarus, where he say that it be not lawful neither for wise man nor fool to know what be beyond the straight of gibraltar have be take for a proverb. thus we see, by the begin of this proverb, how the ancient be obstinate settle in this opinion, as also by the book of poet, historiographer and ancient cosmographer, that the end and bound of the earth be set at cadiz in spain, where they plant the pillar of hercules, there they set the limit of the roman empire and there they describe the bound of the world. and not only profane writer speak in this sort, but also the holy scripture, to apply itself to our phrase, say that the edict of augustus caesa^ be publish to the end that all the world shall be tax, and of alexander the great that he stretch forth his empire even to the end and uttermost bound of the earth. and in another place they say that the gospel do flourish and increase through the universal world. for the holy scripture, by a usual phrase: call all the world that which be the great part thereof and be at that time discover and know, and the ancient be ignorant, that the east indian sea and that of the west be navigable wherein they have general agree by reason. whereof pliny write as a certain truth that the sea, which be betwixt two land, take from we a just moiety of the habitable earth. for, say he, we can pass thither, neither they come hither. final tully, macrobius, pomponius, mela and the ancient writer hold the same opinion of aristotle opinion: touch the new world. and what abuse he to make. he deny it. chap 9: beside all the former reason, there be yet a other which move the ancient to believe it to be impossible for man to pass to this new world, the which they hold for that, beside the vastness of the great ocean, the heat of that region, which they call the burn zone, be so excessive as it will not suffer any. man. how venturous or laborious soev to pass by sea or land from one pole to a other. for although these philosopher have themselves affirm that the earth be round, as in effect it be, and that under the 2. pole there be habitable land, yet can they not conceive that the region contain all that lie betwixt the two tropic, which be the great of the five, zone or region by the which the cosmographer and astrologer divide the world, may be inhabit by man. the reason they give to maintain this zone to be inhabitable, be for the heat of the sun which make his course direct over this region and approach so near as it be set on fire and so, by consequence, cause a want of water and pasture. aristotle be of this opinion who, although he be a great philosopher, yet be he deceive in this point for the clear, whereof it shall be good to observe his reason and to note wherein he have discourse. well, arist 2. ^ap 5. and wherein he have err. this philosopher make a question of the meridional or southern wind, whether we shall believe it. take his beginning from the south or from the other pole, contrary to the north, and write. in these term, reason teach we that the latitude and largeness of the habitable earth have her bound and limit. and yet all this habitable earth can be unite and join one to the other by reason. the middle region be so intemperate, for it be certain that in her longitude, which be from east to west, there be no immoderate cold nor heat, but in her latitude and height, which be from the pole to the equinoctial line, so as we may well pass the whole earth in her longitude if the greatness of the sea which join land together be no hindrance. hitherto there be no contradict of aristotle, who have great reason to affirm that the earth, in her longitude, which be from east to west, run more equal and be more proper for the life and habitation of man. then, in her latitude from north to south, the which be true not only for this foresay reason of aristotle that there be always one temperature of the heaven from east to west, be equal, distant both from the northern cold and the southern heat, but also for a other reason, for that travel, always in longitude, we see the day and night succeed one another by course, the which fall, not out, go in her latitude, for of necessity we must come to that region under the pole. whereas there be continual night for six month, a very inconvenient thing for the life of man. the philosopher pass on further, r^prooving the geographer which describe the earth in his time, and say thus: we may discern the truth of that which i have say by the passage which may be make by land and the navigation by sea, for there be a great difference betwixt the longitude and the latitude, for the distance from the pillar of hercules at the straight of gibraltar, unto the east indies exceed the proportion of above five to three the passage which be from ethiopia to the lake of meotis in the far confine of scythia, the which be confirm by the account of journey by land and by sail. as we do now know by experience. we have also knowledge of the habitable earth, even unto those part which be inhabitable. and true, in this point we must pardon aristotle- see that in his time they have not discover beyond the first ethiopia, call the exterior, join to arabia and africa, the other ethiopia be whole, unknown in his age, yea, all that great land which we now call the land of prete jan. neither have they any knowledge of the rest that lie under the equinoctial and run beyond the tropic of capricorn unto the cape of good hope, so famous and well know by the navigation of portugal. so as if we measure the land from this cape unto scythia and tartary, there be no. doubt. but this distance and latitude will prove as great as the longitude, which be from gibraltar unto the east indies, it be certain. the ancient have no knowledge of the spring of nilus, nor of the end of ethiopia. and therefore, lucan reprove the curiosity of julius caesar. search out the spring of nilus in these verse: o roman, wat avail thou so much travel, lucan? 10. pharsal in search of nile first source, thyself to gravel, and the same poet speak to nile: say: since thy first source be yet so unrevealed, nile, what thou be be from the world conceal. but by the holy scripture we may conceive that this land be habitable, for if it be not, the prophet sophonias will not say speak. of these nation call to the gospel soph ^^. 3. the child of my disperse, so he call the apostle, shall bring, i present from beyond the bank of ethiopia. yet, as i have say, there be reason to pardon the philosopher who believe the writer and cosmographer of his time. let we continue and examine what follow of the same aristotle. one part of the world, say he, which lie towards the north, beyond the temperate zone, be inhabitable for the exceed cold. the other part, upon the south, be likewise inhabitable, beyond the tropic, for the extreme heat. but the part of the world lie beyond india, on the one side and the pillar of hercules on the other, without doubt can be join and continue. one with the other, so as all the habitable earth be not contain in one continent by reason of the sea which divide it. in this last point he speak truth. then he continue: touch the other part of the world, say it be necessary, the earth shall have the same proportion with the pole antarctic as this, our part which be habitable, have with the north, and there be no doubt. but in that other world all thing shall be order as in we, especial in the grow and order of the wind. and have allege other reason to no purpose. he conclude, say we must confess of necessity that the southern wind be that which blow and come from the burn zone, the which be so near the sun, want water and pasture. this be aristotle opinion, and in truth, man conjecture can hardly pass any far. so, as i do, often consider, with a christian contemplation, how weak the philosophy of the wise of this world have. be in the search of divine thing, see in human thing wherein they seem so well read they often err. aristotle hold that the habitable earth of the pole antarctic, in longitude from east to west be very great and in latitude from the pole antarctic to the equi^^cticall be very s^^all ^^. the which be so contrary to the. truth that, in a manner, all the habitation on this side, the pole, antarctic, be in latitude, i mean from the pole to the line, and in longitude, from east to west, it be so small as the latitude exceed in three part or more. in his other opinion, he affirme^ that the middle region be inhabitable, be under the burn zone, burn up by the excessive heat cause by the nearness of the sun, and by this reason have neither water nor pasture, the which be in like so^t contrary for the great part of this new world, be situate betwixt the two tropic, under the burn zone and yet be it, find very well people and inhabit by man and other sort of creature, be a. region of all the world, the most fruitful of water and pasture and very temperate, in the great pa^t which the will of god have so appoint, to show that even in natural thing he have confound the wisdom of this world. to conclude, we must believe that the burn zone be well inhabit, although the ancient have hold it impossible. but the other zone or region which lie betwixt the burn zone and that of the pole, antarctic, although it be in a climate more commodious for the life of man, yet be it small people and inhabit, see, we know no other dwell in it, but the kingdom of chile and a small portion join to the cape of good hope. the rest be possess by the ocean, although many be of opinion, the which i likewise hold, that there be much more land not yet discover, the which shall be firm land opposite to the kingdom of chile, which run beyond the circle or tropic of capricorn, and if there be any, without doubt it be a land of a excellent temper, be in the midst of two extreme and situate in the same climate with the best region in europe. and in this regard, aristotle conjecture be good, but speak of what be discover at this day in this zone. it be little, in regard of the large country inhabit under the burn zone that pliny and the ancient hold the same opinion with aristotle, chap 10.. this opinion of aristotle have be hold by pliny, who say thus: plin lib ^, cap 61.. the temperature of the middle region of the world, where the sun continual run his course, be scorch and burn up as with a near fire, join to the same region. there be two other, of either side, which lie betwixt the heat of this burn zone and the cruel cold of the other two extreme, be very temperate and can have no communication one with another by reason of the excessive heat of the heaven which have, be the opinion of the ancient general, describe by the poet in these verse, heaven circuit be of five zone, one whereof which still the sun burn, make the earth below with flame. intempestive, red hot to glow. and the same poet in another place hear this: if any harbour in that seat who quarter under that large zone be set amid four other by the sun enlighten. and another poet speak more plain: as many region be there on the ground as be in heaven, wherein five part be find, whereof the midst, through heat raise from the ray of scorch sun, inhabitable stay. the ancient have ground their general opinion upon one reason which seem to they certain and not to be confute for: find that the more a region draw near unto the south, the hot it be. the proof whereof be so infallible in those region as, by the same reason, in italy, apulia be hot than tuscan, and in spain, andelozia then biscay. a thing so apparent that, although there be but eight degree difference or less betwixt the one and the other, yet do we find the one extreme hot and the other very cold, whereby they do infer that the region so near the south, have the sun so direct for zenith, must of necessity be continual scorch with heat. they do likewise see that the diverse season of the year, as the spring, summer, autumn and winter, be cause by the nearness and distance of the sun, find also that, although they be far from the tropic, by which the sun do pass in summer, yet when it approach near unto they, at the same season they feel great heat, whereby they do conjecture that if they have have the sun so near unto they as to go direct over their head, the heat will have be so insupportable as it will burn and consume man with the vehemency thereof. the same reason move the ancient to think that the middle region be not habitable and therefore they call it the burn zone. and in truth, if visible experience do not unfold this doubt, we shall yet confess that this reason be very peremptory and mathematical, whereby we may see how weak our understanding be to comprehend these natural thing, but we may say it be fall out to the great good and happiness of our age to have the knowledge of these two great wonder, that be to know how easy we may sail through the great ocean and that under the burn zone man enjoy a very temperate heaven, the which the ancient can never believe of the last of these two wonder touch the quality and habitation of the burn zone. by the grace of god, we will discourse ample thereof in the next book, i think it. therefore fit in this book to treat of the manner of sail through the ocean, for that it import we much for the subject of this work. but before we come to this point it shall be good to show what the ancient think of these new man who we call indian, that in ancient book we find some knowledge of this new world, chap 11. let we return to that which have be former speak. we must necessary conclude that the ancient do believe that either there be no man beyond the tropic of cancer, as s augustine and lactantius do affirm, or if there be any, plutarch 3. phil, cap 11. at the least they do not inhabit betwixt the two tropic as aristotle and pliny. have maintain, and before they the philosopher parmenides, the contrary whereof be before sufficient prove both for the one and the other. but many, through curiosity, may demand if the ancient have no knowledge of this truth which to we be now so apparent? see that, in truth, it seem very strange that this new world, which be so spacious as we do, visible see it, shall be hide from the ancient by so many age. but some at this day, seek to obscure the felicity of this age and the glory of our nation, strive to prove that the new find world be know to the ancient. and in truth, we can deny, but there be some. apparency s jerome write upon the epistle to the ephesian. say s jerom supper, ap 1.. ephes: we seek with reason what the apostle mean in these word where he say: you have walk for a season according to the course of this world, whether he will have we to understand that there be a other world, which neither be nor depend of this world, but other world whereof clement write in his epistle: the ocean and the world which be beyond the ocean. these be the word of s jerome. but in truth i can find this epistle of s clement cite by s jerome, yet i believe undoubted that s clement have write it see s jerome make mention thereof and with reason saint clement say that beyond the ocean there be a other world. yea. many world, as in truth there be, see there be so great distance from one new world to a other new world, i mean from peru and the west indies to china and the east indies. moreover, pliny, who have be so curious a searcher out of strange thing, report in his natural history that hannon, a captain of the carthaginian, sail through the ocean from the straight of gibraltar coast, alongst the land pil^ li 2. c 67. even unto the confine of arabia, and that he leave this his navigation in writing. if it be as pliny write it follow that hannon sail as far as the portugal do at this day, pass twice under the equinoctial, which be a fearful thing. and the same pliny. report of cornelius nepos, a very grave author, who say that the same course have be sail by a other man call, but by contrary way. for this, follow the king of latyre, pass by the red sea into the ocean and turn back, come to the straight of gibraltar, the which cornelius nepos affirm to have happen in his time. and also other grave author do write that a ship of carthage drive by force of wind into the ocean, come to a land which until then be unknown, and return to carthage kindle a great desire in the citizen to discover and people this land. the which the senate perceive do forbid this navigation by a rigorous decree. fear that with the desire of new land. they shall leave to love their own country. by all this we may gather that the ancient have some knowledge of the new world. yet shall you hardly find in the book of ancient writer any thing write of our america and all the west indies. but of the east indies i say there be sufficient testimony, not only of that on the other side, but also of that on this side, which then be far off, go thither by a contrary way to that at this day. be it not easy to find molaco in ancient book, which they call the golden chersonese, the cape of which be call the promontory of coci and that great and famous island of sumatra so well know by the ancient. name of taprobana. what shall we say of the two, the brachmanes and that great land? of the chinaes who doubt, but there be often mention make thereof in ancient book. but of the west indies we find not in pliny that in this navigation they pass the land of the canary, plin, lib 6. cap 21. which he call fortunate, the principal, whereof be say to be call canary for the multitude of dog which be in it. but there be scarce any mention in ancient book of the voyage which be make at this day beyond the canary, by the gulf which with reason they call great. yet many hold opinion that seneca the tragedian do prophesy of the west indies in his tragedy of medea. which translate: say thus: senec in m^d act: 2.. in sin a age shall come, ere age end. bless, strange and strange bless. when our sea, far and near or'pre his shore shall far yet extend descry, then shall a large land be by this profound sea navigation, another world, a other nation. all man shall then discover, see thule account heretofore, the world extreme, the northern bind shall be when south-west part be find a near isle, a neighbour shore. this seneca report in these verse, and we can well deny, but understand it literal. it be very true, for if we reckon the many year he speak of begin from the time of the tragedian, it be above a thousand and four hundred year past. and if it be from the time of medea, it be above two thousand year. the which we see plain now accomplish, see the passage of the ocean, so long time hide have be find out and that they have discover a great land and a new world inhabit more spacious than all the continent of europe and asia. but therein may a question with reason be make, whether seneca speak this by divination or poetical and by chance. and to speak my opinion, i believe he do divine, after the manner of wise man and well advise for that in his time, they undertake new voyage and navigation by sea. he know well, like a philosopher, that there be a other land, contrary and opposite unto we. which they call antichthon, and by this ground he may conceive that the industry and courage of man may in the end pass the ocean and discover new land and another world. for that, in senecaes time, they have knowledge of the voyage which pliny speak of, whereby they pass the great ocean, the which seem to be the motive of senecaes prophecy, as he give we to understand by these former verse: after the, which have describe the careful life of the ancient, free from malice, he follow: thus now, be it not as erst, it be, for whether the ocean will or will he traverse, be by hardy will which pastime make time. so to pass, and a little after, he say: thus now, every boat. dare swim and sport on surge. sea fear no wrack passenger. seek what they lack. so long a voyage, think but short. nothing be now more to discover. no place be now leave to surprise town. now that for defence, devise with new fortification cover all in the world turn round about no thing in place as it be. enure nothing unseen, nothing. assure this circle universe throughout. the indian who at home heat, fry, drink of araxis, water cold. the persian, rich in gem and gold, wash in the rhine and elbe. likewise seneca do conjecture this by the great courage of man as that which shall happen last, say it shall fall out in the latter age, etc. as have be before mention of the opinion. which plato hold of the west indies, chap 12.. if any one have treat more particular of the west indies, the honour belong to plato who, in his time, faith thus, in those day they can not sail this gulf mean the atlantike sea, which be the ocean, which meet at the straight of gibraltar, for that the passage be stop at the mouth of the pillar of hercules, which be the same straight of gibraltar, and this island be, in those day, join to the foresay mouth and be of that bigness as it exceed all asia and africa together, and then be there a passage to go from these land to other, and from those other island they go to the firm land, the, which be near environ with the very sea. this be report. by critias in plato, and such as believe that this narration of plato be a true history, deliver in these term, say that this great atlantic island, the which do exceed both africa and asia in greatness, do then comprehend the great part of the ocean call atlantike, which the spaniard now sail in, and that those other land which he say be near unto this great one be those which we now call the land of barlovante, that be cuba, hispaniola s john de port, jamaica and other land of that country, and that the main land whereof he make mention be the same we now call firm land, that be peru and america, and that sea, which he say be adjoin to the firm land, be the south sea, the which he call the very sea, for that, in comparison of her greatness, all other sea, both mediterranean, yea and the atlantike sea, be small in regard thereof. hereby, in truth, they give a cunning and witty interpretation to these word of plato. but whether this interpretation shall be hold for true or not, i be resolve to declare in a other place that some have hold opinion that, in place of holy scripture, whereas they speak of ophir, be to be understand of our peru, chap 13.. some hold opinion that mention be make of the west indies in the holy scripture. take the region of peru for that ophir which so famous, robert steevens, or, to say more true, francis vatable, a. man well see in the hebrew tongue, as i have hear our master report, who be his disciple, say in his annotation upon the 9 chapter of the 3. book of king, that the island of hispaniola which christopher colombus find out be that of ophir, in 3. lib, reg cap 9, from whence solomon cause to be bring four hundred and twenty or four hundred and 50. talent of most fine and pure gold in appaca^^^, leg ca 9, for that the gold of cibao which our man bring from hispaniola be of the same fashion and quality. and there be many other which affirm that our peru be ophir, derive one name from another, who believe that when, as the book of paralipomenon be write 2.. para^^p 9, 3. reg 10. they call it peru. ground it upon that which the holy scripture say, that they bring from ophir pure gold, precious stone and wood which be rare and goodly. which thing abound in peru, as they say. but in my opinion it be far from the truth that peru shall be ophir, so famous in the bible. for although in this peru there be good store of gold, yet be there not such abundance as it may be equal with the fame of the riches that be in ancient time at the east indies. 2, para ^. 4. reg 22. 9- reg 9. i find not that in peru there be such precious stone or such exquisite wood as the like have not. bend see at jerusalem, for although there be exquisite emerald and some hard tree of aromatical wood, yet do i not find any thing ofso great commendation as the scripture give unto ophir. moreover, it seem not likely that solomon will leave the east indies most rich and plentiful to send his fleet to this far land. whether, if they have come so often as it be write, we have sure find more sign and testimony thereof. moreover, the etymology of the name of ophir and the change or reduction thereof to peru seem to i of small consideration. be most certain that the name of peru be not very ancient nor common to all that country. it have be usual in the discovery of the new world. to give name to land and port of the sea, according to the occasion present at their arrival, and i believe that the name of peru have be so find out and put in practice, for we find here that the name have be give to all the country of peru by reason of a river so call by the inhbitant of the country where the spaniard arrive upon their first discovery, whereby we maintain that the indian themselves be ignorant and do not use this name and appellation to signify their land. it seem, moreover, the same author will say that sepher speak of in the scripture, be that which we now call andes, which be most high mountain in peru. but this resemblance of name and appellation be no sufficient proof. if that be of force, we may as well say that jectan be jecsan mention in the holy scripture. neither may we say jectan heber, gen 10. 25. that the name of titus and paul, which the king of peru do use, come from the roman or christian, see it be too weak a argument to draw a conclusion of great matter. we see plain that it be contrary to the intention of the holy scripture which some have write that tharsis and ophir be one and the same province. confer the 22 chapter of the 4. book of the king with the 20. chapter of the second book of paralipomenon. for that in the book of the king it be say that josaphat prepare a fleet of ship in asiongaber to fetch gold at ophir, and in paralipomenon it be write that the same fleet be furnish to go unto tharsis, whereby it may be suppose that in these foresaid book where the scripture speak of tharsis and ophir that it mean one thing. some one may demand what region or province that ophir be, whether solomon fleet go with the mariner of hyram, king of tyre and sidon to fetch hold, and whether king josaphat fleet 3. reg 9. 4. reg 22. pretend to go do suffer shipwreck and perish in asiongaber, as the holy scripture do testify in this. i do willing agree with the opinion of joseph in his book of antiquity where he say that it be a province of the east indies, gen 10. the which be find by that ophir, the son of jectan, whereof mention be make in the 10. of genessis, and that province do abound with most fine gold. thereof it come. they do so much extol the gold of ophir or of ophas, or as some will say, this word of obrise, be thesame with ophrise, for find there seven sort or kind of gold, as s jerome report. that of ophir be hold for the most fine, as here we esteem the gold of valdivia and caramaya. the chief reason which move i to think that ophir be at the east indies and not in the west be, for that solomon fleet can not come hither without pass the east indies, all china and a great part of the sea be unlikely they will pass over all the world to come thither for gold. that continent especial lie in that sort, as they can not come to the knowledge thereof by any voyage by land. and hereafter we will show that the ancient have never knowledge in the art of navigation, without the which they can not run so far into the sea. final, in these matter, when, as there appear no certain proof, but only light conjecture, we be not bind to believe but what we shall think good, what tharsis and ophir signify in the holy scripture, chap 14.. if every man conjecture and opinion may be allow, for my part i hold that in the holy scripture these word of tharsis and ophir, most common, do not signify any certain place, but it be a word and signification general. to the hebrew, as in our vulgar tongue, this word of indies be general unto we in our usual manner ofspeech. for we mean by the indies those rich country which be far off and strange unto we. so we spaniard do indifferent call indies the country of peru, mexico, china, malaca and bresil, and from what part soever of these any letter come. we say they be from the indies, which country be far distant and different one from another. yet we can deny but that name of indies be proper to be understand of the east indies, and for that in old time they do speak of these indies as of a country far off. so likewise in the discovery of other remote land they have, give they the name of indies, be distant from the rest and hold as the end of the world. even so, in my judgement, tharsis in the holy scripture do not signify any certain and determine place, but only region, a far off and, according to the vulgar opinion, very rich and strange for that which josephus and some other will affirm, that tharsis be tarso according to the meaning of the scripture, jerom marcel in 3.. in my opinion, have be well refute by s jerome, not only for that these word be write with diverse letter, the one with a aspiration, the other without, but also that many thing be write of tharsis which can agree with tarso, a city in cilicia. it be true that in some place of the scripture, tharsis be say to be in cilicia. the which you shall find in the book of judith speak of holophernes who have pass the limit of assyria, judith 2. he come to the great mountain of ange, which perchance be taurus, which hill be on the left hand of cilicia, and that he enter into all the castle pline, lib 5., cap 27. where he assemble all his force, have destroy. that famous city of melothi, he ruin all the child of tharsis and of israel which be join unto the desert and those which be in the south towards the land of cellon and from thence pass euphrates. but as i have say, that which be so write of tharsis, theodor in 1. joan, can be apply to the city of tharso. theodoret and some other follow the interpretation of the 70. astasmont, ibid and in in some place. they set tharsis. in africa say it be the same city which be ancient call carthage and be now the kingdom of thunis. and they say that jonas mean to go thither when, as the scripture report that hefle from the lord into tharsis, other pretend that tharsis be. a certain country of the indies, whereunto it seem that s jerome be incline, jer marcel. i will not now decide these opinion, but i hold that in this case the scripture do not always signify one region or certain part of the world. it be true that the wise man or king that come to worship christ be of the east, and the scripture say they be of saba, epha and madiem, and some learned man hold that they be of ethiopia, arabia and persia, and yet the psalmist and the church sing of: they psal 60, isa^^ 16.. the king of tharsis shall bring present. we agree, then, with s jerome that tharsis be a word that have many and diverse signification in the scripture sometime. it signify the crisolite or jacinth stone, sometime a certain region of the indies, sometime the sea which be of the colour of a jacinth by the reverberation of the sun. but the same doctor do, with reason, deny that tharsis be any region of the indies. whether jonas will fly see that part from joppa, it have be impossible to sail unto the indies by that sea, for that joppa, which at this day we call jaf, be no port of the red sea, join to the east indian sea, but of the mediterranean sea, which have no issue into the indian, whereby it do plain appear that the voyage which solomon fleet make part from asiongaber, whereas the ship of king josaphat be lose, go by. the red sea to tharsis and ophir, the which be direct, testify in the scripture, the which voyage be very different from that which jonas pretend. to tharsis see that asiongaber be the port of a city of idumea seat upon the straight, whereas the red sea join with the great ocean. from this ophir they bring to solomon gold, silver, elephant tooth, monkey, indian cock, and their voyage be of three year, all which without doubt ought to be understand, of the east indies, which be fruitful and abundant of all these thing, as pliny testify and our own experience do witness, from our peru, doubtless they can not bring any elephant tooth, those beast be unknown there, but they may well bring gold, silver and pleasant. monkey. final, the holy scripture. in my opinion, do common understand by this word of tharsis either the great sea or far and strange region. so as he suppose that the prophecy which speak of tharsis, see the spirit of prophecy, may comprehend all thing, may often be apply to thing of our new world, of the prophecy of abdias, which some do interpret to be the indies, chap 15.. many say and affirm that in the holy scripture it be foretell long before that this new world shall be convert to jesus christ by the spanish nation. and to this purpose they expound the text of the prophecy of abdias, which say thus: at the transmigration of this o^t, the child of israel shall possess all the, the dwelling of the canaanite unto sarepte, and the transmigration of jerusalem, which be at bosphorus, shall possess the city of the south, and they that shall save shall come up to the hill of zion to judge the mount of esau and the kingdom shall be the lord. this have be set down according to the letter, but the hebrew author read it thus: and the transmigration of this o^t of the child, which be the canaanite, unto zarphat, which be france, and the transmigration of jerusalem, which be in sapharad. understand, for spain shall possess for inheritance the city of the south, and those which procure salvation shall mount up to the hill of zion to judge the mount of esau and the kingdom shall be the lord. yet some of they do not produce any sufficient testimony of the ancient, nor pertinent reason to prove that sapharad, which s jerome do interpret the bosphor or straight, and the 70. interpreter, euphrates, shall signify spain. but their only opinion. other allege the chaldean paraphrase which be of this opinion and the ancient rabbin which expound it on this sort, as also that zarphat be france, which the vulgar and the 70 interpreter call sarepte. but leave this dispute which belong to man of more leisure. what necessity be there to believe that the city of the south, or of mageb, as the 70 write, be those of this new world? moreover, what need be there to believe and to take the spanish nation for the transmigration from jerusalem to sapharad, unless we will understand jerusalem spiritual and thereby the church. so as by the transmigration from jerusalem to sapharad, the holy spirit, show we the child of the holy church which inhabit the end of the earth and the bank of the sea, for so be sapharad, understand in the syrian tongue and do well agree with our spain which, according to the ancient be the end of the earth be in a manner all environ with sea and by the city of the south. we may well understand these indies. see the great part of this new world be seat in the south and the better part look to the pole, antarctic. that which follow be easy to interpret. viz, they which procure salvation shall ascend the hill of zion to judge the mount of esau. for we may say, they unite themselves to the doctrine and strength of the holy church which seek to break and disperse the profane error of the gentile. for that may be interpret to judge the mount of esau, whereby it follow that in those day the realm shall neither be for the spaniard nor for they of europe, but for jesus christ, our saviour. whosoever shall expound the prophecy of abdias in this sort ought not to be blame be most. certain that the holy spirit do understand all secret long before- and it seem there be great reason to believe- that mention be make in the holy scripture of a matter of such importance as the discovery of the indies of the new world and their conversion to the faith. isaiah say in these word: oh, the wing of ship which come from the other part of ethiopia, isay 18.. luxt^ 70. interp. many learned author hold that all this chapter be understand of the indies, and that same prophet in a other place say: i^ay 66.. those which shall escape out of israel shall go far off to tharsis and to remote land where they shall convert many nation unto the lord amongst the which he name. greece, italy, africa, with many other, the which, without doubt, may well be apply unto the conversion of the indies. be most certain that the gospel shall be preach general throughout the world, as our saviour have promise, and then the end of the world shall come. it follow then, and so we ought to understand it, that there be many nation upon the face of the earth to who jesus christ have not yet be preach, whereby we may gather that there remain a great part of the world unknown to the ancient, and that yet, at this day, there be a good part to discover by what mean the first man may come to the indies, the which be not willing nor of set purpose. chap. 16. now it be time to make answer to such as say there be no antipode and that this region where we live can be inhabit. the huge greatness of the ocean do so amaze s augustine, as he can not conceive how mankind can pass to this new-found world. but see, on the one side, we know for certain that many year ago there be man inhabit in these part. so likewise we can deny, but the scripture do teach, we clear, that all man be come from the first man. without doubt we shall be force to believe and confess that man have pass hither from europe, asia or africa. yet must we discover by what mean they can pass? it be not likely that there be a other noah ark by the which man may be transport into the indies, and much less any angel to carry the first man to this new world. hold he by the hair of the head, like to the prophet abac^c, for we entreat not of the mighty power of god, but only of that which be conformable unto reason and the order and disposition of human thing, wherefore these two thing ought to be hold for wonderful and worthy of admiration yea to be number among the secret of god, the one be how man can pass so huge a passage by sea and land, the other be that there be such multitude of people they have yet be unknown. so many age for this cause, i demand by what resolution, force or industry the indian can pass so large a sea, and who may be the inventor of so strange a passage? true, i have often time consider thereof with myself, as many other have do, but never can i find any thing to satisfy i. yet will i say what i have conceive and what come present into my mind. see that testimony fail, i, who i may follow, suffer myself to be guide by the rule of reason, although it be very subtle, it be most certain that the first man come to this land of peru by one of these two mean, either by land or by sea. if they come by sea, it be casual and by chance, or willing and of purpose. i understand by chance be cast by force of some storm or tempest, as it happen in tempestuous time. i mean do of purpose when they prepare fleet to discover new land beside these two mean, i see it be not possible to find out any other if we will follow the course of human thing and not devise fabulous and poetical fiction, for no man may think to find another eagle as that of ganymede, or a fly horse like unto perseu^ that shall carry the indian through the air, or that peradventure these first man have. use fish as mir-maide, or the fish call a nicholas to pass they thither. but lay aside these imagination and foppery, let we examine these two mean, the, which will be both pleasant and profitable. first, in my judgement, it be not far from reason to say that the first and ancient people of these indies have discover, and people after the same sort as we do at this day, that be by the art of navigation and aid of pilot, the which guide themselves by the height and knowledge of the heaven and by their industry in handle and change of their sail according to the season. why may not this well be? must we believe that we alone, and in this our age, have only the art and knowledge to sail through the ocean? we see, even now, that they cut through the ocean to discover new land, as, not long since, alvero mendana and his companion do, who part from the port of lima, come alongst the west to discover the land which lie eastward from per^, and at the end of three month they discover the land which they call the land of solomon, which be many and very great, and by all likelehood they lie adjoin to new guinnie or else be very near to some other firm land. and even now, by commandment from the king and his counsel, they be resolve to prepare a new fleet for these land. see it be thus. why may we not suppose that the ancient have the courage and resolution to travel by sea with the same intent to discover the land which they call antictho^, opposite to they, and that, according to the discourse of their philosophy, it shall be with a intent not to rest until they come in view of the land they seek? sure there be no repugnancy or contrariety in that which we see happen at this day and that of former age. see that the holy scripture do wit^es that solomon take master and pilot from tyre and sidon, man very expert in navigation, 2, 2, 2. para 9, who, by their industry, perform this voyage in three year, 3, 3, 3. r^z 10. to what end, think you? do it note the art of mariner and their knowledge with their long voyage of three year. but to give we to understand that solomon sleet sail through the great ocean. many be of this opinion, which think that s augustine have small reason to wonder at the greatness of the ocean, who may well conjecture that it be not so difficult to sail through. consider what have be speak of solomon navigation. but to say the truth, i be of a contrary opinion. neither can i persuade myself that the first indian come to this new world of purpose by a determine voyage. neither will i yield that the ancient have knowledgein the art of navigation whereby man at this day pass the ocean from one part. to another where they please, the which they perform with a incredible swiftness and resolution. neither do i find in all antiquity any mark or testimony of so notable a thing and of so great importance beside. i find not that in ancient book there be any mention make of the use of the adamant or loadstone, nor of the compass to sail by. yea, i believe they have no knowledge thereof. and if we take away the knowledge of the compass to sail by, we shall easy judge how impossible it be for they to pass the great ocean. such as have any knowledge of the sea, understand i well, for that it be as easy to believe that a mariner in full sea can direct his course where he please without a compass, as for a blind man to show with his finger any thing, be it near or far off. and it be strange that the ancient have be so long ignorant of this excellent property of the adamant stone, p^in^lib 3. c^ 6 and lib 34. cap 1.14 and lib 7., cap 4.. for pliny, who be so curious in natural cause, write of this adamant stone, speak nothing of that virtue and property. it have always to turn the iron which it touch towards the north, the which be the most admirable virtue. it have aristotle, theophrastes, dioscorides, lucretius, nor any other writer or natural philosopher. dios, lib ^, cap 10. lucret, lib 6. that i have see make any mention thereof, although they treat of the adamant stone. saint augustine write many and sundry property and excellency of the adamant stone, aug de cuit, d^^, c^^, 4. in his book of the city of god, speak nothing thereof. and without doubt, all the excellency speak of this stone be nothing in respect of this strange property. look always towards the north, which be a great wonder of nature. there be yet another argument: plin, lib 7. c 16, for plinic, treat of the first inventor of navigation and name all the instrument. yet he speak nothing of the compass to sa^e by, nor of the adamant stone. i say only that the art to know the star be invent by the, and there be no doubt but whatsoever. the ancient know of the art of navigation, be only in regard of the star and observe the shore, cape and difference of land. and if they have once lose the sight of land, they know not which way to direct their course. but by the star, sun and moon, and that sail as it do, often in a dark and cloudy season, they do govern themselves by the quality of the wind and by conjecture of the way which they have pass. final, they go as they be, guide by their own motion, as at the indies. the indian sail a long way by sea, guide only by their own industry and natural instinct. and it serve great to purpose that which pliny write of the islander of taprobana, which at this day we call sumatra, speak in this sort when, as he treat of the art and industry they use. in sail, those of taprobana see not the north to sail, by which defect they supply with certain small bird. they carry with they, the which they often let fly, and as those bird, by a natural instinct, fly always towards the land, so the mariner direct their course after they who doubt, then if they have have any knowledge of the compass, they will not have. use these little bird for their guide to discover the land. to conclude, this suffice to show that the ancient have no knowledge of the secret of the loadstone. see that for so notable a thing there be no proper word in latin, greek or hebrew, for a thing of such importance can not have want a name in these tongue. if they have know it, whereupon the pilot, at this day, to direct he his course that hold the helm, sit aloft in the poop of the ship, the better to observe the compass where, as in old time, they sit in the prow of the ship to mark the difference of land and sea, from which place they command the helm, as they use at this day at the entry or go out of any port or haven, and therefore the greek call pilot for that. they remain still in the prow of the property and admirable virtue of the adamant stone for navigation, whereof the ancient have no knowledge, chap 17.. by that which have be former speak. it appear that the navigation to the indies be as certain and as short as we be assure of the adamant stone, and at this day we see many that have sail from lisbon to goa, from siville to mexico and through all the south sea, even unto china and to the straight of maggellan, and that as certain and as easy as the husbandman go from his farm unto the city. we have also see man that have make fifteen, yea eighteen voyage to the indies, and we have hear speak of some ancient which have make above twenty vioge, pass and repass the great ocean in the which they have not see any sign of such as have travel. nor meet with any passenger to demand the way of they. s^p 2 for, as the wife man say, a ship cut the wave of the water, leave no way where it pass, nor any path in the flood, but by the virtue and property of the adam ant stone it make as it be a beat path in this ocean. the high creator of all thing have impart this virtue unto it that by the touch of iron it have always his motion and aspect towards the north, in what part of the world soever you be, some search what shall be the cause of this wonderful property and imagine i know not what sympathy. but for my part, i take more pleasure and content in the consideration of these wonder to praise the power and greatness of the almighty and rejoice in the contemplation of his admirable work and to say with solomon sap 14.. speak upon this subject, o father, who providence, govern and maintain a piece of wood, give it a assure way upon the sea and in the midst of the swell wave, to show that in the like sort thou can save and deliver man from all peril and shipwreck, yea, although he be in the midst of the sea without ship. but for that thy work be full of wisdom, man hazard their life in a small piece of wood and pass through the sea in a ship and be save. and upon the same subject, the psalmist say: they which go to the sea in ship and traffic by the great water have see the work of the lord, psal 106.. and his wonder in the depth of the sea. and in truth, it be not one of the least wonder of god that the force of so small a stone shall command the sea and force the infinite depth thereof to obey he and follow his commandment. but for that it be a usual thing and seem easy, man do not admire it, nor take any great. regard thereof and for that his bounty be such the ignorant make less account thereof notwithstanding, such as will due consider it be lead by reason to bless the wisdom of god and to give he thanks for so great a benefit. be then decree in heaven that these nation of the indies, which have lie so long hide, shall be know and discover, and that this rout shall be frequent to the end. so many soul shall come to the knowledge of jesus christ and win eternal life. there be a assure guide, provide for such as travel that way that be the compass to sail by and the virtue of the adamant stone. we do not certain know at what time this art of sail be. bring to light. but for my part i hold for certain that it be not very ancient. for beside the reason allege in the former chapter, i have not read in any ancient author treat of dial any mention make of the adamant. and yet, undoubted, the principal and most necessary instument for sun dial which we use at this day be the needle of iron. touch with the adamant stone. some approve. author write in the history of the east indies that the first which begin to discover this secret upon the sea be de gama, who in the height of mosambique. lib 1. d^ ital illustr regne 19 plin. lib 2. cap 71. and lib 7. c 1. ult ozor reb g^st eman li 1 meet. with certain mariner moor which use this compass or needle to sail by and by the mean thereof he sail through those sea. yet they write, not from who they learn this art, and some among they be of our opinion that the ancient be ignorant of this secret. moreover, i will show a great wonder of the needle to sail, by which we may hold- incredible if we have not proof thereof, by undoubted experience- the iron touch or rub with that part of the adamant stone which be towards the south, have this virtue to turn, always and in all place, to the contrary, which be the north, yet do it not in all place, direct regard it, but have certain point and climate where it. direct regard the north and their stay, but change this climate. it incline a little either to the east or to the west, the far it go from this climate, which the mariner call north-east or northwest, which be to say coast or incline to the east or to the west. and it be a thing of such consequence to understand this decline or coast of the needle that if they observe it, not advise, although it be small, they shall stray, wonderful in their course and arrive in another place then where they pretend to go. once a very expert pilot of portugal tell i that there be four point in all the world, whereas the needle look direct towards the north, the which he name. but i do not well remember. they one be in the height of the island of corvo, at the terceres or acore, which be very well know to all man, but pass to a great altitude, it decline to the west and contrariwise, draw to a less altitude, towards the equinoctial, it lean to the east. the master of this art can well tell how far and how much. for my part, i will glad know of such as presume to know all thing. what shall be the cause of this effect, and for what reason? a little iron touch with the adamant stone, such virtue as to look always towards the north and with such dexterity that it understand the sundry climate and situation of the world. and which way it shall turn and incline, as well as any philosopher or cosinographer whatsoever, and see, we can well discover the cause and reason of these thing which we see daily. without doubt they be very hard to believe if they be not apparent. herein we discover our folly and vanity to make ourselves judge ' and to subject divine and high thing to our reason and discourse. it be therefore better, as s gregory the divine say, ^o subject reason unto faith, for that, in she own mansion, she have no government. but this shall suffice. let we return to our purpose and conclude that the use of the needle to sail by be unknown to the ancient, whereby we may resolve that it be. impossible to make a determine voyage, part from the other world to come to this, by the ocean, wherein a answer be make to they that say that in time pass, they have sail through the ocean, as at this day, chap 18.. that which be allege, to the contrary of that which have be speak, that salomon fleet sail in three year, be no sufficient proof. see the holy scripture do not direct affirm that this voyage continue three year, but that it be make once in three year. and although we grant that the voyage last three year, it may be, as it be likely, that this fleet sail towards the east indies be stay in their course by the diversity of port and region which they discover, as at this day, in all the south sea. they sail from chile to new spain, the which voyage, although it be more certain yet, be it long by reason of the turn they be force to make upon the coast, and they stay in diverse port, and in truth, i do not find in ancient book that they have launch far into the ocean, neither can i believe that this their sail be. otherwise. then they use at this day in the mediterranean sea, which make learned man to conjecture that in old time they do not sail without owers, for that they go always coast along the shore, and it seem the holy scripture do testify as much speak of that famous voyage of the prophet jonas, where it say that the mariner be force. by the weather row to land that we may conjecture how the first inhabitant of the indies come thither by force of weather and not willing. chap 19 have show that there be no reason to believe that the first inhabitant of the indies come thither purposely. it follow, then, that if they come by sea, it be by chance or by force of weather, the which be not incredible, notwithstanding the vastness of the ocean. see the like have happen in our time. when, as that mariner who name we be yet ignorant of to the end, so great a work and of such importance shall not be attribute to any other author, then to god have, through tempest, discover this new world. leave for payment of. his lodging, where he have receive it to christopher columbus the knowledge of so great a secret. even so, it may chance that some of europe or africa in time past, have be drive by soul weather and cast upon unknown land beyond the ocean. who know not that most or the great part of the region in this new world be discover by this mean, the which we must rather attribute to the violence of the weather, then to the spirit and industry of those which have discover, and to the end we may know that it be not in our time only that they have undertake such voyage through the greatness of our ship and the valour and courage of our man. we may read in pliny that many of the ancient have make the like voyage. he write in this manner: it be report that caius caesar, son to augustus caesar, plin, li 2. c 69. have charge upon the arabian sea. do there see and find certain piece and remainder of spanish ship that have perish. and after he say nepos, report of the northern circuit that they bring to metellus caeler, companion in the consulship, to caius affranius. the same metellus be then proconsul in gaul certain indian which have be present by the king of sueden, th^ which indian sail from india for their traffic be cast upon germany by force of tempest. doubtless, if pliny speak truth, the portugal in these day sail no further. than they do in those two shipwreck plin lib 6.. c 22, the one from spain to the red sea, the other from the east indies to germany. the same author write in another place that a servant of annius, who farm the custom of the red sea, sail the course of arabia. there come so furious a northern wind that in fifteen day he pass caramania and discover hippare, a port in taprobane which at this day we call sumatra. and they report of a ship of carthage, which be drive out of the mediterranean sea by a northern wind, to the view of this new world, the which be no strange thing to such as have any knowledge of the sea to know that sometime a storm continue long and furious without any intermission. i myself go to the indies, part from the canary, have, in fifteen day, discover the first land people by the spaniard, and without doubt this voyage have be short if the mariner have set up all their sail to the northern wind that blow. it seem therefore likely to i that in time past man come to the indies against their will, drive by the fury of the wind. in peru. they make great mention of certain giant which have be in those part who bone be yet see at manta and port vi^il: of a huge greatness and by their proportion they shall be thrice as big as the indian at this day. they report that the giant come by sea to make war with those of the country and that they make goodly building, whereof, at this day, they show a well build with stone of great price. they say, moreover, that these man commit abominable sin, especial against nature, be consume by fire from heaven, in like fort the indian report of y^a and arica, that in old time they be wont to sail far to the land of the west and make their voyage in seal skin blow up, so as there want no witness to prove that they sail in the south sea before the spaniard come thither. thus we may well conjecture that the new world begin to be inhabit by man that have be cast upon that coast by the violence of the northern wind, as we have see in our age. so it be be a matter very considerable that the work of nature of great importance for the most part have be find out accidental and not by the industry and diligence of man. the great part of physical herb, of stone, plant metal, pearl, gold, adamant amber, diamond and the most part of such like thing with their property and virtue, have rather come to the knowledge of man by chance, then by art or industry. to the end, we may know that the glory and praise of such wonder shall be attribute to the providence of the creator and not to man. understanding for that which we think to happen accidental proceed always from the ordinance and disposition of god, who do all thing with reason. notwithstanding all that have be say, it be more likely that the first inhabitant of the indies come by land, chap 20.. i conclude, then, that it be likely the first that come to the indies be by shipwreck and tempest of wether. but hereupon grow a difficulty which trouble i much, for suppose we grant that the first man come from far country and that the nation which we now see be issue from they and multiply yet, can i not conjecture by what mean brute beast, whereof there be great abundance, can come there? not be likely? they shall have be embark and carry by sea the reason that enforce we to yield, that the first man of the indies be come from europe or asia. be the testimony of the holy scripture which teach we plain that all man come from adam ^en 7.. we can therefore give no other beginning to those at the indies see the holy scripture say that all beast and creature of the earth perish, but such as be reserve in the ark of noah for the multiplication and maintenance of their kind. so as we must necessary refer the multiplication of all beast to those which come out of the ark of noah on the mountain of ararat, where it stay, and by this mean we must seek out both for man and beast, the way whereby they may pass from the old world to this new, saint augustine treat upon this question. by what reason you? shall find in some island, wolf a^g, lib 6. d civit, cap 7. tiger and other ravenous beast which breed no profit to man. see, there be no doubt. but elephant, horse, ox, dog and other beast which serve man to use, have be express, carry in ship, as we see at this day, bring from the east into europe and transport from europe to peru, although the voyage be very long. and by what mean these beast which yield no profit but be very hurtful, as wolf and other of that wild nature shall pass to the indies. suppose, as it be certain that the deluge drown all the earth in which treaty this learned and holy man labour to free himself of these difficulty, say that. they may swim unto these land, or that some have carry they thither for their delight in hunt, or that by the will of god, they have be new create of the earth, after the same manner of the first creation, when god say: let the earth bring forth every live thing according to his kind, gen 1.. cattle and creep, worm and the beast of the field, every one in his kind. but if we shall apply this solution to our purpose, the matter will remain more doubtful. for beginning at the last point, it be not likely, according to the order of nature, nor conformable to the order of government, establish by god that perfect creature as lion, tiger and wolf shall be engender of the earth, as we see that rat, frog, bee and other imperfect creature be common engender. moreover, to what purpose? be that which the scripture say and do so often repeat: gen 7. thou shall take of all the beast and bird of the air seven and seven, male and female, to maintain generation upon earth, if such beast, after the deluge, shall be create again, after a new kind of creation, without conjunction of male and female, and hereupon may grow another question: see such creature be breed on? the earth, according to this opinion. wherefore be they not likewise in all other part of the main land and in many island? see, we must not regard the natural order of generation but the bounty of the creator. on the other part, i will not hold it for a thing incredible that they have carry some of these beast for the pleasure of hunt, for that we often see prince and great man keep and nourish in their cage, only for their pleasure and greatness, both lion, bear and other savage beast, especial when they be bring from far country. but to speak that of woolve, fox and other beast which yield no profit and have nothing rare and excellent in they but to hurt the cattle. and to say also that they have carry they by sea for hunt. true, it be a thing that have no sense. who can imagine that in so long a voyage, man will take the pain to carry fox to peru, especial of that kind which they call anas, which be the filthy that i have see? who will likewise say that the have carry tiger and lion? true, it be a thing worthy the laugh at to think so it be sufficient. yea, very much for man, drive against their will by tempest, in so long and unknown a voyage to escape the danger of the sea with their own life, without busy themselves to carry woolve and fox and to nourish they at sea. if these beast than come by sea, we must believe it be by swim, which may happen in some land not far distant from other or from the main land, the which we can deny, see the experience we have and that we see these beast be press to swim day and night without weariness and so to escape. but this be to be understand- in small straits and passage, for in our ocean they will mock at such swimmer, whenas bird fail in their flight, yea, those of the great wing, upon the passage of so great a gulf, and although we find small bird which fly above a hundred league, as we have often see in our travel, yet it be a matter impossible^, at the least very difficult, for bird to pass all the ocean. all this be true, which we have speak, what way ^^all we make for beast and bird to go to the indies, and how, can i say, they pass from one world to a other. i conjecture, then, by the discourse i have make, that the new world, which we call indies, be not altogether sever and disjoin from the other world. and, to speak my opinion, i have long believe that the one and the other world be join and continue one with a other in some part, or at the least be very near. and yet to this day there be no certain knowledge of the contrary. for towards the arctic or northern pole, all the longitude of the earth be not discover, and many hold that above florida the land run out very large towards the north and, as they say, join with the scithike or german sea. other affirm that a ship sail in that sea, report to have see the coast of bacalaos, which stretch almost to the confine of europe. moreover, no man know how far the land run beyond the cape of mendoca in the south sea, but that they affirm it be a great continent which run a infinite length. and return to the southern pole, no man know the land on the other part of the straight of magellan, a ship belong to the bishop of plaisance, which pass the straight, report to have sail always within sight of land, the like hernando lame, a pilot do affirm, who, force by foul weather, pass two or three degree above the say straight. so as there be no reason or experience that do contradict my conceit and opinion, which be that the whole earth be unite and join in some part, or at the least the one approach near unto the other. if this be true, as in effect there be some likelihood, the answer be easy to the doubt we have propound how the first inhabitant can pass to the indies, for that we must believe they can not so convenient come thither by sea as travel by land, which may be do without consideration, in change, by little and little, their land and habitation, some people the land they find, and other seek for new. in time they come to inhabit, and people, the indies, with so many nation. people and tongue, as we see by what mean tame beast, pass to the indies, chap 21.. the sign and argument which offer themselves to such as be curious to examine the indian manner and fashion help much to maintain the foresay opinion for that you shall not find any inhabit the land that be far from the main land or from other land as the bermudes, the reason whereof be for that the ancient do never sail- but alongst the coast and in view of land whereupon it be report that they have find no great ship in any part of the indies capable to pass such gulf, but only bark and canoe which be all less than our long boat, the which the indian do only use with the which they can not run through so great a passage without apparent danger of shipwreck, and although their ship have be sufficient yet have they no knowledge of the astrolabe or compass? if, then, they have be but eight or ten day at sea, withoutsight of land, they must of necessity lose themselves, have no knowledge where they be. we know many island well, people with indian and their usual navigation, the which be such as they may well perform in canoe and boat without any compass to sail by, whenas the indian of peru, which remain at tomb, do see our first spanish ship sail to peru and view the greatness of their sail be spread and of the body of the ship, they stand great amaze, not be able to persuade themselves that they be ship, have never see any. of the like form and greatness. they suppose they have be rock, but see, they advance and not to sink they stand, transport with amazement until that, behold they near, they discover man with beard that walk in, they who then they hold for some god or heavenly creature, whereby it appear how strange it be to the indian to have great ship. there be yet a other reason which confirm we in the foresay opinion, which be that these beast, which we say be not likely to have be transport by sea to the indies, remain only on the main land and not in any land, four day journey from the main land. i have make this search for proof thereof, for that it seem to. i a point of great importance to confirm i in my opinion, that the confine of the indies, europe, asia and africa have some communication one with another or at the least approach very near together. there be in america and peru, many wild beast as lion, although they be not like in greatness, fierceness, nor of the same colour, red, to the renown lion of africa. there be also many tiger, very cruel, and more to the indian then to the spaniard. there be likewise bear, but in no great abundance of boar and fox, a infinite number. and yet if we shall seek for all these kind of beast in the land of cuba, hispaniola, jamaica, marguerita or dominica, you shall not find any. so as in the say land, although they be very fertile and of a great circuit, yet be there not any kind of beast for service when the spaniard arrive, but at this day there be so great troop of horse, ox, cow, dog and hog, which have multiply in such abundance as now the cow have no certain master but belong to he that shall first kill they, be it on the mountain or on the plain, which the indian do only to save their hide, whereof they make great traffic without any regard of the flesh to eat it. dog have so increase as they march by troop and endamage the cattle no less than wolf, which be a great inconvenience in these land there want. not only beast in these land, but also bird, both great and small. as for parrot, there be many that fly by flock but, as i have say, there be few of any other kind. i have not see nor hear of any partridge there, as in peru. likewise, there be few of those beast which at peru they call and vicunas, like to wild goat, very swift in, who stomach. they find the beezars stone which many do great value. sometime you shall find they as big as a hen egg, yea, half as big again. they have no other kind of beast but such as we call indian sheep, the which, beside their wool and flesh wherewith they clothe and feed themselves, do serve they as. ass to bear their burden. they carry half as much as a moil and be of small charge to their master. have need neither of shoe, saddle nor oat to live by, nor of any furniture for that nature. have provide they of all these wherein she seem to have favour, these poor indian, of all these creature and of many other sort whereof i will make mention. the main land at the indies abound, but in the land there be not any find, but such as the spaniard have bring. it be true that once one of our friar do see a tiger in a island, as he report unto we upon the discourse of his peregrination and shipwreck, but be demand how far it be from. the main land, he answer six or eight league at the most. which passage tiger may easy swim over. we may easy infer by these argument and other like that the first indian go to inhabit the indies more by land then by sea, or, if there be any navigation, it be neither great nor difficult, be a indibitable thing that the one world be continue and join with the other, or at the least they approach one near unto another in some part, that the lineage of the indies have not pass by the atlantike island, as some do imagine, chap 22.. some follow plato opinion mention before affirm that these man part from europe, sag cap 12. or africa, to go to that famous and renown. atlantike island, and so pass from one island unto another until they come to the main land of the indies. for that critias of plato, in his time, discourse in this manner: if the atlantike island, whereas great as all asia and africa together, or great as plato say, it shall of necessity contain all the atlantike ocean and stretch even unto the land of the new world. and plato say, moreover, that by a great and strange deluge, the atlantike island be drown, and by that mean the sea be make unnavigable through the abundance of bank rock and roughness of the wave, which be yet in his time, but in the end the ruin of this drown island weresetled, which make this sea navigable. this have be curious handle and discourse of by some learned man of good judgement and yet, to speak the truth be well, consider they be ridiculous thing, resemble rather to ovid tale than a history or philosophy worthy of account. the great part of plato interpreter affirm that it be a true history whatsoever. critias report of the strange beginning of the atlantike island, of the greatness thereof, of the war they have against they, of europe with many other thing, that which give it the more credit of a true history be the word of critias, who plato bring in in his time. say that the subject he mean to treat of be of strange thing but yet true. the other disciple of plato, consider that this discourse have more show of a fable, then of a true history, say that we must take it as a allegory and that such be the intention of their divine philosopher of this opinion be procles and porphire, yea and origen, who so much regard the writing of plato as, when they speak thereof, they seem to be the book of moses or of esdras. and whereas they think the writing of plato have no show of truth, they say they be to be understand, mystical and in allegory. but to say the truth, i do not so much respect the authority of plato, who they call divine, as i will believe he can write these thing of the atlantike. island for a true history, the which be but mere fable. see, he confess that he learn they of critias be a little child who, among other song, sing that of the atlantike island. but whether that plato do write it for a true history or a fable, for my part i believe that all which he have write of this island, begin at the dialogue of time and continue to that of critias, can be hold for true. but among child and old folk who will not account it a fable to say that neptune fall in love with clite and have of she five pair of twin at one birth, and that out of one mountain he draw three round ball of water and two of earth, which do so well resemble, as you will have judge, they all one bowel. what shall we say, moreover, of that temple of a thousand pace long and five hundred broad, who wall, without be all cover with silver, the ceiling of gold and within ivory indent and inlay with gold, silver and pearl, in the end speak of the ruin thereof. he conclude thus, in his time, in one day and one night come a great deluge. whereby all our soldier be swallow by heap within the earth and in this sort the atlantike island be drown, it vanish in the sea. without doubt it fall out. happy that this island vanish so sudden, see it be big than asia and africa and that it be make by enchantment, it be in likesort. all one to say that the ruin of this so great a island be see in the bottom of the sea and that the mariner which see they can sail that way, then he add: for this cause, unto this day, that sea be not navigable by reason of the bank which by little and little be grow in that drown island. i will willing demand what sea can swallow up so infinite a continent of land, great than asia and africa, who confine stretch unto the indies, and to swallow it up in such sort as there shall at this day remain no sign nor mark thereof whatsoever. see it be well know by experience that the mariner find no bottom in the sea where they say this island be notwithstanding, it may seem indiscreet and far from reason to dispute serious of those thing which be report at pleasure. or if we shall give that respect to the authority of plato as it be reason, we must rather understand they to signify, simple, as in a picture, the prosperity of a city and withal the ruin thereof. for the argument they make to prove that this atlantike island have be real and indeed say that the sea in those part do at this day bear the name of atlantike be of small importance. for that we know: mount atlas, plin, lib 5. cap 1. and lib 6. c 31, whereof pliny say this sea take the name be upon the confine of the mediterranean sea, and the same pliny report that join to the say mount there be a island call atlantike, which he report to be little and of small account. that the opinion of many which hold that the first race of the indian come from the jew be not true, chap 23.. now that we have show how unlikely it be that. the first indian pass to the indies by the atlantike island. there be other hold opinion that they take the way whereof esdras speak in his four book in this manner, and whereas thou see that he gather a other peaceable troop unto he, 4. esdr 13. thou shall know, those be the ten tribe which be carry away captive out of their own land in the time of king ozeas, who salmanazar, king of the assyrian, take captive and lead they beyond the river. so be, they bring into a other land. but they take this counsel to themselves to leave the multitude of the heathen and go forth into a far country where never mankind dwell. that they may there observe their statute, which they can. not keep in their own land and they enter by the narrow passage of the river euphrates. for then god show his wonder and stay the spring of the flood until they be pass over, for the way unto that country be very long, yea of a year and a half, and this region be call arsareth. then dwell they there until the latter time, and when they come forth again, the most mighty shall hold still the spring of the river again. that they may go through for this cause. see thou, this multitude peaceable. some will apply this text of esdras to the indies, say they be guide by god, whereas never mankind dwell, and that the land where they dwell be so far off as it require a year and a half to perform the voyage, be by nature very peaceable, and that there be great sign and argument among the common sort of the indian to breed a belief that they be descend from the jew. for common, you shall see, they fearful, submiss, ceremonious and subtle in lie. and moreover, they say their habit be like unto those the jew use, for they wear a short coat or waistcoat and a cloak, embroider, all about. they go barefooted or with sole tie, with latcher over the foot, which they call oiotas, and they say that it appear by their history, as also by their ancient picture, which represent they in this fashion, that this attire be the ancient habit of the hebrew and that these two kind of garment, which the indian only use, be use by samson, which the scripture call, and be the same which the indian term waistcoat and cloak. but all these conjecture be light and rather against they, then with they, for we know well that the hebrew use letter whereof there be no show among the indian. they be great lover of silver, these make no care of it. the jew, if they be not circumcise hold. not themselves for jew and contrariwise the indian be not at all. neither do they ever use any ceremony near it, as many in the east have do. but what reason of conjecture be there in this? see the jew be so careful to preserve their language and antiquity so, as in all part of the world, they differ and be know from other. and yet at the indies alone they have forget their lineage, their law, their ceremony, their messiah and final, their whole judaism. and whereas they say the indian be fearful, coward, superstitious and subtle in lie for the first, it be not common to all there be some nation among the barbarian free from these vice. there be some valiant and hardy there be. some blunt and dull of understanding. as for ceremony and superstition, the heathen have always use they much the manner of habit describe which they use be the plain and most simple in the world, without art, the which have be common not only to the hebrew but to all other nation. see that the very history of esdras, if we shall believe the scripture, that be make more against they then for their purpose, for he say in that place that the ten tribe go from the multitude of the heathen to keep their faith and ceremony, and we see the indian give to all the idolatry in the world. and those which hold this opinion. see well, if the entry of the river euphrates stretch to the indies and whether it be necessary for the indies to repass that way, as it be write beside: i know not how you can name they peaceable see. they be always in war among themselves. to conclude, i can see how that euphrates in esdras shall be a more convenient passage to go to the new world than the enchant and fabulous atlantike island of plato. the reason why we can find no beginning of the indian, chap 24.. it be easy to refute and contradict the false opinion conceive of the original of the indian, then to set down a true and certain resolution for that there be no writing among the indian, nor any. certain remembrance of their founder. neither be there any mention make of this new world in their book that have knowledge of letter. our ancient hold that in those part there be neither man, land nor heaven. so as he shall seem rash and presumptuous, that shall think to discover the first beginning of the indian. but we may judge a far off by the former discourse that these indian come by little and little to this new world, and that by the help and mean of the nearness of land or by some navigation, the which seem to i the mean whereby they come, and not that they prepare any army to go thither of purpose, neither that they have be carry thither by any shipwreck or tempest, although some of these thing may chance in some part of the indies, for these region be so great as they contain nation without number. we may believe that some come to inhabit after one sort and some after a other, but in the end i resolve upon this point that the true and principal cause to people, the indies, be that the land and limit thereof be, join and continue in some extremity of the world, or at the least be very near, and i believe it be not many thousand year past since man first inhabit this new world and west indies, and that the first man that enter be rather savage man and hunter, then breed up in civil and well govern commonweal, and that they come to this new world, have lose their own land or be in too great number, they be force of necessity to seek some. other habitation, the which have find they begin by little and little to plant, have no other law but some instinct of nature and that very dark and some custom remain of their first country and although they come from country well govern. yet be it not incredible to think that they have forget all through the tract of time and want of use. see that in spain and italy we find company of man which have nothing but the shape and countenance only whereby we may conjecture in what sort this new world grow, so barbarous and uncivil. what the indian report of their beginning, chap 25.. it be no matter of any great importance to know what the indian themselves report of their beginning, be more. like unto dream, then to true. hiries ^hey make great mention of a deluge happen in their country, but we can well judge if this deluge be universal, whereof the scripture make mention, or some particular inundation of those region where they be. some expert man say that in those country be many notable sign of some great inundation, and i be of their opinion, which think that these mark and show of a deluge be not that of noah but some other, particular, as that which plato speak of, or deucalion flood, which the poet sing of, whatsoever it be. the indian say that all man be drown in this deluge and they report that out of the great lake come one viracocha which stay in tiaguanaco. where at this day there be to be, see the ruin of ancient and very strange building, and from thence come to cusco and so begin mankind to multiply. they show in the same island, a small lake where they feign that the sun hide himself and so be preserve, and for this reason they make great sacrifice unto he in that place, both of sheep and man. other report that six or i know not what number of man come out of a certain cave by a window by who man first begin to multiply, and for this reason they call they pacaritampo and therefore they be of opinion that the be the most ancient race of man. they say also that mango, who they acknowledge for the founder and chief of their, be issue of that race and that from he spring two family or lineage, the one of havan cusco, the other of vrni cusco. they say, moreover, that when the king attempt war and conquer sundry province, they give a colour and make a pretext of their enterprise, say that all the world ought to acknowledge they, for that all the world be renew by their race and country, and also that the true religion have be reveal to they from heaven. but what avail it to speak more? see that all be full of lie and vanity and far from reason. some learned man write that all which the indian make mention. of be not above 400. year old and whatsoever they speak of former age be but a confusion full of obscurity wherein we find no truth, the which may not seem strange. they have no use of book or write in steed, whereof they use count with their quipocamaye, the which be peculiar unto they but which reckon all they can report be not past 400. year. instruct myself careful of they to know from what land and what nation they pass to that where they ^ow live, i have find they so far unable to give any reason thereof, as they believe, confident that they be create at their first beginning at this new world where they now dwell. but we have free they of this error. by our faith, act 17. which teach we that all man come from the first man. there be great and apparent conjecture that these man, for a long time, have neither king nor common weal but live in troop, as they do at this day in florida, the chiriquanas, those of bresil and many other nation which have no certain king but as occasion be offer in peace or war, they choose their captain as they please. but some man excel other in force and wit, begin in time to rule and domineer, as nembroth do genit^ so increase. by little and little they erect the kingdom of peru and mexico, which our spaniard find, and although they be barbarous, yet do they far surpass all the other. indian. behold how the foresay reason do teach we that the indian begin to multiply for the most part by savage man and fugitive, which may suffice. touch the beginning of these man we speak of, leave the rest until we treat of their history more at large, the second book of the natural and moral history of the indies. that it be not out of purpose but necessary to treat of the () chap 1.. for the well conceive of thing at the indies, it be necessary to know the nature and disposition of that region, which the ancient do call the burn zone, the which they hold inhabitable. see the great part of this new world which have be of late, discover, lie and be situate. under this region in the midst of heaven, and it seem to, i great to purpose, which some do say, that the knowledge of thing at the indies depend of the well understand the nature of the equinoctial, for that the difference which be betwixt the one and the other world, proceed in a manner from the quality of this equinoctial, and we must note that all the space, betwixt the two tropic, must be proper take and hold for this middle line which be the equinoctial. so call for that the sun run his course therein, make the day and night even throughout the world. yea, they that dwell under this line enjoy throughout the year the same equality of day and night in this equinoctial line. we find so many admirable quality that, with great reason, man understanding do study and labour to search out the cause, not move thereunto so much by the doctrine of ancient philosopher as by reason and certain experience. for what reason the ancient hold that the burn zone be inhabitable? chap 2. examine this subject from the beginning. no man can deny that which we plain see: that the sun, when it draw near, do heat and when it retire, grow cold. the day and night with the winter and summer, be witness hereof. who variety with the heat and cold grow by the nearness and distance of the sun. moreover, it be certain, the more the sun approach and cast his beam prependicular, the more the earth be scorch and burn, the which we see plain in the heat of the south and in the force of summer whereby we may judge, in my opinion, that the far a country be distant from the course of the sun, the more cold it be. so we find, by experience, that the country and region which approach near to the north be cold, and, contrariwise, those that lie near the zodiac, where the sun keep his course, be most hot. for this cause, ethiopia pass africa and barbary in heat barbary exceed andalousia, andalousia, castille and arragon, surpass biscaie and france, and the more they decline to the north, the cold they be, and so, by consequence, those which approach near to the sun and be beat perpendicular with his beam they do most feel the heat thereof. some urge another reason to this effect, which be that the motion of the heaven be very sudden and light towards the tropike, but near the pole it be slow and heavy, whereby they conclude that the region which the zodiac circle and contain be set on fire with heat, for three cause and reason: the one for the nearness of the sun, the other for that his beam reflect. direct and the three for that it do participate and feel this swift and sudden motion of the heaven. see what reason and discourse teach. we touch the cause of heat and cold upon the region of the earth. but what shall we say of the two other quality, wet and dry, even the same, for the drought seem to grow by the nearness of the sun, and moistness be retire far off. for that, the night be cold than the day, be likewise more moist, and the day which be dry be also hot. winter, whilst the sun run his course far off, be more cold and rainy, and summer, when the sun be near, be more hot and dry. for even as the fire have the property to parch and burn, so have it to dry up the moistness. these thing, therefore, consider aristotle and other philosopher, attribute unto the region of the south, which they call burn, a excessive heat and a drought likewise, and therefore they say this region be wonderful, scorch and dry and so, by consequence, have neither water nor pasture, whereby, of necessity, it must be contrary and unfit for man life that the burn zone be very moist, contrary to the opinion of the ancient chap 3.. all that we have propound seem undoubted true and to purpose, and yet the conclusion they will draw from it be direct false, for that the region of the south which they call the burn zone be people and inhabit by man- and we ourselves have stay long there- be very commodious, pleasant and agreeable. if, therefore, it be so- as we can deny it- that from a true proposition we can draw a false conclusion, and yet this conclusion shall be false, as indeed it be, we must of necessity return back the same way to examine this proposition more strict, and whence the error shall proceed. we will first show the truth, as assure experience do teach we then will we prove it, although it be? very difficult and will endeavour to give a rea^on, follow the term of philosophy, the last point that we propound, that the drought be great whenas the sun be near to the earth seem certain and infallible and yet it be very false f^r there be never great abundance of rain in the burn zone then, whenas the sun go direct over they and be very near. true, it be a admirable thing and worthy observation that the air be most clear and without rain under this burn zone whenas the sun be far off, and contrariwise, there be most rain, snow and mist whenas the sun be near. such as have not travel in this new world will happy think this incredible and it will seem strange. even unto, such as have be there, if they have not well observe it. but the one and the other will willing yield in note the certain experience of that which have be say of this part of peru which look to the southern or antarctic pole. the sun be then far off when it be near unto europe, that be in may, june, july and august, whenas he make his course in the tropic of cancer, during which month the air at peru be very clear and calm, neither do there fall any snow or rain. all their river fall much and some be dry up quite, but as the year increase and the sun approach near unto the tropic of capricorn, then begin it to rain. and to snow and their river swell from october to december. then, after that, the sun retire from capricorn, whenas his beam reflect direct upon the head of they of peru, then be the violence of their water. great then be the time of rain, snow and great overflow of their river when, as their heat be great, that be from januarie to mid march. this be so true and certain as no man may contradict it, and at that time the contrary be find in the region of the pole arctic, beyond the equinoctial which proceed from the same reason. but let we now look into the temperature of panama and all that coast as well, of new spain, the land of barlovent, cuba, hispaniola, jamaica. as of s john de port, we shall without doubt find that from the begin of november until april, they have the air clear and bright. the reason be for that? the sun pass by the equinoctial to the tropic of capricorn, retire from those region more than at any other time of the year, and contrariwise, they have violent shower and great swell of water, whenas the sun return and be near unto they, which be from june unto september, for then his beam beat most upon they. the like happen at the east indies, as we learn daily by letter. that come. so as it be a general rule, although in some place there be a exception, that in the region of the south or burn zone, which be all one, the air be most clear and dry whenas the sun be far off, and contrariwise, when it approach there be great rain and humidity and even as the sun advance or retire, little or much, even so the earth abound or want water and moisture. that in the region which be without the tropic there be great store of water whenas the sun be far off. contrary to that under the burn zone, chap 4.. in region which lie without the tropic, we see the contrary to that which have be speak for, that the rain be mingle with cold and the drought with heat, the which be well know in all europe and the old world, as we see in the same manner in the new world, whereof the whole kingdom of chile be a witness- which lie without the tropic of capricorn and in the same height with spain, be subject to the same law of winter and summer, but that winter be there whenas it be summer in spain, be under diverse pole, so as when it be cold in these province, the water be in great abundance, which be when the sun be far off from the begin of. april to the end of september, final the disposition of season be like to that in europe, which be that the heat and drought come whenas the sun return, which be the cause that this realm of chile approach near the temperature of europe than any other, of the indies as well, in the fruit of the earth as in the body and spirit of man, the like they report of that part which lie before the inner ethiopia that stretch out in manner of a point unto the cape or good hope, the which they hold for a true cause of the inundation of nile, which be in summer, whereof the ancient have so much dispute for that in that region the winter and rain begin in. april, whenas the sun have pass, aries and these water, which partly grow from snow and partly from rain, assemble and make great lake and pool, from whence, by good and true geography, the river of nile proceed, and by this mean go by little and little, stretch out her course, till that have run a long way. it final, in the time of summer, overflow egypt, which seem against nature. and yet it be certain report for at what time it be, summer in egypt lie under the tropic of cancer. then, be it winter, at the spring of nile, which be under the other tropic of capricorn, there be in america a other inundation like to that of nile, at paraguen or river la, which be as much to say as the river of silver. the which receive yearly infinite water which fall from the mountain of per^ do so terrible swell in her course and overflows that region, as the inhabitant be force during those month to retire themselves into boat and canoe and to leave the dwell of the land that betwixt the two tropic, the great abundance of rain be in summer. with a discourse of winter and summer, chap 5.. to conclude, summer be always accompany with heat and drought in the two temperate. zone and winter with cold and moistness, but under the burn zone those quality be not alike, for that rain accompany heat and drought follow the cold. i understand by cold want of excessive heat. so as winter be, take in our europe for the cold and rainy season, and summer for the hot and clear season. ou^ spaniard which live at peru and in new spain see these two quality not to concur together, as in spain call that season winter, wherein there be great abundance of rain and water, and summer, where there be little or non^ at all, wherein they be plain deceive, although they affirm by a general rule that in the mountain of peru it be summer from the month of april to september, for that the rain cease in that season, and that winter be from the month of september unto april, for that the shower return then, and therefore it be winter and summer at the same instant that in spain, so as when the sun^e go direct over their head, they then take it to be the depth of winter have great store of rain. but it be worthy to be laugh at, come from ignorant man and unlearned. for even as the difference betwixt the day and night proceed from the presence or absence of the sun in our hemisphere, according to the motion of the first motor which be the cause of day and night, even so, the difference which we see betwixt winter and summer proceed from the nearness and distance of the sun, according to the motion of the say sun which be the proper cause to speak truth, then it be summer whenas the sun be near and winter when it be far off. both heat and coldness and every other temperature grow of necessity by the nearness and distance. of the sun, but to rain or not to rain, which be humidity and drought, do not necessary follow. it be therefore easy to judge, beside this vulgar opinion, that at peru the winter be clear and without rain and the summer full of shower and not otherwise, as many believe that the winter be hot and the summer cold. they fall into the like error upon the difference they make betwixt the plain and the mountain of peru. say that when it be summer upon the mountain, it be winter in the valley, which be in april, may, june, july and august, for then the air be very clear upon the mountain, without any rain or mist, and at the same season we common see fog in. the plain, which they call guarva, which be as it be a very sweet dew wherewith the sun be cover, but winter and summer, as it be say, be cause by the nearness and distance of the sun. see then that throughout all per^, both upon the mountain and on the plain, the sun approach and retire in one sort. there be no reason to say that when it be summer in one part, that it be winter in a other. yet be it no m^tter of any importance to contend upon the signification of word. let they term they as they please and call that summer when it rain, not although the heat be great, but that, whereunto we must have great regard, be the truth of the subject, which be that drought and want of rain be not always great when the sun approach near, as we see in the burn zone. that the burn zone abound with water and pasture, against the opinion of aristotle who hold the contrary chap 6.. by the former discourse, we may easy conceive that the burn zone be not dry but abound with water, the which be so true, as it exceed all the region of the world for store of water, except in some part where there be sand and desert country, as we find likewise in some other part of the world. as for water from heaven, we have already show that there be great abundance of rain, snow and hail, which especial abound in the kingdom of peru. but as for land-water as river, fountain, brook, spring, flood and lake- i have not speak thereof till now- yet be a ordinary thing that the water below have a correspondency with they above. we must not imagine that there can be any want and in truth there be so great store of spring and fountain as you shall not find in any region or country of the world. so many lake, marsh and such store of river for the great part of america be almost inhabitable through too great abundance of water for that the river swell with the great rain in summer do often overflow their bank with such fury as they break all they encounter and in many place they can pass by reason of. the mud and mire of marsh and valley. for this cause, those that live near to paraguen, whereof we have make mention, foresee the rise of the river before it come, put themselves and their good into canoe and so preserve themselves and their good, float up and down almost for the space of three month, and when the river be return within her bound than they go to their house still wet and drop with the ^^ood. and this river be so great as nile, ganges and euphrates all together can equal it. but what shall we say of the great river of magdalaine, which fall into the sea, betwixt s, martha and carthagene, and with reason be call the great river sail in those part i. be amaze to see her stream, which be very clear, run ten league into the sea, be in breadth above two league, not mingle no^ vanquish with the violent wave of the ocean. but if we shall speak more of river, that great flood, call by some the river of amazon, by other marannon and by some the river of orellana, which our spaniard sail, in their discovery, aught to blemish all the rest, and in truth i be in doubt whither i may term it a river or a sea. it flow from the mountain of peru, from whence it receive a great abundance of water, both of rain and of river, which it gather into. it then pass by the great plain of pautiti, dorado and the amazon. in the end it fall into the ocean almost right against the ^land of marguerite and trinidado. it have so large and broad a channel, special in the last three part of her length, as it contain in it many great ^lands and that which seem incredible. when you sail through the midst of it, you shall see nothing but air and water. they say, moreover, that from the midst you can see nor discover with the eye many great and high mountain which be upon the bank by reason of her great breadth. we have learn from credible person the great and wonderful breadth of this river, which, in my opinion, deserve well the name of empress and queen of all flood, which be by the report of a brother of our company, who be then young, sail it in the company of peter, with who he be present at all the adventure of this strange entry and discovery, and at the seditious and pernicious act of that wicked diego aguirra, from the which god deliver he to place he in our company, such be the river in that region which they call the burn zone and the dry and parch up country in the which aristotle and the ancient affirm there be neither water nor pasture. but see, i have make mention of the river of marannon to show the abundance of the water that be in the burn zone. it shall not be from the purpose to speak somewhat of that great lake, which they call, which be in the midst of the province of collao. there be above ten great river which lose themselves, enter into that lake and yet have it no issue but one small current of water, although some hold it to be very deep and of such a fashion as it be impossible to build a bridge over it for the depth of the water. neither can they pass it by boat, for the violence of the current. they pass it by a artificial and notable practice peculiar. to the indian, with a bridge of straw lay upon the water, the which be of so light a substance, sink not, and yet this passage be very easy and safe. this lake contain almost four score league, thirty five in length and fifteen in breadth. at the large place there be many land which in old time be inhabit and till but now lie waste. it bring forth a great abundance of reed, which the indian call totora, which serve they to a thousand use for it, be meat for swine, for horse and for man. they make house therewith, fire and bark to conclude, the vros. in this, their totora find all they have need of. these vros be such dull and brutish people as they. esteem not themselves man, it be report of they. that be demand of what nation they be, they answer they be not man but vros, as it be some kind of beast. there be whole village of these vros inhabit in the lake in their boat of totora, the which be tie together and fasten to some rock, and often time the whole village change from place to place. so as he that will seek they now, whereas they be yesterday, shall find no show nor remainder of they or of their village. the current or issue of this lake have run above fifty league, make another lake, but less than the first which they call, and contain in it some small land, but they find no issue. thereof. some imagine it run under the ground and that it fall into the south sea. give out that there be a branch of a river which they see rise and enter into the sea near the bank. have no knowledge of the spring, but contrariwise, i believe that the water of this lake dissolve and be disperse within the lake itself through the heat of the sun. this discourse seem sufficient to prove that the ancient have no reason to hold that the middle region be inhabitable for the defect of water. see there be such store both from heaven and on the earth. show the reason why the sun, without the tropic, cause great quantity of water when it be far off and, contrariwise, within they. it breed most when it be near chap 7.. consider with myself, often time, what shall cause the equinoctial to be so moist. as i have say, to refute the opinion of the ancient, i find no other reason but the great force of the sun in those part whereby it draw unto it a great abundance of vapour from out of the ocean, which in those part be very great and spacious and have draw unto it this great abundance of vapour, do sudden dissolve they into rain, and it be approve by many try experience that the rain and great storm from heaven proceed from the violent heat of the sun. first, as we have say before, it rain in those country whenas the sun cast. his beam direct upon the earth, at which time he have most force, but when the sun retire the heat be moderate and then there fall no rain, whereby we may conclude that the force and heat of the sun be the cause of rain in those country. moreover, we observe both in peru, new spain and in all the burn zone that the rain do usual fall in afternoon when, as the sunbeam be in their great force, be strange to see it rain in the morning, and therefore traveller foresee it, begin their journey early that they may end and rest before noon, for they hold that common it rain after noon, such as have frequent and travel those country can sufficient speak thereof, and there be that have make some abode there, say that the great abundance of rain be when the moon be at the full. but to say the truth, i can never make sufficient proof thereof, although i have observe it. moreover, the day, the year and the month show the truth hereof- that the violent heat of the sun cause the rain in the burn zone. experience teach we the like in artificial thing, as in a limbeck, wherein they draw water from herb and flower for the vehemency of the fire force and drive up a abundance of vapour which be press and find no issue, be convert into liquor and water. the like we see in gold and silver which we refine with quickesilver. the fire be small and slow, we draw out almost nothing of the quickesilver, but if it be quick and violent it do great, evaporate the quicksilver which encounter the head above do present, turn into liquor and begin to drop down. even so, the violent heat of the sun produce these two effect when it find matter, dispose that be to draw up the vapour on high and to dissolve they present and turn they into rain when there be any obstacle to consume they. and although these thing seem contrary, that one sun, within the burn zone be near, shall cause rain, and without the zone, afar off, shall breed the like effect. so it be that all well consider there be no contrariety. a thousand effect in natural cause proceed of contrary thing by diverse mean. we dry linen by the fire and in the air, and yet the one heat and the other cool pasture be dry and harden by the sun and with the frost. moderate exercise, provoke sleep. be too violent, it hinder. if you lay no wood on the fire, it die. if you lay on to^ much, it likewise quench, for the only proportion, entertain and make it to continue to well discern a thing: it must not be too near the eye nor too far off, but in a reasonable distance, proportionable. be too far off from any thing, we lose the sight. and too near, likewise, we can see it. if the sun beam. be weak, they draw up no fog from the river. if they be violent, have draw up the vapour they present, dissolve and consume they. but if the heat be moderate, it draw up and preserve it. for this reason the vapour rise not common in the night, nor at noon, but in morning whenas the sun begin to enter into his force. there be a thousand example of natural cause upon this subject, which we see do often grow from contrary thing, whereby we must not wonder if the sun be near, engender rain and be far off work the like effect, but be of a moderate and proportionable distance, cause none at all. yet there remain one doubt: why the nearness of the sun cause the rain under the burn zone and without when it be far off. in my opinion, the reason be that in winter, without the tropic, the sun have not force sufficient to consume the vapour which rise from. the land and sea, for these vapour grow in great abundance in the cold region of the air, where they be congeal and thicken by the extremity of the cold and after be press, they dissolve and turn into water. therefore, in winter, when the sun be far off, the day short and the night long, his heat have small force. but when the sun approach, which be in the summer time, his force be such as it draw up the vapour and sudden consume and disperse. they, for the heat and the length of the day, grow through the nearness of the sun, but within the tropic, under the burn zone, the far distance of the sun work the same effect that the nearness do without the tropik, by reason whereof it rain: no more under the burn zone when the sun be far off, then without the tropic when it be near. for that, in this approach and retire, the sun remain always in one distance. whence proceed this effect of clearness. but when the sun be in the period of his force in the burn zone and that he cast his beam direct upon the inhabitant head, there be neither clearness nor dryness, as it seem. there shall be, but rather great. and strange shower, for that, by this violent heat he draw up sudden a great abundance of vapour from the earth and ocean which be so thick as the wind not able easy to disperse. they. they melt into water which breed the cold rain in so great abundance, for the excessive heat may soon draw up many vapour, the which be not so soon dissolve and be gather together. through their great abundance they melt and dissolve into water, the which we may easy discern by this familiar example: roast a piece of pork, mutton or veal. if the fire be violent and the meat near, we see the fat melt sudden and drop away. the reason be that the violent heat draw forth the humour and fat from the meat and be in great abundance, can dissolve it and so it distill more away. but when the fire be moderate and the meat in a equal distance, we see that it roste handsome and the fat drop not too sudden, for that the moderate heat draw out the moistness which it consume sudden and therefore cook, make a moderate fire and lay not their meat too near nor too far off lest it melt away. the like may be see in another experience in candle of tallow or wax. if the wick be great it melt the tallow or the wax, for that the heat can consume the moistness which rise. but if the flame be proporcionable, the wax melt nor drop. not for that the flame do waste it by little and little as it rise, the which seem to i the true reason why under the equinoctial and burn zone, the violence of the heat do cause rain, the which in other region grow through want thereof. how we shall understand that which have be former speak of the burn zone, chap 8.. if in natural and physical thing we must not seek out infallible and mathematical rule but that which be ordinary and try by experience which be the most perfect rule, we must then believe what we have. say that there be more humidity under the burn zone then in other region, and that it rain less there when the sun be near, must be take and understand after one sort as in truth it be the most common and ordinary. but this be not to hinder the exception which nature have give to this rule, make some region of the burn zone extreme dry, the which be report of ethiopia. and we have see it in a great part of peru, where all that land or coast which they call plain want rain, yea, land, water. except some valley where river fall from the mountain, the rest be a sandy and barren soil where you shall hardly find any spring but some deep well. but with the help of god, we will show the reason why it rain: not in these plain, the which many demand. for now i only pretend to show that there be many exception to natural rule whereby it may happen that in some part of the burn zone it rain, not when the sun be near but be far off, although unto this day i have neither see nor hear of it. but if it be so, we must attribute it to the particular quality of the earth and also, if sometime the contrary do chance, we must have regard that in natural thing there happen many contrariety and le^s whereby they change and dissolve one another. for example, it may be the sun will cause rain and that the wind will hinder it or else cause more abundance than have be usual. the wind have their property and diverse, beginning by the which they work, diverse effect, the which be most common, contrary to that which the order and season require. see then, in all place we see great variety in the year which proceed from the diverse motion and aspect of planet. it be not out of purpose to say that in the burn zone we may see and observe some thing. contrary to that, we have try but to conclude that which we have speak be a certain and undoubted truth, which be that the great draught which the ancient hold to be in the middle region which they call the burn zone, be nothing at all, but contrariwise, there be great humidity and then it rain most. when the sun be near, that the burn zone be not violent hot but moderate. chap 9: hitherto we have treat of the humidity of the burn zone. now it shall be fit to discourse of the other two quality: hot and cold. we have show in the begin of this discourse how the ancient hold that the burn zone be hot and exceed dry, the which be not. so for it be hot and moist and in the great part the heat be not excessive but rather moderate, which some will hold incredible. if we have not try it, when i pass to the indies i will tell what chance unto. i have read what poet and philosopher write of the b^^ning zone. i persuade myself that, come to the equinoctial, i shall not endure the violent heat. but it fall out otherwise. for when i pass, which be when the sun be there for zenith be enter into aries in the month of march, i feel so great cold as i be force to go into the sun to warm i. what can i else do then, but laugh at aristotle, meteor and his philosophy. see that, in that place and at that season, whenas all shall be scorch with heat, according to his rule, i and all my companion be a cold. in truth, there be no region in the world more pleasant and temperate then under the equinoctial, although it be not in all part of a equal. temperature but have great diversity. the burn zone in some part be very temperate, as in quitto and on the plain of peru, in some part very cold, as at potozi, and in some very hot, as in ethiopia, bresil and the molucque. this diversity be know and certain unto we. we must of force seek out another cause of cold and heat. then the sun beam see that in one season of theyeere and in place of one height and distance from the pole and equinoctial, we find so great diversity that some be environ with heat, some with cold, plato in tim and and other temper with a moderate heat. plato place his most renown atlantike island under the burn zone. then he say that at certain season of the year it have the sun for zenith and yet it be very temperate, fruitful and rich. pliny say that taprobana, which at this day they call sumatra, be under the equinoctial plin, lib 6.. c 12, as in effect it be, write that it be not only happy and rich but also people with man and beast, whereby we may easy judge that although the ancient hold the heat of the burn zone to be insupportable, yet may they well understand that it be not so great as they have. speak the most excellent ginger and cosmographer, ptolemy, and the worthy philosopher and physician avicen, be of a better resolution, be both of opinion that under the equinoctial there. be very commodious habitation, that the heat of the burn zone be temperate by reason of the rain and the shortness of the day. chap 10. since the discovery of this new world, we have find by experience that which late writer have hold for truth. but it be a natural thing, whenas any matter beyond our conceit be make know unto we by experience. we, by and by, examine the cause. therefore, we desire to know the reason why a region where the sun approach near be not only temperate but in many part cold. consider this matter general. i find two general cause which make this region temperate. the one be that before mention, for that this region be very moist and subject to rain, and there be no doubt. but the rain do refresh it, for that the water be by nature cold and although by the force of the fire it be make hot, yet do it temper. this heat proceed only from the sunbeam, the which we see by experience in the inner arabia. the which be burn with the sun have no shower to temper the violence thereof. the cloud and mist be the cause that the sun offend not so much and the shower that fall from. they refresh both the air and the earth and moisten. likewise, how hot soever it be, they drink rain water, and it quench the thirst, as our man have well try have no other to drink. so, as reason and experience do teach we that rain of itself do temper the heat and have by this mean show that the burn zone be much subject unto rain, it appear that there be matter in it to temper the violence of the heat. to this i will add a other reason which deserve to be know, not only for this matter but for many other. for although the sun be very hot and burn under the equinoctial, yet be it not long, so as the heat of the day be there short and of less continuance, it cause not so violent a heat, the which it behoove to specify more particular, such as be: practise in the knowledge of the sphere teach very well that the more the zodiac be oblique and traverse our hemisphere, the more unequal be the day and night. and contrariwise, where the sphere be straight and the sign mount direct, there the day and night be equal. and therefore in all that region which be between the two tropic, there be less inequality then without they. and the more we approach the line the less inequality we find. the which we have try in those part, those of quitto, for that they be under the line, have not throughout the whole year the day and night more short at one season then at a other, but be continual equal. those of lima, be distant almost twelve degree, find some difference betwixt the day and the night, but very little for that. in december and januarie the day increase a hour or little less. those of potozi find much more difference, both in winter and in summer, be almost under the tropic. but those that live without the tropike find the day in winter short and in summer long, the more remote they be from the equinoctial and come near the pole, as we see in germany and in england, the day be long in summer, then in italy and in spain. it be a thing which the sphere do teach and experience do plain show. we, we must add a other proposition which be likewise true and very considerable for all the effect of nature, to understand the perseverance and continuation of the efficient cause to work and move. this presuppose, if any one demand of i, why, under the equinoctial line, the heat be not so violent in summer as in some other region, as in in the month of july and august. i will answer that in andelousia the day be long and the night short, and as the day be hot, inflame and cause heat, so the night be cold and moist. give a refresh, according to the which, at peru there be no such great heat for that. the day in summer be not long, nor the night short, so as the heat of the day be much temper by the freshness of the night, and although the burn zone be near the sun than all other region, yet do not the heat. continue there so long it be a natural thing that a small fire continue heat more than a great, that last but little especial if there be any thing to refresh it. he therefore that shall put these two property of the zone in one balance, that it be most rainy in the time of great heat and that the day be short there. he shall perchance find they to equal the other two contrariety, which be that the sun be near and more direct over they then in other region, that there be other reason, beside the former mention, which show that the burn zone be temperate, especial alongst the ocean, chap 11. be a thing, conclude that the two forename property be common and universal to all the region of the burn zone and yet in the same there be find some place very hot and other exceed cold. also, that the temperature be not there equal in all place but under one climate, one part be hot, another cold and the three temperate all at one season. we be force to seek out other reason whence this great diversity shall proceed in the burn zone. discourse, therefore, upon this question, i do find threeapparant and certain cause and a four more obscure and dark. the apparent and certain cause be the first be the ocean, the second the situation of the land, and the three the nature and property. of many and sundry wind. beside these three, which i hold for manifest, i believe there be a four hide and less apparent, which be the property of the same land inhabit and the particular influence of the heaven. whoso will near consider the cause and general reason before mention, shall find they insufficient for the full resolution of this point. observe that which daily happen in diverse part of the equinoctial manomotapa and a great part of the kingdom of prester jean be seat under the line or very near, in which region they endure excessive heat and the man be all black, the which be not only in those part of the land far from the sea, but also in land environ with the sea. the island of saint thomas be under the line, the land of cape be very near, and both in the one and the other be violent heat and the man be likewise black. under the same line, or very near, lie a part of peru and of the new kingdom of grenado which, notwithstanding be very temperate country, incline rather to cold than heat and the inhabitant be white. the country of bresil be in the same distance from the line with peru and yet both bresil and all that coast be extreme hot, although it be in the north sea, and the other coast of peru, which be in the south sea, be very temperate. i say, then, that whosoever will consider these difference and give a reason thereof can content himself with these general rule before specify to prove that the burn zone may be a temperate land. among the special cause and reason, i have first place the sea, for without doubt, the nearness thereof do help to temper and cool the heat. for although the water be salt, yet be it always water who nature be cold, and it be a thing remarkable that, in the depth of the ocean, the water can be make hot by the violence of the sun, as in river final, even as saltpetre though it be of the nature of salt, have a property to cool water. even so, we see by experience that in some port and haven, the salt-water do refresh the, which we have observe in that of callao, whereas they put the water or wine which they drink into the sea in flagon to be refresh, whereby we may undoubted find that the ocean have this property to temper and moderate the excessive heat. for this cause we feel great heat at land, then at sea, and common country lie near the sea, be cooole than those that be far off. as i have say, even so, the great part of the new world lie very near the ocean. we may with reason say, although it be under the burn zone, yet do it receive a great benefit from the sea. to temper the heat, that the high land be the cold, and the reason thereof chap 12.. but if we shall yet search more particular, we shall not find in all this land a equal temperature of heat, although it be in equal distance from the sea and in the same degree see that in some part there be great heat and in some very little. doubtless the cause thereof be that the one be low and the other high, which cause that the one be hot and the other cold. it be most certain that the top of the mountain be cold than in the bottom of the valley, the which proceed not only for that the sun beam have great repercussion upon low place. although it be a great reason, yet there be a other, which be that the region of the air be cold when it be far from the ground. the plain of collao at peru and of popaian in new spain make sufficient proof hereof, for without all doubt those part be high country and for this reason cold, although they be all environ with high point of mountain much subject to the sun beam. but if we demand why, at peru and in new spain, the plain along the coast be very hot. and the plain of the same country of peru and new spain be contrariwise cold. in truth, i see no other reason can be give but that the one be a low country and the other high. experience do teach we that the middle region of the air be cold than the neither, and therefore the more the mountain approach to the middle, the cold they be. be. cover with snow and frost. reason itself do yield to it, for if there be a sphere and region of fire, as aristotle and the other philosopher say, the middle region of the air must be most cold. by the cold be expel and thicken there, as in summer time we see in well that be very deep for this. cause the philosopher affirm that the two extreme region of the air, that above and the other below, be the hot and the middle region more cold. if it be thus, as experience do teach we, we shall yet draw out another reason and notable argument to show that the burn zone be temperate, which, be that the great part of the indies be a high country fill with many mountain which, by their nearness, refresh the neighbour country. you may continual see, upon the top of these mountain, snow hail and freeze water, and the cold so bitter as the grass be all wither, so as the man and beast which pass that way be benumb with cold. this, as i have say, be in the burn. zone, and it happen most common when they have the sun for zenith. it be therefore most certain and conformable unto reason that the mountain be cold than the valley and plain, for that they participate more of the middle region of the air, which be very cold. the cause why the middle region of the air be more cold have be show before. for that the region of the air next to the fiery exhalation, the which, according to aristotle, be upon the sphere of the air, repel and thrust back all the cold, the which retire itself into the middle region of the air by, as the philosopher speak. now, if any one shall question with i in this manner, if it be so that the air be hot and moist, as aristotle hold, and as we common say, whence then proceed the cold which be congeal in the middle region of the air? see, it can come from the fiery sphere, for if it come from the water or the earth, arist me. by this reason, the low region of the air shall be cold than the middle. to answer true what i think, i will confess that this argument and objection be so difficult, as i be almost ready to follow the opinion of such as reprove the quality agreement and disagreement which aristotle give unto the element- say they be but imagination- who, for this occasion, hold the air to be cold by nature, and to this end they use many argument and reason, whereof we will propound one very familiar and well know. leave the rest apart. in the canicular day we be accustom to beat the air with a fan and we find that it do refresh we so, as these author affirm that heat be no. private property of any other element, but of fire only, which be disperse and mingle with all thing, as the great denis do, teach we dionys c 25.. the coel, but whether it be so or otherwise, for i will not contradict aristotle, but in that which be most certain, in the end they agree all that: the middle region of the air be cold than the low next to the earth, as experience do show. we see that in this middle region be congeal, snow, hail, frost and other sign of extreme cold. the middle region then, which they call the burn zone, have on the one side the sea and on the other the mountain. we must hold they for sufficient cause to temper and cool. the heat, that the cold wind be the principal cause to make the burn zone temperate chah 13.. the temperature of this region ought chief to be attribute to the property of the wind that blow in that country, the which be pleasant and fresh. the providence of the great god, creator of all thing, have be such as he have ordain: fresh and cool wind in that region where the sun make his course, which seem shall be burn up that by their coolness the excessive heat of the sun may be. qualify, and they be not far from appearance of reason, which hold that the earthly paradise be under the equinoctial, if they have not deceive themselves in the cause of their opinion, say that the equality of the day and night be sufficient of itself to make that zone temperate, to which opinion many other have be opposite of which number be that renown poet say that coast incessant by hot beam, tire of phoebus who from thence never retire. the coolness of the night than be not sufficient to moderate and to correct the violent heat of the sun, but rather this burn zone receive so sweet a temperature by the benefit of the fresh and pleasant air, as, notwithstanding, it be hold by the ancient to be more hot than a burn furnace, yet those which inhabit there take it for a delightful spring. it appear, by argument and very apparent reason, that the cause hereof consist principal in the quality of the wind. we see in one climate some region and city hot than other, only for that they feel less wind to refresh they the like be in other country where no wind blow, the which be all on fire like unto a furnace. there be many of these village and town in bresil, ethiopia and paraguen, as every one know, and that which be more considerable. we see these difference not only on the land but also on the sea. there be some sea where they feel great heat, as they report of that of and ormus, in the east, and of the sea of panama, in the west, the which, for this reason, engender and bring forth great lizard call cayamans, as also in the sea of bresil. there be other sea, in the same degree of height, very cold as that of peru, in the which we be a cold, as i have say before, when we first sail it, which be in march when the sun be direct. over we, in truth, on this continent where the land and sea be of one sort, we can imagine any other cause of this so great a difference, but the quality of the wind which do refresh they. if we shall near look into the consideration of the wind whereof we have speak, we may resolve many doubt which some object and which seem strange and wonderful. wherefore the sun cast his beam upon the burn zone, and particular at peru, and that more violent, then in spain, in the canicular day, yet they defend the heat with a light cover, so as with a slender cover of mat or straw they be better preserve from the heat. then in spain, under a roof of wood or a vault of stone? moreover, why be not the night in summer at peru as hot and troublesome as in spain? wherefore, on the high top of mountain, even among the heap of snow, you shall sometime feel great and insupportable heat. wherefore, in all the province of colao, when you come into the shade, how little soever, you feel cold, but come into the sun, beam, you present find the heat excessive. why be all the coast of peru be full of sand, very temperate, and why be potozi, distant from the silver city, but eighteen league and in the same degree of so diverse a temperature that the country be extreme cold? it be wonderful, barren and dry, and contrariwise the silver city be temperate, incline unto heat and have a pleasant and fertile soil. it be more certain that the wind be the principal cause of these strange diversity. for without the benefit of these cool wind, the heat of the sun be such as, although it be in the midst of the snow, it burn and set all on fire. but when the coolness of the air return sudden, the heat be qualify, how great soever it be. and whereas this cool wind rain ordinary, it keep the gross vapour and exhalation of the earth from gather together, which cause a heavy and troublesome heat, whereof we see the contrary in europe. for by the exhalation of these vapour the earth be almost burn up with the sun by day, which make the night so hot and troublesome, as the air do often seem like unto a furnace. for this reason, at peru, this freshness of the wind be the cause, by the mean of some small shade at the sunneset, that they remain cool. but contrariwise, in europe the most agreeable and please time in summer be the morning, and the evening be the most hot and troublesome. but at peru, and under all the equinoctial, it be not so, for every morning the wind from the sea do cease and the sun begin to cast his beam, and for this reason they feel the great heat in the morning, until the return of the same wind, which otherwise they call the tide or wind of the sea, which make they first to feel cold. we have try all this whilst we be at the land of barlovante, where in the morning we do sweat for heat and at noon we feel a fresh air. for that, then a north-easter wind, which be fresh and cool, do common blow that they which inhabit under the equinoctial live a sweet and pleasant life, chap 14.. if those which have hold opinion that the earthly paradise be under the equinoctial have be guide by this discourse. vi^es, lib 13. civit, c 21. they have not seem altogether deceive. not that i will conclude that the delightful paradise whereof the scripture speak be in that place, which be too great a temereity to affirm it for certain. but i may well say if there be any paradise on earth, it ought to be place whereas they enjoy a sweet and quiet temperature, for there be nothing more troublesome or repugnant to man life then to live under a heaven or air that be, contrary, troublesome or sickly, as there be nothing more agreeable then to enjoy a heaven that be sound, sweet and pleasant it. be certain that we do not participate of any of the element, nor have not the use of any so often in our body as of the air it be that which inviron our body on all part, which enter into our bowel and at every instant visit the heart and there engrave her property. if the air be any thing, corrupt, it cause death. if it be pure and healthful, it augment the strength. final, we may say that the air alone be the life of man, so as, although we have good and riches, if the air be troublesome and unwholesome we can live quiet, nor with content, but if the air be healthful, pleasant and sweet, although we have no other wealth yet do it. yield content. consider with myself the please temperature of many country at the indies, where they know not what winter be, which by his cold do freeze they, nor summer which do trouble they with heat, but that with a mat they preserve themselves from the injury of all weather and where they scarce, have any need to change their garment throughout the year. i say that often. consider of this. i find that if man at this day will vanquish their passion and free themselves from the snare of covetousness, leave many fruitless and pernicious disseine, without doubt they may live at the indies, very pleasant and happy for that which other poet sing of the elisean field and of the famous tempe, or that which plato report or feign of his atlantike island. man shall find in these land, if, with a generous spirit, they will choose rather to command their silver and their desire then to remain slave as they be, that which we have hitherto, discourse, shall suffice: touch the quality of the equinoctial of cold, heat, drought, rain and the cause of temperature, the particular discourse of wind, water, land, metal, plant and beast. whereof there be great abundance at the indies, shall remain for the other book, for the difficulty of that which be handle in this, though brief, will happy, seem too tedious a advertisement to the reader. the reader must understand that i write the two first book in latin when i be at peru, and therefore they speak of matter of the indies as of thing present be since return into spain, i think good to translate they into our vulgar tongue and not to change my former manner of speeach. but in the five follow book for that i make they in europe, i have be force to change my style and therein to treat of matter of the indies as of country and thing absent. and for that this diversity of speech may with reason offend the reader, i have think good to advertise he thereof the three book of the natural and moral history of the indies. that the natural history of the indies be pleasant and agreeable, chap 1. every natural history be of itself, please, and very profitable to such as will raise up their discourse and contemplation on high, in that it do move they to glorify the author of all nature, as we sea, the wise and holy man do, psal 103.135, 91.92.18.8, job 28.39, special david in many psalm and job likewise, treat of the secret of the creator, whereas the same lord answer job so ample, he that take delight to understand the wondrous work of. nature shall taste the true pleasure and content of history, and the more whenas he shall know they be not the simple work of man but of the creator himself, and that he shall comprehend the natural cause of these work, then shall he true occupy himself in the study of philosophy, but he that shall raise his consideration high, behold the great and first architect of all these marvel. he shall know his wisdom and infinite greatness and, we may say, shall be divine employ. and so the discourse of natural thing may serve for many good consideration, although the feebleness and weakness of many appetite be common accustom to stay at thing. less profitable, which be the desire to know new thing, call curiosity the discourse. and history of natural thing at the indies, beside the common content it give, have yet another benefit, which be to treat of thing a far off, the great part whereof be unknown to the most excellent author of that profession which have be among the ancient. and if we shall write these natural thing of the indies so ample as they require, be so strange, i doubt not. but we may compile work no less than those of pliny, theophrastes and aristotle, but i hold not myself sufficient, and although i be yet be not my intent but to note some natural thing which i have see and know be at the indies or have receive from man, worthy of credit, the which seem rare to i. and scarce know in europe by reason, whereof i will pass over many of they brief, either because they be write of by other or else require a long discourse than i can now give of the wind, their difference, property and cause in general. chap 2. have discourse in the two former book of that which concern the heaven and the habitation of the indies in general, it behoove ^s now to treat of the three element, air, water and land, and their compound, which be metal, plant and beast. for as for the fire, i see no special matter at the indies which be not in other region, unless some will say that the manner to strike fire in rub two stone one against another, as some indian use, or to boil any thing in gourd, cast a burn stone into it, and other such like thing be remarkable, whereof i have write what may be speak, but of those which be in the vulcan and mouth of fire at the indies, worthy doubtless to be observe, i will speak in their order, treat of the diversity of ground, whereas they find these fire or vulcan, therefore, to begin with the wind, i say that with good reason, solomon, in the great judgement which god have give. he esteem much the knowledge of the wind and their property be very admirable for that. some be moist, other dry, some unwholesome, other find some hot, other cold, some calm and pleasant, other rough and tempestuous, some barren and other fertile with infinite other difference. there be some wind which blow in certain region and be as it be lord thereof, not addmit any entry or communication of their contrary. in some part they blow in that sort as sometime they be conqueror, sometime conquer. often there be diverse and contrary wind which do run together at one instant divide the way betwixt they sometime one blow above of one sort and another below of a other sort. sometime they encounter violent one with another, which put they at sea in great danger. there be some wind which help to the generation of creature, and other that hinder and be opposite. there be a certain wind of such a quality as, when it blow, in some country it cause it to rain flea, and in so great abundance as they trouble and darken the air and cover all the sea shore, and in other place it rain frog. these diversity and other, which be sufficient, know be common attribute to the place by the which these wind pass, for they say that from these place they take their quality to be cold, hot, dry or moist, sickly or sound. and so of the rest, the which be partly true and can be deny, for that, in a small distance you shall see in one wind many diversity. for example, the or eastern wind be common, hot and troublesome. in spain and in murria it be the cool and healthful that be. for that it pass by the orchard and that large champain which we see very fresh. in carthagene, which be not far from thence, the same wind be troublesome and unwholesome. the meridional, which they of the ocean call south and those of the mediterranean sea, mezo common, be rainy and boisterous and in the same city whereof i speak, it be wholesome and pleasant. pliny report that in africa it rain with a northern wind. and that the southern wind be clear. he then that shall well consider what i have. speak of these wind. he may conceive that, in a small distance of land or sea, one wind have many and diverse quality, yea, sometime quite contrary, whereby we may infer that he draw his property from the place where it pass, the which be in such sort- true, although we may not say in (@)- as it be the only and principal cause of the diversity of the wind, it be a thing we easy find that in a river contain fifty league in circuit. i put it thus, for a example, that the wind which blow of the one part be hot and moist and that which blow on the other be cold and dry. notwithstanding this diversity be not find in place by which it pass the which makesmee, rather ^o say- that the wind bring these quality with they, whereby they give unto they the name of these quality. for example, we attribute to the northern wind- otherwise call cicrco- the property to be cold and dry and to dissolve mist. to the southern wind, his contrary call leu^s^he, we attribute the contrary quality, which be moist and hot and engender mist. this be general and common. we must seek out another universal cause to give a reason of these. effect. it be not enough to say that the place by which they pass give they these quality. see that pass by the same place. we see contrary effect. so, as we must of force confess that the region of the heaven where they blow give they these quality. as the septentrional be cold because it come from the north, which be the region far from the sun. the southern, which blow from the midday or south, be hot, and for that the heat draw the vapour, it be also moist and rainy. and contrariwise, the north be dry and subtle, for that it suffer no vapour to congeal. and in this manner we may discourse of other wind. give they the quality of the region where they blow, but look more precise into it. this reason can not satisfy i. i will therefore demand: what do the region of the air by which they pass, if i^ do (@) they their quality? i speak it for that in german, in the southern wind be hot and moist and in africa the northern be cold and dry. notwithstanding, it be most certain that in what region soever of germany the southern wind be engender, it must needs be more cold than any part of africa where the northern be engender. and if it be so, why be the northern wind more cold in africa, then the southern in germany see it proceed from a hot region. some may answer i that the reason be for that it blow from the north, which be cold. but this be neither sufficient nor true, for if it be so, whenas the northern wind blow in africa, it shall also run and continue his motion. in all the region, even unto the north, the which be not so, for at one instant there blow northern wind, very cold in country that be in few degree, and southern wind, which be very hot in country lie in more degree, the which be most certain, usual and well know, whereby, in my opinion, we may infer that it be no pertinent reason to say that the place by which the wind do pass give they their quality or that they be diversify for that they blow from diverse region of the air, although the one and the other have some reason, as i have say, but it be needful to seek further to know the true and original cause of these so strange difference, which we see in the wind, i can conceive any other, but that the same efficient cause which bring forth and make the wind to grow, do withal, give they this original quality. for, in truth, the matter whereon the wind be make which be no other thing, according to aristotle. but the exhalation of the interior element may well cause, in effect, a great part of this diversity, be more gross, more subtle, more dry and more moist, but yet this be no pertinent reason. see that we see, in one region where the vapour and exhalation be of one sort and quality, that there rise wind and effect quite contrary. we must therefore refer the cause to the high and celestial efficient which must be the sun. and to the motion and influence of the heaven, the which, by their contrary motion, give and cause diverse influence, but the beginning of these motion and influence be so obscure and hide from man, and, on the other part, so mighty and of so great force, as the holy prophet david, in his prophetical spirit, and the prophet jeremy admire the greatness of the lord, speak thus * *. psalm 134^, jeremy 10. he that draw the wind out of his treasure. in truth, these principle and beginning be rich and hide treasure for the author of all thing. hold they in his hand and in his power, and when it please, he send they forth for the good or chastisement of man and send forth such wind as he please, not as that aeolus who, the poet, do foolish feign to have charge of the wind. keep they in a cave like unto wild beast. we see not the beginning of these wind, neither do we know how long they shall continue or whither they shall go, but we see and know well the diverse effect and operation they have, even as the supreme truth, the author of all thing have teach, we say, the spirit or wind blow where it please, and although thou feel the breath, yet do thou not know whence it come. nor whither it shall go. to teach we that conceive a little of matter which be present and common unto we. we shall not presume to understand that which be so high and so hide as the cause and motive of the holyghost. it be therefore sufficient that we know his operation and effect, the which be plain, discover in his greatness and perfection, and to have treat little philosophical of the wind and the cause of their difference, property and operation which we have produce into three: the place by which they pass, the region where they blow and the celestial virtue, the beginning and motive of the wind, of certain property of wind which blow at the new world, chap 3.. it be a question much. dispute by aristotle whether the southern wind, which we call, blow from the pole, antarctic, or only from the equinoctial line^ which be proper to demand if, beyond the equinoctial, it hold the same quality of hot and rainy as we see here. it be a point whereof we may, with reason, stand in doubt, for, although it pass the equinoctial, yet be it still the southern wind, see it come from the same part of the world as the northern wind which, come, to the contrary, continue still the same wind, although it pass the burn zone and equinoctial line, and it seem hereby that these two wind shall hold their first property, the one to be hot and moist, the other cold and dry, the south. to breed mist and rain and the north to disperse they and to make a clear sky. notwithstanding, aristotle lean to the contrary opinion, for that, in europe, the northern wind be cold because it come from the pole, a region extreme cold, and the southern wind, contrariwise, be hot because it come from the south, which be the region the sun do most heat. by this reason than we shall believe that the south wind shall be cold to they that inhabit on the other side of the line and the northern wind shall be hot, for in those part. the southern wind come from the pole and the northern from the line, and though it seem by this reason that the southern wind shall be more cold there than the northern, be here for that they hold the region of the south pole to be more cold than that of the north by reason that the sun stay seven day every year in the tropic of cancer, more than it do in the tropic of capricorn, as it appear by the equinox and solstice he make in the two circle, wherein it seem that nature will show the pre-eminence and excellency of this moiety of the world, which be in the north above the other part in the south. so as it seem there be reason to believe that these quality of the wind do change in pass the line, but in truth it be not so, as i can comprehend by the experience i have some year be in those part of the indies which lie on the south of the other side of the line. it be true that the northern wind be not usual cold and clear. there, as here, in some part of peru, as at lima, and on the plain, they find the northern wind troublesome and unwholesome, and all along the coast, which run above five hundred league, they hold the southern wind for healthful and cool and which be more most clear and pleasant. yea, it never rain. contrary to that, we see in europe and of this side the line, yet that which chance upon the coast of peru be no general rule but rather a exception and a wonder of nature: never to rain upon that coast and ever to have one wind. without give place to his contrary, whereof we will hereafter speak our mind, now let we stand upon this point that the northern wind beyond the line have not the same property which the southern wind have on this side, although they both blow from the midday to region and part of the world which be opposite and contrary. for it be no general rule there that the northern wind be neither hot nor rainy there as the south wind be on this side, but contrariwise it rain whenas the south wind blow there, as we see in all the sierre or mountain of peru, in chile and in the country of congo, which be on the other side of the line and far advance into the sea, and in potozi likewise the wind which they call, which be our north, if my memory fail, i not be extreme, cold, dry and unpleasant as it be here with we. yet do not the northern wind disperse the cloud usual there as it do here, but contrariwise, if i be not deceive, it do often cause rain there. be no doubt. but the wind do borrow this great diversity of contrary effect from the place by which they pass and the near region where they be breed, as we see by daily experience, in a thousand place. but speak in general of the quality of the wind, we must rather look to the coast or part of the world from whence they proceed, then to observe whether they be on this side or beyond the line, as it seem. the philosopher hold opinion: these capital wind, which be the east and west, have no such universal quality, nor so common in this continent nor in the other, as the two former, the or eastern wind, be common here, troublesome and unwholesome, and the western, or zephyrus. be more mild and healthful at the indies and in all the burn zone the eastern wind, which they call brise, be contrariwise very healthful and pleasant. of the west i can speak any thing, certain or general, for that it blow not at all or very seldom in the burn zone. for in all the navigation betwixt the two tropike the eastern wind be ordinary, and for that it be one of the admirable work of nature. it shall be good to understand the cause and the beginning thereof, that the burn zone, the brise or easterly wind, do continual blow, and without the zone, the western, and that the easterly be ordinary always there. chap 4. the way at sea be not, as at land, to return the sameway they pass. it be all one way, say the philosopher, from athens to thebes and from thebes to athens, but it be not so at sea. juan in decade 1. li 4. ca 6. for we go one way and return by another. the first which discover the east and west indies labour much, with great difficulty, to find out their course. until that experience, the mistress of these secret have teach they that to sail through the ocean be not like the passage in italy through the mediterranean sea, where in their return they observe the same port and cape they have sight of in their passage, attend still the benefit of the wind. which change instant, and when that fail they have recourse to their ower. and so the galley go and come daily, coast along the shore in some part of the ocean. they may not look for any other wind then that which blow for that common. it continue long to conclude that which be good to go by be not fit to return with. for in the sea, beyond the tropic and within the burn zone, the easterly wind, rain continual not suffer their contrary, in the which region there be two strange thing: the one be that in that zone be the great of the five into the which the world be divide, the easterly wind, which they call brise, do rain not suffer. the western or southern, which they call low wind, to have their course at any season of the year. the other wonder be that these easterly wind never cease to blow, and most common in place near to the line where it seem that calm shall be more frequent, be a part of the world most subject to the heat of the sun. but it be contrary, for you shall hardly find any calm there and the wind be cold and continue long, which have be find true in all the navigation of the indies. this be the reason why the voyage they make from spain to the west indies be short, more easy and more assure than the return to spain. the fleet part from siville have more difficulty to pass the canary, for that the gulf of yegues or of mare be variable, be beat with diverse wind, but have pass the canary. they sail with a western wind until they come to the burn zone, where present they find a easterly wind, and so they sail on with full wind, so as they have scant any nedde to touch their sail in the whole voyage. for this reason they call this great gulf the gulf of dance, for the calmness and pleasantness thereof. then, follow their course, they come to the land of guadelupe, dominique, desir^e, marigualante and the rest, which, in that place, be as it be the suburb of the indies. there the fleet separate. and divide themselves, whereof some, which go to new spain, take to the right hand towards hispaniola, and have discover cape s anthony. they pass unto s john delua, always use the same easterly wind. those for the main land, take the left hand, discover the high mountain of tayrone, then have touch at carthagene. they pass unto from whence they go by land to panama and from thence by the south sea, to peru. but when the fleet return to spain, they make their voyage in this sort. the fleet of peru discover cape s anthony than they enter into the havana, which be a goodly port in the island of cuba. the fleet of new spain do likewise touch at the havana, be part from the. true cross, or from the island of s john delua, the which be not without difficulty for that common easterly wind blow there which be a contrary wind, to go to the havana, these fleet be join together. for spain, they seek their height without the tropic, where present, they find westerly wind which serve they until they come in view of the acore or terceres, and from thence to sevill, so as their voyage in go be of a small height, not above twenty degree from the line which be within the tropic, but the return be without the tropic, in eight and twenty or thirty degree of height at the least, for that, within the tropic, the eastern wind continual blow, the which be fit to go from spain to the west indies, for that their course be from east to west, and without the tropic, which be in three and twenty degree of height, they find westerly wind, the which be the more certain and ordinary the far you be from the line and more fit to return from the indies, for that they be. wind blow from the south and west which serve to run into the east and north. the like discourse be of the navigation make into the south sea, go from new spain or peru to the philippines or china and return from the philippines or china to new spain, the which be easy, for that they sail always from east to west, near the line where they find the easterly wind to blow in their poop in the year 1584. there go a ship from callo^ in lima to the philippines which sail 2000 and 700. league without sight of land and the first it discover. be the island of lusson, where they take port, have perform their voyage in two month, without want of wind or any torment, and their course be almost continual. under the line. for that, from lima, which be twelve degree to the south, he come to menilla, which be as much to the north, the like good fortune have alvero de mandana whenas he go to discover the land of solomon, for that he have always a full gale until he come within view of these land, the which must be distant from that place of peru, from whence he part, about a thousand league have run their course always in one height to the south. the return be like unto the voyage from the indies unto spain. for those which return from the philippines or china to mexico, to the end, they may recover the western wind. they mount a great height until they come right against the land of jappon and discover the caliphorne. they return by the coast of new spain to the port of acapulco, from whence they part. so as it be, prove likewise by this navigation that they sail easy from east to west within the tropic, for that their easterly wind do rain, but return from west to east. they must seek the western wind without the tropic, in the height of seven and twenty degree. the portugese prove the like in their navigation to the east indies, although it be in a contrary course. for that go from. portugal, the voyage be troublesome but their return be more easy. for that in go, their course be from the west to the east, so as they must of necessity mount until they have find their general wind, which they hold to be above the seven and twenty degree, and in their return they discover the terceres, but with more ease for that they come from the east, where the easterly or northern wind do serve. they final, the mariner, hold it for a certain rule and observation that within the tropic continual rain, easterly wind, and therefore it be very easy to sail to the west, but without the tropic, there be in some season easterly wind and in some and more ordinary western wind by reason. whereof they which sail from west to east, labour always to be out of of the burn zone, to put themselves in the height of seven and twenty degree, and for this reason man have endanger themselves to undertake strange navigation and to seek out far country, unknown of the difference of the brise or eastern wind and the western, and likewise of other wind. chap 5. although that which we have speak be general and well approve, yet, there remain still a desire in i to learn the cause of this secret, why, under the burn zone, we sail always from east to west with so great facility, and not from west to east, which be as much as if we shall demand. why the easterly wind? rain there and not the weasterly, for that, according to good philosophy, that which be perpetual, universal and of itself, as the philosopher say, must have a proper cause and of itself. but before i stay at this question, which seem remarkable, it shall be necessary to show what we understand by brise or easterly wind and weasterly, for that it will serve much for this subject and for many other matter. touch wind and navigation. the pilot make two and thirty point of wind for that to bring their ship to the desire haven. they must make their account as punctual and as strict as they can, for bend to the one side or the other, never so little. in the end of their course they shall find themselves far from their pretend place and they reckon but two and thirty quarter of the wind, for that more will confound the memory. but with reckon as they account, two and thirty wind, so may they reckon three, score and four. one hundred twenty and eight and two hundred fifty and six, final. multiply these part to a infinite, for the place where the ship be, be as it be the centre and all hemisphere in circumference, what shall let? but we may account line without number, the which come from this centre draw direct to these lineal circle in so many part which may cause as many diverse wind. see that the wind come from all part. of the hemisphere, which we may divide into as many part as we will imagine. yet the wisdom of man, conformable to the holy scripture, observe four: wind, the principal of all other, and, as it be, the four corner of the world, the which they join in, make a cross with two line, whereof the one go from one pole to another and the other from one equinoctial to the other, of the one side, the north, or aquilon, and the southern wind, or midday opposite, and on the other side, the east, which come from the sun rise, and the west from his set. and although the holy scripture in some place speak of other diversity of wind, as of eurus and aquilo^, which those in the ocean sea call norde, and they of the mediterranean sea, gregual, whereof there be mention, make in saint paul^ navigation, yet the same holy scripture make mention of those four notable wind which all the world know, which area be, say north, south, east and west. but for that we find three difference: in the rise of the sun, from whence the name of east come, that be the two great decline which he do usual make, and the mean betwixt. they both, as he do, rise in diverse place, in winter, in summer, and in that which hold the middle of these two season. for this reason they have reckon two other wind, the east of summer and the east of winter, and by consequence, two weast, the one of summer and the other of winter, their contrary, so as there be eight wind in eight notable point of heaven, which be the two pole, the two equinox, the two solstice and their opposite, in the same circle, the which be call by diverse name and appellation in every place of the sea and land, those which sail the ocean do usual call they. thus they give the name of north to those wind that blow from our pole which carry the same name, and north-east that which be near and come from the summer. east they call east that which come. direct from the rise, equinoctial, and southeast, that which come from the winter rise to the midday, or pole, antarctic, they give the name of south-west, and to that of the winter set the name of south-west, to the right set, equinoctial, the name of west, and to the summer set, northester. they divide among they the rest of the wind and give they their name, as they participate and approach to other, as north-northweast, north-north-east, eastnortheast, eastsoutheast, south-southweast, weast-southwest, weast-norw, so as by their name we know whence they proceed in the mediterranean sea, although they follow the same division and manner of reckon, yet do they give they other, different name? they call the north, tramontana and his contrary, the south, mezo-giorno, or mydy, the east. they call levant and the west povant, and those which across these four they call thus southeast, be by they name or xaloque and his opposite, which be northwest mestrall, they call the north-east gre^ or greguall and the southweast his contrary, levesche or affricaine. in latin, the four know wind be s^ptentrio, auster, subsolanus, favonius, and those which be interlace be aquilo, vulturnus and corus, according unto pliny, vulturnus and eurus be the same wind that southeast or xaloque, favonius, be the west or ponent, aquilo and boreas, be norte or gregual or tramontana, and be the southweast or levesche, auster, and be the south or midday, corus and zephyrus, the northwest or mestral, and to the north-east or gregual they give no other name than phenicien. some divide they after a other manner. but for that, it be not now our purpose to repeat the latin and greek name of all the wind. let we only show which be those among these wind that the mariner of the indian ocean call brise and low wind. i be long in some difficulty about these name, see they to use they very diverse, until i find that these name be more general, then proper and peculiar. they call brise those which serve to go to the indies, the which blow in their poop, which by this mean comprehend all the easterly wind, and those which depend of they. and they do call low wind those which be fit to return from the indies which blow from. the south to the summer-weast. so as they be, as it be, two esquadron of wind of either side, the corporal be of oneside north-east or greguall, on the other southweast or levesche. but you must understand that of the number of eight wind and difference which we have count, five be proper to sail by and not the other three. i say that when a ship sail at sea he may make a long voyage with one of these wind, although they serve, he not equal, but he can use any of the other three, as if a ship go to the south, he shall sail with the north, north-east, northester, and with east and west, for side-winde serve to go or to come, but with a southern wind he can sail be direct contrary nor with with his two collateral, which be south and south-west, which be a very trivial thing and common to they that sail, and therefore it be not needful to explain they here, but to signify that the side-winde of the right, east, be those which common blow to the burn zone, which they do call brise, and those from the south decline to the west, which serve to sail from west to east, be not common in the burn zone, and therefore they seek, they without the tropike and the indian mariner common, call they low wind or vent. what be the reason why sail u^der the burn zone, we find always easterly wind, chap 6.. let we now speak of that which touch the question propound: what shall be the reason why, under the burn zone, we sail easy from east to west and not contrary, wherein we must presuppose two certain ground: the one, be that the motion of the first mover, which they call diurnal, not only draw and move with he the celestial sphere, which be inferior unto he, as we see daily in the sun, the moon and the star, but also the element do participate of this motion, insomuch as they be not hinder the earth, be not move by reason of her heaviness, which make it immooveable, be far from this first motor, the element of water. move, not likewise with this diurnal motion, for that it be unite to the earth and make one sphere, so as the earth keep it from all circular motion, but the other two element of fire and air, be more subtle and near the heavenly region, so as they participate of their motion and be drive about, circular as the same celestial body. as for the fire, without doubt it have his sphere, as aristotle and other philosopher have hold. but for the air, which be no point of our subject, it be most certain that it move with a motion diurnal which be from east to west, which we see plain in comet that move from the east unto the west, mount, descend and final turn in. the hemisphere in the same sort as the star move in the firmament. for otherwise these comet be in the region and sphere of the air, whereas they engender, appear, consume. it shall be impossible for they to move circular as they do if the element of the air do not move with the same motion that the first motor do. for these element be of a burn substance, by reason, they shall be fix without move, circular if the sphere where they be do not move, if it be not, as we feign, that some angel or intellectual spirit do walk with the comet, guide it circular. in the year of our lord god, one thousand five hundred seventy and seven appear that wonderful comet in form. like unto a feather, from the horizon almost to the midst of heaven, and continue from the first of november until the eight of december. i say from the first of november for although in spain, it be note, but the nine of november, according to the testimony of writer of that time. yet at peru, where i be then i remember well, we do see it and observe it eight day before and all the time after. touch the cause of this diversity. some may dilate upon it particular. i will only show that during those forty day which it continue, we all observe, both such as be in spain and we that live then at the indies, that it move daily with a universal motion from east to west, as the moon and other planet, whereby it appear that the sphere of the air be its region. the element itself must of necessity move after the same sort. we note also that beside this universal motion, it have a other particular by which it move with the planet fro west to east, for every night it turn more eastward, like unto the moon, sun and planet of venus. we do also observe a three particular motion whereby it move from the zodiac towards the north, for after some night it be find near unto the septentrional sign, and it may be this be the reason why the great comet be soon see by those that be southerly, as at peru, and late discover by they of europe, for by this three motion, as i have say, it approach near the northern region. yet every one may well observe the difference of this motion. so as we may well perceive that many and sundry celestial body give their impression to the sphere of the air in like sort, it be most certain that the air move with the circular motion of the heaven from east to west. which be the first ground before mention the second, be no less certain, the which be that the motion of the air in those part that be under the line or near unto it be very swift and light the more it approach to the equinoctial, but the far off it be from the line, approach near the pole, the more slow and heavy this motion be. the reason hereof be manifest. for that the move of the celestial body be the efficient cause of the move of the air, it must of necessity be more quick and light where the celestial body have their swift motion to labour, to show the reason why the heaven have a quick motion under the burn zone, which be the line. then in any other part of the heaven be. to make small account of man, see. it be easy to see in a wheel that its motion be more slow and heavy in the part of great circumference, then in the less, and that the great circumference end at one instant with the lesser. from these two ground proceed the reason where such as sail great gulf from east to west, do always find the wind in their powpe. go in a small altitude and the near they come to the equinoctial the more certain and durable the wind be. and contrariwise, sail from west to east, they always find the wind contrary. for that, the swift motion of the equinoctial draw after it the element of the air, as it do the surplus of the high sphere. so as the air do always follow the motion of the day, go from east to west without any alteration, and the motion of the air be swift, draw after it all the vapour and exhalation which rise from the sea, which cause in those region a continual easterly wind which run from the levant. father alonso sanches, a religious man and of our company who have travel the east and west indies, as a man ingenious and of experience, say that sail under the line or near unto it, with a continue and durable season. it seem to he to be the. same air move by the heaven, the which guide the ship, and be not proper a wind nor exhalation, but a air move with the daily course of the sun, for proof whereof he show that the season be always equal and alike, at the gulf of danee and in other great gulf where we sail under the burn zone, by reason whereof their sail be always of one fashion, without any bluster, have no need in a manner to change, they in all their course. and if the air be not move by the heaven, it may sometime fail, sometime change to the contrary, and sometime there will grow some storm. although this be learned, speak yet can we not deny it to be a wind, see. there be vapour and exhalation of the sea, and that we sometime see the brise or easterly wind, strong, sometime more weak, and place in that sort as sometime they can hardly carry all their sail. we must then know, and it be true, that the air move, draw unto it the vapour it find, for that the force be great and find no resistance, by reason whereof the eastern and weasterne wind be continual and in a manner always alike, in those part which be near the line and almost under all the burn zone, which be the course the sun follow betwixt, the two circle of cancer and capricorn. why, without the zone in a great altitude we find always westerly wind^s chap 7.. whoso will? near, look into what have be speak, may likewise understand that go from the west to the east, in altitude beyond the tropike we shall find western wind. for that the motion of the equinoctial be so swift it be a cause that the ay^e move under it. according to this motion, which be from east to west, draw after it the vapour and exhalation that rise of either side. the equinoctial or burn zone encounter, the course and motion of the zone be force by the repercussion to return almost to the contrary. whence grow the southweast wind, so ordinary in those part, even as we see in the course of water, the which, if they be encounter by other of more force, return in a manner. back. so it seem to be like in vapour and exhalation, whereby it grow that the wind do turn and separate themselves from one part to another. these westerly wind do common rai^^ in a mean altitude which be from twenty and seeven to thirty and seven degree, though they be not so certain nor so regular as the brise, that be in a less altitude. the reason be for that the south-west wind be no cause of this proper and equal motion of the heaven, as the brise be be near to the line but, as i have say, they be more ordinary and often more furious and tempestuous, but pass into a great altitude as of forty degree there be as small assurance of wind at. sea as at land, for sometime the east or north wind blow and sometime the south or west, whereby it happen their navigation be more uncertain and more dangerous. of the exception to the foresay rule and of the wind and calm both at land and at sea, chap 8. that which we have speak of wind which blow ordinary, within and without the zone, must be understand, of the main sea and in the great gulf, for at land it be otherwise, where we find all sort of wind by reason of the inequality which be betwixt the mountain and the valley, the great number of river and lake and the diverse situation of country whence the gross and thick vapour arise, which be move from the one part or the other according to the diversity of their beginning, which cause these diverse wind, the motion of the air cause by the heaven have not power enough to draw and move they with it, and this variety of wind be not only find at land but also upon the sea coast which be under the burn zone, for that there be foreign or land wind which come from the land and many which blow from the sea, the which wind from the sea be common, more wholesome and more pleasant than those of the land which be, contrariwise, troublesome and unwholesome, although it be the difference of the coast that cause this diversity common. the land wind blow from midnight to the sun rise, and the sea wind until sun set. the reason perhaps may be that the earth, as a gross substance, fume more whenas the sun shine not upon it, even as green wood or scarce dry smoke, most when the flame be quench. but the sea, which be compound of more subtle part, engender no fume. but when it be hot, even as straw or hay be moist and in small quantity breed smoke, when it be burn, and when the flame fail, the fume sudden cease whatsoever. it be it be certain that the land blow by night and that of the sea by day, so that even as there be often contrary, violent and tempestuous wind upon the sea coast, so do we see very great calm. some man of great experience report that have sail many great passage at sea under the line, yet do they never see any calm, but that they always make way little or much the air be move by the celestial motion which be sufficient to guide a ship, blow in poop as it do. i have already say that a ship of lima go to mani^^a sail two thousand seven hundred league, always under the line or not above twelve degree from it, and that in the month of february and march, whenas the sun be there for zenith and in all this space they find no calm but always a fresh gale. so as in two month they perform this great voyage, but in the burn zone. and without it, you shall usual see great calm upon the coast, where the vapour come from the land or main land, and therefore storm and tempest and the sudden motion of the air be more certain and ordinary upon the coast, whereas the vapour come from the land, then in full sea, i mean under the burn zone, for without it and at sea there be both calm and whirlwind, notwithstanding, sometime betwixt the two tropic yea under the line, you shall have great rain and sudden shower yea far into the sea for the work whereof the vapour and exhalation of the sea be sufficient, which move sometime hasty in the air, cause thunder and whirlwind, but this be more ordinary near to the land and upon the land. when i sail from peru to new spain, i observe that all the time we be upon the coast of peru, our voyage be, as it be ordinary, very calm and easy by reason of the southern wind that blow have always a before wind return from spain and new spain, as we pass the gulf, launch far into the sea, almost under the line. we find the season cool, quiet and pleasant, with a full wind, but come near to nicaragua and to all that coast, we have contrary wind, with great store of rain and fog. all this navigation be under the burn zone, for from twelve degree to the south, which be lima, we sail to the seventeen, which be gautulco, a. port of new spain and i believe that such as have observe their navigation make under the burn zone shall find what i have say which may suffice for the wind which rain at sea under the burn zone of some mervellous effect of the wind which be in some part of the indies. chap 9, it be a very difficult matter to report particular the admirable effect which some wind cause in diverse region of the world and to give a reason thereof. there be wind which natural trouble the water of the sea and make it green and black, other clear as crystal, some comfort and make glad, other trouble and breed heaviness, such as nourish silkworm, have great care to shut their window whenas the south-west wind do blow, and to open. they, to the contrary, have find by certain experience that their worm diminish and die with the one and fatten and become better with the other. and who so will near observe it, shall find in himself that the diversity of wind cause notable impression and change in the body principal, in sick part and ill dispose when they be most tender and weak. the holy scripture call one a burn wind, ex c, 10. and 14. ilb 17. joan 4. osee 13. dan 3. another, a wind full of dew and sweetness. and it be no wonder if we see such notable effect of the wind in plant, beast and man. see that we see it visible in iron, which be the hard of all metal. i have see grate of iron in some part of the indies. so rust and consume that, press it, betwixt your finger, it dissolve into powder as if it have be hay or parch straw, the which proceed only from the wind, which do corrupt it, have no mean to withstand it, but leave apart many other great and notable effect. i will only make mention of two: the one, although it cause pang grater, then death itself. yet do it not breed any further inconvenience? the other take away life without feel of it. the sickness of the sea, wherewith such be trouble as first begin to go to sea, be a matter very ordinary. and yet, if the nature thereof be unknown to man, we shall take it for the pang of death, see how it afflict and torment while it do last, by the cast of the stomach, pain of the head and other troublesome accident. but in truth, this sickness, so common and ordinary, happen unto man by the change of the air and sea. for although it be true that the motion of the ship help much, in that it move more or less, and likewise the infection and ill favour. of thing in the ship. yet the proper and natural cause be the air and the vapour of the sea, the which do so weaken and trouble the body and the stomach which be not accustom thereunto. that they be wonderful, move and change. for the air be the element by which we live and breathe, draw it into our entrails, the which we bathe therewithal, and therefore there be nothing that so sudden and with so great force do alter we as the change of the air we breathe, as we see in those which die of the plague. it be approve by many experience that the air of the sea be the chief cause of this strange indisposition. the one be that when there blow from the sea a strong breath, we see they at the land as it be sea sick, as i myself have often find. another, be the far we go into the sea and retire from land, the more we be touch and dazzle with this sickness. another, be that coast, along any island, and after launch into the main, we shall there find the air more strong yet, will i not deny. but the motion and agitation may cause this sickness. see that we see some be take therewith pass river in bark, other in like sort go in coach and caross according to the diverse complexion of the stomach, as contrariwise there be some. how boisterous and troublesome soever the sea be, do never feel it. wherefore it be a matter certain and try that the air of the sea do common cause this effect in such as new go to sea. i think good to speak this to show a strange effect which happen in some part of the indies where the air and the wind, that rain make man daisy, not less but more than at sea. some hold it for a fable, other say it be a addition. for my part, i will speak what. i have try. there be in peru a high mountain which they call, and have hear speak of the alteration it breed. i go as well, prepare as i can according to the instruction which be give i by such as they call vaguianos or expert man. but notwithstanding all my provision, when i come to mount the degree, as they call they, which be the top of this mountain, i be sudden surprise with so mortal and strange a pang that i be ready to fall from the top to the ground. and although we be many in company, yet, every one make haste, without any tarry, for his companion to free himself speedy from this ill passage. be then alone with one indian who i entreat to help to stay. i i be surprise with such pang of strain and cast, as i think to cast up my heart too, for have cast up meat, sleugme and choler, both yellow and green. in the end i cast up blood with the strain of my stomach. to conclude, if this have continue, i shall undoubted have die, but this last not above three or four hour. that we be come into a more convenient and natural temperature where all our companion be fouteteene or fifteen, be much weary. some in the passage demand confession, think very to die. other leave the ladder and go to the ground, be overcome with cast and go to the stool. and it be tell i that some have lose their life there with this accident. i behold one that do beat himself against the earth, cry out for the rage and grief which this passage of have cause, but common it do no important harm, only this pain and troublesome distaste while it endure. and not only the passage of have this property, but also all this ridge of the mountain which run above five hundred league long. and in what place soever you pass, you shall find strange intemperature yet more, in some part, then in other, and rather to those which mount from the sea, then from the plain beside. i have pass it by lucanas and soras, in a other place, by and by cavanas. final by four different place go and come, and always in this passage i have feel this alteration, although in no place so strong as at the first, in which have be try by allsuch as have pass it, and no doubt but the wind be the cause of this intemperature and strange alteration, or the air that reign there, for the best remedy and all they find be to stop their nose, their ear and their mouth as much as may be and to cover themselves with clothes, especial the stomach, for that the air be subtle and pierce, go into the entrails, and not only man feel this alteration, but also beast that sometime stay there so as there be no spur can make they go. forward. for my part, i hold this place to be one of the high part of land in the world, for we mount a wonderful space and, in my opinion, the mountain n^vade of spain, the pirence and the alps of italy be as ordinary house in regard of high tower. i therefore persuade myself that the element of the air be there, so subtle and delicate as it be, not proportionable with the breathe of man, which require a more gross and temperate air, and i believe it be the cause that do so much alter the stomach and trouble all the disposition, the passage of the mountain n^vade and other of europe which i have see, although the air be cold there and do force man. to wear more clothes. yet this cold do not take away the appetite from meat, but contrariwise it provoke. neither do it cause any cast of the stomach, but only some pain in the foot and hand. final, their operation be outward, but that of the indies whereof i speak, without molest of foot or hand or any outward part, trouble all the entrails within, and that, which be more admirable when the sun be hot, which make, i imagine, that the grief we feel come from the quality of the air which we breathe. therefore, that be most subtle and delicate who cold be not so sensible as pierce all this ridge of mountain be for the most part desert, without any village or habitation for man. so as you shall scarce find any small cottage to lodge, such as do pass by night. there be no beast, good or bad, but some vicunos which be their country mutton and have a strange and wonderful property as i shall show. in his place the grass be often burn and all black with the air, and this desert run five and twenty or thirty league overthwart and in length above five hundred league. there be other desert or place inhabit which at peru they call punas- speak of the second point we promise- where the quality of the air cut off man life without feeling. in former time the spaniard go from peru to the realm of chille by this mountain, but at this day they do pass common by sea, and sometime alongst the side of it, and though that way be laborious and troublesome, yet be there not so great danger as by the mountain where there be plain on the which many man have perish and die and sometime have escape by great hap, whereof some have remain lame. there run a small breath which be not very strong nor violent, but proceed in such sort that man fall down dead in a manner without feeling, or at the least they lose their foot and hand, the which may seem fabulous yet be it most true. i have know and frequent long the gennerall, jerome costilla, the ancient of cusco, who have lose three or four toe, which fall off in pass the desert of chille, be perish with this air, and when he come to look on they they be dead and fall off without any pain, even as a rot apple fall from the tree. this captain report that of a good army which he have conduct by that place in the former year since the discovery of this kingdom by almagro. a great part of the man remain dead there, who body he find lie in the desert without any stink or corruption. add thereunto one thing very strange: that they find a young boy alive and be examine how he have live in that place. he say that he lie hide in a little cave, whence he come to cut the flesh of a dead horse with a little knife, and thus have he nourish himself a long time with i know not how many companion that live in that sort, but now they be all dead. one die this day, and another to morrow, say that he desire nothing more than to die there with the rest. see that he find not in himself any disposition to go to any other place, nor to take any taste in any thing. i have understand the like of other, and particular of one that be of our company, who be then a secular man, have pass by these desert and it be a strange thing, the quality of this cold air which kill and also preserve the dead body without corruption. i have also understand it, of a reverend religious man of the order of saint dominike, and prelate thereof, who have see it pass by the desert and which, be strange, he report that travel that way by night, be force to defend himself against that deadly wind which blow there have no other mean but to gather together a great number of those dead body that lay there and make thereof as it be a rampire and a bolster for his head. in this manner do he sleep the dead body, give he life? without doubt this be a kind of cold so pierce that it quench the vital heat, cut off his influence and be so exceed cold, yet do not corrupt nor give any putrefaction. to the dead body, for that putrefaction, grow from heat and moistness. as for the other kind of air which thunder under the earth and cause earthquake, more at the indies then in any other region, i will speak thereof in treat the quality of the land at the indies. we will content ourselves now with what we have, speak of the wind and air and pass to that which be to be speak of the water, of the ocean that environ the indies, and of the north and south sea, chap 10.. among all water, the ocean be the principal by which the indies have be discover and be environ therewith, for either they be land of the ocean, sea, or main land, the which, wheresoever it. end be bound with this ocean. to this day they have no^ discover at the indies any mediterranean sea, as in europe, asia and africa, into the which there enter some arm of this great sea and make distinct sea, take their name from the province they bathe, and almost all the mediterranean sea continue and join together and with the ocean itself by the straight of gibraltar, which the ancient call the pillar of hercules. although the red sea be separate from the mediterranean sea, enter alone into the indian ocean and the caspian sea, join not with any other, so that at the indies we find not any other sea than this ocean, which they divide into two, the one they call the north sea and the other the south. for that the indies, which be first discover by the ocean and reach unto spain, lie all to the north and by that land thereafter discover a sea on the other side, the which they call the south sea. for that they decline until they have pass the line and have lose the north or pole arctic, they call it south. for this cause they have call all that ocean the south. sea which lie on the other side of the east indies, although a great part of it be seat to the north, as all the coast of new spain, nuaragna, guatimala and panama. they say that he that first discover this sea be call blasconune of bilbo, the which he do by that part which we now call main land, where it grow narrow and the two sea approach so near the one to the other that there be but seven league of distance. for although they make the way eighteen from to panama, yet be it with turn to seek the commodity of the way but draw a direct line, the one sea shall not be find more distant from the other. some have discourse and propound. to cut through this passage of seven league and to join one sea to the other, to make the passage from peru more commodious and easy. for that, these eighteen league of land- betwixt de dios and panama- be more painful and chargeable than 2300. by sea, whereupon some will say it be a mean to drown the land. one sea be low than another, as in time past. we find it write that for the same consideration they give over the enterprise to win the red sea into nile, in the time of king sesostris and since in the empire of the ottoman. but for my part, joviu^, i hold such discourse and proposition for vain, although this inconvenient shall not happen, the which i will not. hold for assure, i believe there be no human power able to beat and break down those strong and impenetrable mountain which god have place betwixt the two sea and have make they most hard rock to withstand the fury of two sea. and although it be possible to man yet, in my opinion, they shall fear punishment from heaven in seek to correct the work which the creator, by his great providence, have ordain and dispose in the frame of this universal world. leave this discourse of open the land and join both sea together, there be yet another, less rash but very difficult and dangerous, to search out whether these two great gulf do join in any other part of the world which be the enterprise. of fernando magellan, a portugal gentleman who, great courage and constancy in the research of this subject and happy success in the find thereof, give the name of eternal memory to this straight which just they call by the name of the discoverer, magellan, of which straight we will entreat a little as of one of the great wonder of the world. some have believe that this straight which magellan have discover in the south sea be none, or that it be straighten, as don alonso arsille write in his auracane, and at this day there be some that say there be no such straight, but that they be land betwixt the sea and land for that the main land end there, at the end, whereof be all. land beyond the which the one sea join full with the other or, to speak better, it be all one sea. but in turth it be most certain there be a straight and a long and stretch out land on either side, although it have not yet be know how far it stretch. of the one side of the straight towards the south, after magellan, a ship of the bishop of plaisance pass the straight, don gui^ieres carvaial, who mast, they say, be yet at lima at the entry of the palace. they go afterward coast along the south to discover the straight by the commandment of don garcia of mendoce, than governor of chille, according to that which captain ladrillero find it and pass it. i have. read the discourse and report he make, where he say that he do not hazard himself to land in the straight but have discover the north sea. he return back for the roughness of the time- winter be now come- which cause the wave come from the north to grow great and swell and the sea continual foam with rage. in our time, francis drake, a englishman, pass this straight after he, captain sarmiento pass it on the south side, and last in the year 1587.. other englishman pass it by the instruction of drake, which at this time run along all the coast of peru, and for that the report which the master pilot that pass it make seem notable unto i. i will here set it. down of the straight of magellan and how it be, pass on the south side, chap 11.. in the year of our lord god, one thousand five hundred seventy nine francis drake have pass the straits that run along the coast of chille and all peru and take the ship of saint jean anthona, where there be a great number of bar of silver, the viceroy don francis of toledo arm and send forth two good ship to discover the straight. appoint peter sarmiento for captain, a man learn in astrology. they part from callao of lima in the begin of october, and forasmuch as upon that coast there blow a contrary wind from the south, they take the sea and have sail little above thirty day with a favourable wind. they come to the same altitude of the straight, but for that it be very hard to discover. they approach near unto the land where they enter into a great bay in the which there be a archipelague of land. sarimento grow obstinate that this be the straight and stay a whole month to find it out by diverse way, creep up to the high mountain but see they can not discover it at the instance of such as be in the army. they return to sea the same day, the weather grow rough with the which they run their course. in the begin of the night the admiral light fail, so as the other ship never see they, after the day, follow the force of the wind, continue still be a ^ide wind. the admiralles ship discover a open which make land think good to enter there for shelter until the tempest be pass. the which succeed in such sort as have discover this vent. they find that it run more and more into the land and conjecture that it shall be the straight which they seek. they take the height of the sun, where they find themselves in fifty degree and a half, which be the very height of the straight and to be the better assure. they thrust out their brigandine, which have run many league into this arm of the sea without see any end. they find it to be the very straight and for that they have order to pass it. they plant a high cross there with letter thereon to the end that if the other ship shall chance to arrive there they shall have news of their general and follow. they pass the straight in a favourable time without difficulty and pass into the north sea. they come to certain unknown island where they take in fresh water and other refresh. from thence they take their course towards cape, from whence the pilot mayor return to peru by the way of carthagene and panama, carry a discourse of the straight to the viceroy and of all their success, of who he be well reward for his good service. but captain peter sarmiento sail from cape to sevill in the same ship wherewith he have pass the straight and go to court where his majesty reward, he and at his instance, give commandment to prepare a great army which he send, under the command of diego flores de valdes, to people and fortify this straight. but this army, after variable success, spend much and profit. little. return now to the viceadmiralles ship which go in company of the general have lose he in the storm. they take the sea, but the wind be contrary and stormy. they look all to perish, so as they confess themselves and prepare for death. this tempest continue three day without intermission and hourly they fear to run on ground, but it fall out contrary, for they go still from land until the end of the three day that the storm cease and then take the height. they find themselves in fifty six degree, but see, they have not cross and yet be far from land. they be amaze whereby they surmise, as hernando lamero tell i, that the land which be on the other side of the straight as we go by the south sea, run not the same that it do to the straight, but that it turn to the east, for else it be impossible. but they shall have touch land, have run so long time with this cross wind, but they pass on no further. neither can they discover the land end which some hold to be there, whether it be a island on the other side of the straight where the two sea of north and south do join together, or that it do run up towards the east and join with the land of vesta, as they call. it, which answer to the cape of good hope. as it be the opinion of some, the truth hereof be not, to this day well know, neither be there any one. find that have discover that land, the viceroy don martin, henrique sa^de, unto i that he hold this report for a invention of the english, that the straight shall present make a island and that the two sea do join together, for that be viceroy of new spain. he have diligent examine the portugal pilot who have be leave there by francis drake and yet have no knowledge of any such matter by he, but that be a very straight and a main land on either side. return then to the say vice-admiral. they discover this straight. as the say hernando lamero report unto i, but by another mouth or entry, and in a great height, by reason of a certain great island which be at the entry of the straight which they call the bell, for the form it carry and, as he say, he will have pass it, but the captain and soldier will not yield thereunto suppose that the time be too far spend and that they be in great danger, and so they return to chille and peru without pass it of the straight which some hold to be in florida, chap 12.. even as magellan find out this straight upon the south, so some have pretend to discover another straight which they say be in the north, and suppose it. to be in florida, who coast run in such sort as they know no end thereof. peter melendez, the, a man very expert at sea, affirm for certain that there be a straight and that the king have command he to discover it, wherein he show a great desire. he propound his reason to prove his opinion, say that they have see some remainder of ship in the north sea, like unto those the which the chinois use, which have be impossible if there be no passage from one sea unto another. moreover, he report that in a certain great bay in florida, the, which run 300. league within the land, they see whale in some season of the year, which come from the other sea show. moreover, other likelihood, he conclude that it be a thing, agree with the wisdom of the creator and the goodly order of nature, that as there be communication and a passage betwixt the two sea at the pole antarctic, so there shall, in like sort be one at the pole arctic, which be the principal pole. some will say that drake have knowledge of this straight and that he give occasion so to judge, whenas he pass along the coast of new spain by the south sea. yea, they hold opinion that other englishman, which this year, 1587. take a ship, come from the philippines with great quantity of gold and other riches, do pass this straight. which prize they make near to the calliphorne. which course the ship return from the philippines and china to new spain do usual observe they confident believe that as the courage of man be great and his desire infinite to find new mean to enrich himself, so within few year this secret will be discover, and true. it be a thing worthy admiration that as the ant do always follow the trace of other, so man, in the knowledge and search of new thing, never stay. until they have attain the desire end for the content and glory of man and the high and eternal wisdom of the creator. use this curiosity of man to communicate the light of his holy gospel to people that always live in the obscure darkness of their error. but to conclude, the straight of the arctic pole, if there be any, have not be yet discover. it shall not therefore be from the purpose to speak what we know of the particularity of the antarctic strait, already discover and know by the report of such as have see and observe it, of the property of the straight of magellan, chap 13.. this straight, as i have say, be just fifty degree to the south and from one sea. to another fourscore and ten or a hundred league. in the narrow place it be a league and little less. wher^ it be intend the king shall build a fort to defend the passage. it be so deep in some place that it can be sound, and in some place they find ground at 18. yea, at 15. fathom of these hundred league which it contain in length from one sea unto the other, it be plain. see that the wave of the south sea run 30. league and the other 70. be possess with the billow and wave of the north sea. but there be this difference that the 30. league to the south run betwixt, the rock and most high mountain who top, be continual cover. with snow. so as they seem, by reason of their great height, to be join together, which make the entry of the straight to the south so hard to discover, in these 30. league the sea be very deep and without bottom. yet may they fasten their ship to the land. the bank be straight and uneven. but in the 70. league towards the north, they find ground and of either side there be large plain, the which they call ca^^na^. many great river of fair and clear water run into this straight and thereabouts be great and wonderful forest, whereas they find some tree of excellent wood and sweet the which be not know in these part, whereofsuch as pass from thence to peru, bring some to. show there be many meadow within the land and many land in the midst of the straight. the indian that inhabit on the south side be little and coward. those that dwell on the north part be great and valiant. they bring some into spain, which they have take. they find piece of blue cloth and other mark and sign that some man of europe have pass there. the indian ^^luted our man with the name of jesia. they be good, archer and go^, clad in wild beast skin, whereof there be great abundance. the water of the straight rise and fall as the tide and they may visible, see the tide come of the one side of the north sea and of the other, from the south. whereas they meet the which, as i have say, be thirty league from the south and three score and ten from the north, and although it seem there shall be more danger then, in all the rest, yet, whenas captain sarmi^nto his ship, whereof i speak, pass it, they have no great storm but find far less difficulty than they expect. for then the time be very calm and pleasant, and moreover, the wave from the north sea come break by reason of the great length of three score and ten league, and the wave from the south sea be not rage by reason of the great depth in which depth the wave break and be swallow up. it be true that in winter the straight be not navigable by reason of the tempest and rage of the sea in that season. some ship which have attempt to pass the straight in winter have perish. one only ship pass it on the south side, which be the captain i make mention of. i be full instruct of all that i have speak by the pilot thereof, call hernando alonse, and have see the true description of the straight they make in pass it, whereof they carry the copy to the king of spain and the original to their viceroy of peru. of the ebb and flow of the indian ocean, chap 14.. one of the mostadmirable secret of nature be the ebb and flow of the sea, not only for this strange property of rise and fall, but much more for the difference there be thereof in diverse sea, yea in diverse coast of one and the same sea. there be some sea that have no daily flow nor ebb, as we see in the inner mediterranean, which be the thyrene sea, and yet it flow and ebb every day. in the upper mediterranean sea, which be that of venice and just give cause of admiration that these two sea be mediterranean and that of venice be no great than the other, yet have it his ebb and flow as the ocean, and that other sea of italy, none at all. there be some mediterranean sea that apparent rise and fall every month, and other that neither rise in the day nor in the month. there be other sea, as the spanish ocean, that have their flux and reflux every day, and beside that they have it monthly, which come twice, that be to say at the entry and at the full of every moon, which they call spring tide, to say that any sea have this daily. ebb and flow and not monthly, i know, not any. it be strange the difference we find of this subject at the indies, for there be some place, whereas the sea do daily rise and fall two league, as at panama, and at a high water it rise much more. there be other place where it do rise and fall so little that hardly can you find the difference. it be ordinary in the ocean sea to have a daily flow and ebb, and that be twice in a natural day, and ever it fall three quarter of a hour, soon one day, then another, according to the course of the moon, so as the tide fall not always in one hour of the day. some will say that this flux and reflux proceed from the local motion of the water, of the sea, so as the water that rise on the one side fall on the other, that be opposite unto it, so that it be full sea on the one side, when as it be a low water on the opposite. as we see in a kettle full of water, when we move it, when it lean to the one side the water increase and on the other it diminish. other affirm that the sea rise in all part at one time and decrease at one instant. as the boil of a pot come out of the centre, it extend itself on all part and when it cease it fall likewise. on all part this second opinion be true and, in my judgement, certain, and try, not so much for the reason which the philosopher give in their meteor as for the certain experience we may make. for to satisfy myself upon this point and question, i demand particular of the say pilot how he find the tide in the straight and if the tide of the south sea do fall whenas those of the north do rise, and contrariwise- this question be true, why the increase of the sea in one place be the decrease thereof in another. as the first opinion hold, he answer that it be not so. but they may see plain that the tide of the north and south sea rise at one instant. so as the wave of one sea encounter with the other and at one instant, likewise, they begin to retire every one into his sea, say that the rise and fall be daily see and that the encounter of the tide, as i have say, be at three score and ten league to the north sea and thirty to the south, whereby we may plain gather that the ebb and flow of the ocean be no pure local motion but rather a alteration whereby all water real rise and increase, at one and in other they dimini^h as the boil of a pot whereof i have speak. it be impossible to comprehend this point by experience if it be not in the straight where all the ocean, both on the one side and on the other, join together, for none but angel can see it and judge of the opposite part. for that man have not so long a sight, nor so nimble and swift foot as be needful to transport his eye from one part to another in so short a time as a tide will give he respite, which be only six hour of sundry fisher and their manner of fish at the indies, chap 15.. there be in the indian ocean a infinite number of fish, the kind and property whereof the creator only can declare. there be many such as we. have in the sea of europe as shadde and alose, which come from the sea into the river, dorad, pilchard and many other. there be other the like i do not think to have see in these part as those which they do call cabrillas, which do somewhat resemble the trout, and in new spain they call they bobos. they mount from the sea into the river. i have not see any besugues there, nor trout, although some say there be in chille. there be tonins in some part upon the coast of peru, but they be rare and some be of opinion that at a certain time they do cast their spawn in the straight of magellan, as they do in spain at the straight of gibraltar. and for this reason they find more. upon the coast of chille, although those i have see there be not like to they. in spain, at the island which they call barlovente, which be cuba, saint dominique, port rique and jamaique, they find a fish which they call manati, a strange kind of fish, if we may call it fish, a creature which engender her young one alive and have teat and do nourish they with milk, feed of grass in the field, but in effect it live continual in the water and therefore they eat it as fish. yet when i do eat of it at saint dominique on a friday, i have some scruple, not for that which be speak, but for that in colour and taste it be like unto morsel of veal, so be it green, and like unto a cow on the hinder part. i do wonder at the incredible raven of the tib^rons or shark, whenas i do see draw from one that be take in the port out of his gullet, a butcher great knife, a great iron hook and a piece of a cow head with one whole horn. neither do i know if both be there or no. i do see in a creek make with that sea a quarter of a horse for pleasure, hang upon a. stake. whither present come a company of these tiburon. at the smell thereof, and for the more pleasure, this horse flesh be hang in the air, i know not how many hand breadth from the water, this company of fish flock about it, leap up and, with a strange nimbleness, cut off both flesh and bone off the horse leg, as if it have be the stalk of a lettuce. their tooth be as sharp as a razor. there be certain small fish they call rambos, which cleave to these tiburon. neither can they drive they away, and they be feed with that which fall from the tiburon. there be other small fish which they call fly fish, the which be find within the tropic and in no other place, as i think they be pursue by the ducade and to escape they they leap out of the sea and go a good way in the air and for this reason they be call fly fish. they have wing, as it be of linen, cloth or of parchment, which do support they some space in the air. there do one fly or leap into the ship wherein i go, the which i do see and observe the fashion of his wing. in the indian history there be often mention make of lizard or caymans as they call they, and they be the very same which pliny. and the ancient call crocodile. they find they on the sea side and in hot river, for in cold river there be none to be find, and therefore they find none upon all the coast of peru unto payra, but forward they be common see in the river. it be a most fierce and cruel beast. although it be slow and heavy, he go hunt and seek his prey on the land, and what he take alive, he drown it in the water. yet do he not eat it, but out of the water, for that his throat be of such a fashion as if there enter any water, he shall easy be drown. it be a wonderful thing to see a combat betwixt a caymant and a tiger, whereof there be most cruel at the indies. a religious man of our company tell i that he have see these beast fight most cruel one against the other upon the sea shore. the caymant with his tail give great blow unto the tiger, strive with his great force to carry he into the water, and the tiger with his paw resist the caymant, draw he to land. in the end the tiger vanquish and open the lezard, it seem by the belly, the which be most tender and penetrable, for in every other part he be so hard that no lance and scarce a harquebus can pierce it. the victory which a. indian have of a caymant be yet more rare. the caimant have carry away his young child and sudden plunge into the sea. the indian move with choler, cast himself after he with a knife in his hand, and as they be excellent swimmer and diever, and the caymant swim always on the top of the water, he hurt, he in the belly, and in such sort that the caymant feel himself wound, go to the shore, leave the little infant dead. but the combat which the indian have with whale be yet more admirable. wherein appear the power and greatness of the creator to give so base a nation, as be the indian, the industry, and courage to encounter the most fierce and deform beast in the world, and only to fight with he, but also to vanquish he and not to triumph over he. consider this, i have often remember that place of the psalm speak of the whale. what great mockery can there be then to see a indian lead a whale as big as a mountain, vanquish with a cord, the manner the indian of florida use, as some expert man have tell i, to take these whale, whereof there be great store, be they put. themselves into a canoe which be like a bark of a tree and in swim. approach near the whale side, then with great dexterity they leap to his neck and there they ride as on horse back, expect his time, than he thrust a sharp and strong stake which he carry with he into the whale nostril, for so they call the hole or vent by which they breathe present. he beat it in with a other stake as forcible as he can. in the mean space the whale do furious, beat the sea and raise mountain of water, run into the deep with great violence and present rise again not know what to do. for pain, the indian still sit firm and to give he full payment. for this trouble, he beat another stake into the other vent or nostril. so as he stop he quite and take away his breathe than he betake he to his canoe, which he hold, tie with a cord to the whale side, and go to land. have first tie his cord to the whale, the which he let run with the whale, who leap from place to place while he find water. enough be trouble with pain. in the end he come near the land and remain on ground by the hugeness of his body, unable any more to move. then a great number of indian come unto the conqueror to gather his spoil. they kill he and cut his flesh in piece, the which be bad enough. this do they dry and beat into powder, use it for meat. it do last they long wherein be fulfil that which be. speak in another psalm of the whale. the do often speak of this kind of fish, whereof m^nardes make mention in his book. there be a other fish which the indian do common use in the sea, the which, although it be less yet be it worthy the report they make as it be, faggot of bul-rush or dry sedge, well, bind together, which they call bassa have, carry they upon their shoulder to the sea, they cast they in and present leap upon they be so set, they launch out into the deep row up and down, with small reed of either side. they go a league or two into the sea to fish, carry with they their cord and net upon these faggot and bear themselves thereon. they cast out their net and do there remain fish the great part of the day and night, until they have fill up their measure with the which they return. well, satisfy, true, it be delightful to see they fish at callao of lima, for that they be many in number and every one, set on horseback, cut the wave of the sea which, in their place of fish, be great and furious, resemble the triton or neptune which they paint upon the water and be come to land. they draw their bark out of the water upon their back, the which they present undo and lay abroad on the shore to dry. there be other indian of the valley of yca which be accustom to go to fish in leather or skin of sea-wolve, blow up with wind, and from time to time they do blow they like ball of wind, lest they shall sink. in the vale of canete, which in old time they call guaroo, there be a great number of indian fisher, but because they resist the ingua, when he come to conquer that land, he make show of peace with they and therefore to feast he they appoint a solemn fish of many thousand indian which go to sea in their vessel. of reed at who return the ingua who have lay many soldier in ambush, make a cruel butchery of they. so, as afterward, this land remain unpeople, although it be abundant and fertile. i do see a other manner of fish, whereunto don francis of toledo, the viceroy, do lead, i yet be it not in the sea but in a river which they call great, in the province of charcas, where the indian chiraquanas plunge into the water and swim with a admirable swiftness. follow the fish where, with dart and hook, which they use to carry in their right hand, only swim with the left. they wound the fish and so hurt they bring they forth. seem in this more like unto fish than man of. the land. but now that we have leave the sea, let we come to other kind of water that remain to be speak of, of lake and pool that be at the indies, chap 16.. in place of the mediterranean sea, which be in the old world, the creator have furnish this new with many lake, whereof there be some so great as they may be, proper call sea, see the scripture, call that of palestina- so which be not so great as some of these, the most famous be that of which be at peru, in the province of callao, the which, as i have say in the former book, contain near fourscore league in compass, into the which there run ten or twelve great river a while, since they begin to sail in it with bark and ship, wherein they proceed so ill that the first ship be split with a tempest that do rise in the lake, the water be. not altogether sour nor salt as that of the sea, but it be so thick as it can be drink. there be two kind of fish breed in this lake in great abundance: the one they call suche, which be great and savorous but phlegmatic and unwholesome, and the other, bogos, which be more healthful, although it be less and full of bone. there be great number of wilde-duckes, and whenas the indian will feast it or show delight to any one that pass along the two bank which they call chucuyto and omasugo, they assemble a great number of canoe, make a circle and environ the foul until they take with their hand what they please, and they call this manner of fish chaco on the one. and the other bank of this lake be the best habitation of peru. from the issue thereof there grow a lesser lake, although it be great, which they call upon the bank, whereof there be great number of cattle, especial swine which grow exceed fat with the grass upon those bank. there be many other lake in the high mountain, whence proceed brook and river which after become great flood upon the way from arequippa to callao. there be two lake upon the mountain of the one and other side. the way from the one flow a brook which grow to a ^loud and fall into the south sea. from the other, they say, the famous river of take her, beginning from the, which some hold that the renown river of amazos, otherwise call maragnon, proceed with so great a assembly and abundance of water which join in these mountain. it be a question may be often ask, why there be so many lake in the top of these mountain, into the which no river enter, but contrariwise many great stream issue forth, and yet do we scarce see these lake to diminish any thing at any season of the year, to imagine that these lake grow by the snow that melt or rain from heaven. that do not whole satisfy i, for there be many that have not this abundance of snow nor rain, and yet we see no decrease in they, which make i to believe they be spring which rise there, natural, although it be not against reason to think that the snow and rain help somewhat in some season. these lake be so common in the high top of the mountain that you shall hardly find any famous river that take not his beginning from one of they. their water be very clear and breed little store of fish, and that little be very small by reason of the cold which be there continual notwithstanding. some of these lake be very hot, which be another wonder. at the end of the valley of tarapaya, near to potozi, there be a lake in form round, which seem to have be make by compass who water be extreme hot and yet the land be very cold. they be accustom to bathe themselves near the bank, for else they can endure the heat be. far in in the midst of this lake, there be a boil of above twenty foot square, which be the very spring, and yet, notwithstanding the greatness of this spring, it be never see to increase in any sort. it seem that it exhale of itself or that it have some hide and unknown issue. neither do they see it decrease, which be another wonder, although they have draw from it a great stream to make certain engine grind for mettle. consider the great quantity of water that issue forth, by reason whereof it shall decrease. but leave peru and pass to new spain, the lake there be no less to be observe, especial that most famous of mexico, where we find two sort of water: one salt lake to that of the sea, and the other clear and sweet by reason of the river that enter into it. in the midst of this lake be a rock, very delightful and pleasant, where there be bath of hot water that issue forth, the which they great esteem for their health, there be garden. in the midst of this lake, frame and fleet upon the water where you may see, plot full of a thousand sort of herb and flower, and they be in such sort as a man can well conceive. they without sight. the city of mexico be seat in the same lake, although the spaniard have fill up the place of the situation with earth, leave only some current of water, great and small, which enter into the city to carry such thing as they have need of as wood, herb, stone, fruit of the country and all other thing. when cortes conquer mexico, he cause brigandins to be make, yet afterward he think it more safe not to use they. therefore they use canoe, whereof there be great. store. there be great store of fish in this lake, yet have i not see any of price notwithstanding. they say the revenue of this lake be worth three hundred thousand ducat a year. there be many other lake not far from this, whence they bring much fish to mexico, the province of mechovacan. be so call for that it abound great with fish. there be goodly and great lake in the which there be much fish and this province be cool and healthful. there be many other lake whereof it be not possible to make mention nor to know they in particular. only we may note by that which have be discourse in the former book, that under the burn zone there be great abundance of lake. then in any other part of the world. and so by that which we have former speak and the little we shall say of river and fountain, we will end this discourse of water, of many and diverse spring and fountain, chap 17.. there be at the indies, as in other part of the world, great diversity of spring, fountain and river, and some have strange property. in of peru, where the mine of quicksilver be, there be a fountain that cast forth hot water and in run the water turn to rock, of which rock or stone, they build in a maver all the house of the village. this stone be soft and easy to cut, for they cut it as easy with iron as if it. be wood, it be light and last. if man or beast drink thereof they die for that. it congeal in the very entrails and turn into stone, and for that cause some horse have die. as this water turn into stone, the which flow stop the passage to the rest, so as of necessity, it change the course, and for this reason it run in diverse place as the rock increase. at the point of cape s helaine there be a spring or fountain of pitch, which at peru they call coppey. this shall be like to that which the scripture speak of: the savage valley where they do find pit of pitch. the mariner use these fountain of pitch, or coppey, to pitch their rope and tackle. for that it serve they as pitch and tar. in spain, when i sail into new spain by the coast of peru, the pilot show i a island which they call the i will of wolf, where there be another fountain or pit of coppey or pitch with the which they anoint their tackle. there be other fountain and spring of goultran resin which the pilot, a excellent man in his charge, tell i he have see and that sometime sail that way, be so far into the sea as he have lose the sight of land. yet do he know by the smell of the coppey where he be, as well as if he have know the land. such be the savour that issue continual from that. fountain, at the bath which they call the bath of ingua, there be a course of water which come forth all hot and boil and join unto it. there be another who water be as cold as ice. the ingua be accustom to temper the one with the other and it be a wonderful thing to see spring of so contrary quality, so near one to the other. there be a infinite number of other hot spring, special in the province of charcas. in the water whereof you can endure to hold your hand the space of a maria, as i have see, try by wager in a farm near to cusco, spring a fountain of salt which as it run, turn into salt very white and exceed. good, the which, if it be in another country, be no small riches. yet they make very small account thereof for the store they have there. the water which run in guayaquel, which be in peru almost under the equinoctial line, be hold to be healthful for the french disease and other such like. so as they come from many place far off to be cure, and they say the cause thereof be for that in that country there be great abundance of root, which they call the virtue and operation whereof be so know that it communicate her property to the water wherein it be put to cure this disease. bilcanota be a mountain, the which, according to common opinion, be in the high part of peru. the top, whereof be all cover with snow and in some place be black like coal. there issue forth of it two spring in contrary place, which present grow to be very great b^rookes and so by little and little become great flood. the one go to calloa, into the great lake, the other go to the land and be that which they call yucay, which join with another, run into the north sea with a violent and furious course. this spring, when it come out of the rock bilcanota, as i have say, be of the colour of lie, have a asshie colour and cast a fume as a thing, burn the which run far in this sort until the multitude of water that run into it. quench this smoke and fire which it draw from the spring. in new spain i have see a spring as it be ink somewhat blue. in peru, another of colour red like blood, whereupon they call it the red river of rivers, chap 18.. among all river, not only at the indies but general through the world, the river maragnon or of amazon be the chief, whereof we have speak in the former book. the spaniard have often sail it, pretend to discover the land which by report be very rich, especial those they call dorado and paytiti. jean salny, the make a memorable entry, though of small effect. there be a passage which they call pongo, one of the most dangerous in all the world for the river. be there, straighten and force betwixt, two high steep rock the water fall direct down with so great a violence that, come steep down it cause such a boil as it seem impossible to pass it without drown. yet the courage of man dare attempt to pass it for the desire of this renown dorado. they slip down from the top to the bottom, thrust on with the violence and currant of the flood, hold themselves fast in their canoe or bark, and although in fall they be turn topsy-turvy and both they and their canoe plunge into the deep, yet by their care and industry they recover. themselves again, and in this sort the whole army escape, except some few that be drown and that which be more admirable. they carry themselves so cunning that they neither lose their powder nor munition in their return, have suffer many trouble and danger, they be force in the end to pass back that same way, mount by one of those high rock, stick their poniard in the rock. captain peter orsua, make a other entry by the same river, who be dead in the same voyage, and the soldier mutine. other captain, follow the enterprise by a arm that come into the north sea. a religious man of our company, tell we that be then a secular man, he be present in a manner at all that. enterprise, and that the tide do flow almost a hundred league up the river and, whereas it enter into the sea, the which be under the line or very near it have 70. league breadth at the mouth of it, a matter incredible, and which exceed the breadth of the mediterranean sea, though there be some other who, in their description, give it but twenty five or thirty league breadth. at the mouth next to this river, that of or of silver, hold the second place, which be otherwise call paragu^y, which run from the mountain of peru into the sea. in thirty five degree of altitude to the south, it rise, as they say, like to the river of nile, but much more, without comparison, and make the field it overflow, like unto a sea for the space of three month, and after return again to his course, in the which ship do sail many league against the stream. there be many other river that be not of that greatness and yet be equal. yea, they surpass the great of europe, as that of magdalaine, near to saint marthe, the great river, and that of alvarado, in new spain, and a infinite number of other of the south side, on the mountain of peru. the river be not usual, so great for that their current be not long. and that many water can join together, but they be very swift, descend from the mountain and have sudden fall by reason, whereof they be very dangerous and many man have perish there. they increase and overflow, most in the time of heat. i have go over twenty and seven river upon that coast, yet do i never pass any one by a ford. the indian use a thousand devise to pass their river. in some place they have a long cord that run fro one side to the other and thereon hang a basket into the which he put himself that mean to pass, and then they draw it from the bank with another cord. so as he pass in this basket. in other place the indian pass, as it be, on horse back upon a bottle of straw and behind he he that desire to pass and so row with a piece of a board, carry he over. in other place they make a float of gourd or pompion upon the which they set man with their stuff to carry over, and the indian have cord fasten to. they go swim before and draw this float of pompion after. they, as horse, do a coach, other go behind, thrust it forward, have pass. they take their bark of pompion upon their back and return swim. this they do in the river of saint. at peru we pass that of alvarado in new. spain, upon a table which the indian carry upon their shoulder, and when they lose their foot they swim. these devise, with a thousand other wherewith they use to pass their river, breed a terror in the beholder, help themselves with such weak and unsure mean, and yet they be very confident. they do use no other bridge but of hair or of straw. there be now, upon some river, bridge of stone, build by the diligence of some governor, but many few than be needful in such a country, where so many man be drown by default thereof, and the which yield so much silver, as not only spain but also other strange country make sumptuous building therewith. the indian do draw from these flood that run. from the mountain to the valley and plain, many and great brook to water their land, which they usual do with such industry as there be no better in murcia, nor at milan itself, the which be also the great and only wealth of the plain of peru and of many other part of the indies, of the quality of the land at the indies in general, chap 19- we may know the quality of the land at the indies for the great part. see it be the last of the three element whereof we have propound to treat in this book by the discourse we have make in the former book of the burn zone. see that the great part of the indies do lie under it. but to make it know the more particular. i have observe three kind of land as i have pass through those region, whereof there be one very low, another very high and the three which hold the middle of these two extreme. the low be that which lie by the sea coast, whereof there be in all part of the indies, and it be common, very hot and moist so as it be not so healthful, and at this day we see it, less people, although in former time it have be great, inhabit with indian, as it appear by the history of new spain and peru, and where they keep and live, for that the soil be natural unto they be breed there, they live of fish. at sea and of seed, draw brook from the river which they use for want of rain. for that it rain little there and in some place not at all. this low country have many place inhabitable as well, by reason of the sand which be dangerous, for there be whole mountain of these sand, as also for the marsh which grow by reason of the water that fall from the mountain, which find no issue in these flat and low land, drown they and make they unprofitable, and in truth the great part of all the indian sea coast be of this sort, chief upon the south sea, the habitation of which coast be at this present so waste and contemn that of thirty part of the people that inhabit it there want twenty nine, and it be likely the rest of the indian will in short time decay. many according to the variety of their opinion. attribute this to diverse cause: some to the great labour which have be impose upon these indian, other unto the change and variety of meat and drink they use since their commerce with the spaniard, other to their great excess and drink and to other vice they have. for my part, i hold this disorder to be the great cause of their decay, whereof it be not now time to discourse any more in this low country which, i say general, be unhealthful and unfit for man habitation. there be exception in some place which be temperate and fertile, as the great part of the plain of peru, where there be cool valley and very fertile. the great part of the habitation of the coast, entertain all the traffic of spain by sea, whereon all the estate of the indies depend upon this coast. there be some town, well people, as lima and truxillo in peru, panama and carthagena upon the main land and in the land s dominique port and havana, with many other town which be less than these, as the true cross in new spain, yca, arigua and other in peru. the port be common, inhabit although, but slender. the second sort of land be, contrary, very high and, by consequent, cold and dry, as all the mountain be common, this land be neither fertile nor pleasant, but very healthful, which make it to be people and inhabit. there be pasture. and great store of cattle, the which for the most part entertain life and by their cattle they supply the want they have of corn and grain by truck and exchange. but that which make these land more inhabit and people be the riches of the mine that be find there, for that all obey to gold and silver. by reason of the mine there be some dwelling of spaniard and indian which be increase and multiply, as potozi and gancavelicqua in peru and cacatecas in new spain. there be also, through all these mountain, great dwelling of the indian which to this day be maintain. yea, some will say they increase, but that the labour of the mine do consume many and some general disease have destroy. a great part as the cocoliste in new spain. yet they find no great diminution. in this extremity of of high ground, they find two commodity, as i have say of pasture and mine, which do well countervail the two other that be in the low ground along the sea coast, that be the commerce of the sea and the abundance of wine which grow not but in the hot land. betwixt these two extreme there be ground of a mean height, the which, although it be in some part high or low one than other, yet do it not approach neither to the heat of the sea coast nor the intemperature of the mountain. in this sort of soil there grow many kind of grain as wheat. barley and maize, which grow not at all in the high country but well in the low. there be likewise store of pasture, cattle, fruit and green forest. this part be the best habitation of the three for health and recreation and therefore it be best people of any part of the indies, the which i have curious observe in many voyage that i have undertake and have always find it true that the province best people at the indies be in this situation. let we look near into new spain, the which without doubt be the best province. the sun do circle, by what part soever you do enter, you mount up and when you have mount a good height, you begin to descend, yet very little. and that land be always much high than that along the sea coast. all the land about mexico be of this nature and situation, and that which be about the vulcan, which be the best soil of the indies, as also in peru, arequipa, guamangua and cusco, although more in one then in the other, but in the end all be high ground, although they descend into deep valley and climb up to high mountain. the like be speak of quitto saint foy and of the best of the new kingdom. to conclude, i do believe that the wisdom and providence of the creator will have it so that the great part of this country of the indies shall be hilly, that it may be of a better temperature for be low it have, be very hot under the burn zone, especial be far from the sea. also, all the land i have see at the indies be near to the mountain, on the one side or the other and sometime of all part. so, as i have oftentimes say there, that i will glad see any place from whence the horizon do fashion itself and end by the heaven, and a country stretch out and even, as we see in spain, in a thousand champain field. yet do i not remember that i have ever see such sight at the indies, be it in the land or upon the main land, although i have travel above seven hundred league in length. but, as i have say, the nearness of the mountain be very commodious in this region to temper the heat of the sun. to conclude, the best inhabit part of the indies be, as i have say, and general. all that country abound in grass, pasture and forest, contrary unto that which aristotle and the ancient do hold so as when we go out of europe to the indies, we wonder to see the land so pleasant, green and fresh. yet this rule have some exception, and chief in the land of peru, which be of a strange nature among all other, whereof we will now proceed to speak of the property of the land of peru, chap 20.. we mean by peru, not that great part of the world which they call america. see that therein be contain bresil, the kingdom of chille and that of grenade, and yet none. of these kingdom be peru, but only that part which lie to the south, begin at the kingdom of quitto, which be under the line and run in length to the realm of chille, the which be without the tropic, which be six hundred league in length and in breadth, it contain no more than the mountain, which be fifty common league, although in some place, as at chachapayas, it be broad. this part of the world, which we call peru, be very remarkable and contain in it strange property which serve as a exception to the general rule of the indies. the first be that upon all that coast it blow continual, with one only wind, which be south and southweast, contrary to that which do usual. blow under the burn zone. the second, be that this wind be by nature the most violent, tempestuous and unhealthful of all other, yet in this region. it be marvelous, please, healthful and agreeable, so as we may attribute the habitation of that part thereunto, without the which it will be troublesome and inhabitable by reason of the heat if it be not refresh with the wind. the three property, be that it never rain, thunder, snow nor hail in all this coast, which be a matter worthy of admiration. four, that little distance from the coast it rain and snow terrible. five, that there be two ridge of mountain which run the one as the other and in one altitude, notwithstanding on the one there be great. forest and it rain, the great part of the year be very hot and the other be all naked and bare and very cold. so as winter and summer be divide on those two mountain and rain and clearness itself. for the better understanding hereof, we must consider that peru be divide, as it be, into three part, long and narrow, which they call sierras and andes. the run along the sea coast, the sierras be all hill with some valley, and the andes be steep and craggy. mountain. the or sea coast have some ten league in breadth, in some part less and in some part little more. the sierra contain some twenty league in breadth and the andes as much. sometime more, sometime less they run. in length from north to south and in breadth from east to west. it be a strange thing that in so small a distance as fifty league, equal distant from the line and pole, there shall be so great a contrariety as to rain almost continual in one place and never in the other. it never rain upon the coast, or although there fall sometime a small dew which they call guarva and in castill, mol^^^a, the which sometime thicken and fall in certain drop of water, yet be it not troublesome nor such as they need any cover, their cover be of mat, with a little earth upon they which be sufficient. upon the andes, it rain in a manner continual, although it be sometime more clear. than other. in the sierra, which lie betwixt both the extreme, it rain in the same season as it do in spain, which be from september unto april, but in the other season the time be more clear, which be when the sun be far off and the contrary, when it be near, whereof we have discourse at large in the former book. that which they call andes and sierra be two ridge of most high mountain which run above a thousand league, the one in view of the other and almost equal. there be a infinite number of vicague which breed in the sierre and be proper like unto wild goat, very nimble and swift. there be also of those beast which they call guanaco and pacos. which be sheep, which we may well term the ass of that country, whereof we shall speak. in their place and upon the andes, they find ape, very gentle and delightful, and parrot in great number. there also, they find the herb or tree which they call coca, that be so great esteem by the indian and the traffic they make of it be worthy much money. that which they call sierre cause valley, whereas it open, which be the best dwelling of peru, as be the valley of xauxa, of andaguaylas and yucay. in these valley there grow wheat, maize and other sort of fruit, but less in one then in the other, beyond the city of cusco, the ancient court of the lord of those realm. the two ridge of mountain separate they self one from the other and in the midst leave a plain and large champain which they call the province of callao, where there be many river and great store of fertile pasture. there be also that great lake of and although it be a full soil and in the same height and intemperature that the sierre, have no more tree nor forest. yet the want they have of bread be countervail with the root they sow, the which they call papas, and they grow in the earth. this root be the indian food, for dry it and make it clean, they make that which they call, which be the bread and nourishment of those province. there be other root and small herb which they eat. it be a healthful soil, best people and the rich of all the indies, for the abundance of cattle they feed, as well of those that be in europe as sheep, neat and goat, as of those of the country which they call guanaco and pacos, and there be store of partridge next to the province of callao, be that of charcas, where there be hot valley, very fertile and very high rock, the which be very rich. in mine, so as in no part of the world shall you find better nor fair the reason why it rain on the along the sea coast, chap 21.. for that it be rare and extraordinary to see a country. where it never rain nor thunder. man desire natural to know the cause of this strangeness, the reason which some give that have near look into it, be that upon that coast there rise no vapour sufficient to engender rain, for want of matter, but only that there be final and light vapour which can breed any other than mist and dew, as we see in europe. oftentimes vapour do rise in the morning which be not turn into rain, but into mist, only, the which grow from the substance which be not gross and sufficient enough to turn to rain. they say, the reason why that which happen but some time in europe fall out continual upon the coast of peru, be for that this region be. very dry and yield no gross vapour, the dryness be know by the gre^ abundance of sand, have neither well nor fountain, but of fifteen stade deep, which be the height of a man or more, and that be near unto river, the water whereof pierce into the land give. they mean to make well so as it have be find by experience that the course of river be turn. the well have be dry up until they return to their ordinary course, and they give this reason for a material cause of this effect. but they have another efficient, which be no less considerable, and that be the great height of the sierre, which come along the coast, shadow the, so as it suffer no wind to blow from the land, but above the top of these mountain, by mean, whereof there rain, no wind but that from the sea, which find no opposite, do not press nor strain forth the vapour which rise to engender rain, so as the shadow of the mountain keep the vapour from thicken and converte they all into mist. there be some experience, agree with this discourse, for that it rain upon some small hill along the coast which be least shadow, as the rock of and arequipa. it have rain in some year, whenas the northern or easterly wind have blow yea all the time. they have continue, as it happen in seventy eight, upon the lan^s of where it rain abundant, the which they have not see in many age before. moreover, it rain upon the same coast, in place, whereas the easterly or northern wind be ordinary, as in guayaquil, and in place, whereas the land rise much and turn from the shadow of the mountain, as in those that be beyond ariqua. some discourse in this manner, but let every one think as he please. it be most certain that, come from the mountain to the valley, they do usual see, as it be two heaven, one clear and bright above and the other obscure, and as it be a grey veil spread underneath which cover all the coast. and although it rain, not yet this mist be wonderful, profitable to bring forth grass and to raise up and nourish the seed. for although they have plenty of water which they draw from the pool and lake, yet this moisture from heaven have such a virtue that, cease to fall upon the earth, it breed a great discommodity and defect of grain and seed. and that which be more worthy of admiration, the dry and barren sand be by this dew so beautify. with grass and flower, as it be a please and agreeable sight and very profitable for the feed of cattle, as we see in the mountain. call sandie, near to the city of king, of the property of new spain, of the land and of other land, chap 22.. new spain pass all other province in pasture which breed infinite troop of horse, kine, sheep and other cattle. it abound in fruit and all kind of grain. to conclude, it be a country the best furnish and most accomplish at the indies. yet peru do surpass it in one thing, which be wine. for that there grow store and good and they daily multiply and increase the which do grow in very hot valley where there be water. and although there be vine in new spain, yet the grape come not to his maturity fit to make wine. the reason be for that: it rain there in julie and august whenas the grape ripen, and therefore it come not to his perfection. and if any one, through curiosity, will take the pain to make wine, it shall be like to that of genua and lombardie, which be very small and sharp, have a taste like unto verjuice, the land which they call barlovente, which be hispaniola, cuba, port and other there about be beautify with many green pasture and abound in cattle as neat and swine, which be become wild. the wealth of these land, be their sugar-worke and hide. there be much cassia, fistula and ginger. it be a thing incredible to see the multitude of these merchandise bring in one fleet be in a manner impossible that all europe shall waste so much. they likewise bring wood of a excellent quality and colour, as ebony and other, which serve for building and joiner. there be much of that wood which they call or guage fit to cure the pox. all these land and other there, about which be many, have a goodly and pleasant aspect, for that throughout the year they be beautify with grass and green tree, so as they can discern when it be autumn or summer, by reason of continual moisture, join to. the heat of the burn zone, and although this land be of a great circuit, yet be there few dwelling, for that of itself it engender great arcabutos, as they call they, which be grove or very thick coppese, and on the plain there be many marsh and bog. they give yet another notable reason why they be so small people, for that there have remain few natural indian, through the inconsiderateness and disorder of the first conqueror that people it, and therefore for the most part they use negro, but they cost dear, be very fit to till the land. there grow neither bread nor wine in these land, for that the too great fertility and the vice of the soil suffer. they not to seed but cast all forth in grass, very uneaqual. there be no olive tree, at the least they bear no olive, but many green leaf, pleasant to the view, which bear no fruit. the bread they use be of cacave, whereof we shall hereafter speak. there be gold in the river of these land, which some draw forth, but in small quantity. i be little less than a year in these island and as it have be tell i of the main land of the indies, where i have not be, as in florida, nicaraqua, guatimala and other, it be in a manner of this temper as i have describe. yet have i not set down every particular of nature in these province of the? firm land, have no perfect knowledge thereof. the country which do most resemble spain and the region of europe in all the west indies be the realm of chille, which be without the general rule of these other province. be seat without the burn zone and the tropic of capricorn. this land of itself be cool and fertile and bring forth all kind of fruit that be in spain. it yield great abundance of bread and wine and abound in pasture and cattle. the air be wholesome and clear, temperate, betwixt heat and cold. winter and summer be very distinct, and there they find great store of very fine gold. yet this land be poor and final people by reason of their continual war with the auricanos and their associate, be a rough people and friend to liberty of the unknown land and the diversity of a whole day. betwixt they of the east and the west, chap 23. there be great conjecture that in the temperate zone at the antarctic pole there be great and fertile land, but to this day they be not discover. neither do they know any other land in this zone but that of chille and some part of that land which run from ethiopia to the cape of good hope. as have be say in the first book, neither be it know if there be any habitation in the other two zone. of the pole, and whether the land continue and stretch to that which be towards the antarctic or south pole. neither do we know the land that lie beyond the straight of magellan, for that the great height yet discover be in fifty ^ix degree, as have be former say, and towards the arctic or northern pole. it be not know how far the land extend, which run beyond the cape of mendocin and the caliphorne, nor the bound and end of florida, neither yet how far it extend to the west. of late they have discover a new land which they call new mexico, where they say be much people that speak the mexicaine tongue, the philippines and the follow land, as some report, that know it. by experience run above nine hundred league, but to entreat of china, cochinchina, syam and other region which be of the east indies, be contrary to my purpose, which be only to discourse of the west. nay, they be ignorant of the great part of america which lie betwixt peru and bresil, although the bound be know of all side, wherein there be diversity of opinion. some say it be a drown land, full of lake and watery place. other affirm there be great and flourish kingdom. imagine there be the paytiti, the dorado and the caesar, where they say be wonderful thing. i have hear one of our company say, a man worthy of credit, that he have see great dwelling there and the way as much. beat as those betwixt, salamanca and villadillit, the which he do see, whenas peter d'orsua and after those that succeed, he make their entry and discovery by the great river of amazon. who believe that the dorado which they seek be far off, care not to inhabit there and after go both without the dorado, which they can not find, and this great province which they leave. to speak the truth, the habitation of america be to this day unknown, except the extremity which be peru, bresil, and that part where the land begin to straighten, which be the river of silver, then tucuman, which make the round to chille and charc^. of late, we have understand by letter from some of we which go to s croix. in the sierre that they go discover of great province and dwelling betwixt bresil and peru. time will reveile they for as at this day, the care and courage of man be great to compass the world from one part to another. so we may believe that, as they have discover that which be now know, they may likewise lay open that which readiness to the end. the gospel may be preach to the whole world. see, the two crown of portugal and ca^^ille have meet by the east and west join their discovery together, which in truth be a matter to be observe, that the one be come to china and jappan by the east and the other to the philippines, which be neighbour and almost join. unto china by the west, for from the land of lusson, which be the chief of the philippines, in the which be the city of mamill^ unto macan, which be, in the i will of cauton, be but four score or a hundred league. and yet we find it strange that, notwithstanding th^^ small distance from the one to the other, yet, according to their account, there be a day difference betwixt they, so as it be sunday at macan, whenas it be but saturday at mamille, and so, of the rest, those of macan and of china have one day advance before the philippines. it happen to father alo^^^ sanches, of who mention be make, before that part from the philippines, he arrive at macan, the second. day of may, according to their computation, and go to say the mass of s athanasius, he find they do celebrate the feast of the invention of the holy cross. for that they do then reckon the three of may. the like happen unto he in another voyage beyond it. some have find this alteration and diversity strange, suppose that the fault proceed from the one or the other, the which be not so. but it be a true and well observe computation, for according to the difference of way where they have be, we must necessary say that when they meet there must be difference of a day, the reason be for that sail from west to east, they always gain of the day, find the sun. rise soon, and contrariwise, those that sail from east to west do always lose of the day, for that the sun rise late unto they, and as they approach near the east or the west, they have the day long or short. in peru, which be westward in respect of spain, they be above six hour behind, so as when it be noon in spain it be morning at peru, and when it be morning here, it be midnight there. i have make certain proof thereof by the computation of eclipse of the sun and moon. now that the portugal have make their navigation from west to east and the castillan from east to west, when they come to join and meet at the philippines and macan, the one have gain twelve hour and the other have lose as much, so as at one instant and in one time they find the difference of twenty hour, which be a whole day, so, as necessary, the one be at the three of may, whenas the other account but the second. and whenas the one do fast for easter eve, the other eat flesh for the day of the resurrection. and if we will imagine that they pass far, turn once again about the world, use the same computation when they shall return to join together. they shall find, by the same account, two day difference. for, as i have say, those that go to the sun rise account the day soon, for that the sun rise to they soon, and those that go to the set account the day late, for that it go from they late. final. the diversity of the noon tide cause the diverse reckon of the day. and now, for as much as those that do, sail from east to west, change their noon tide without perceive it and yet still follow the same computation they do when they, part of necessity have make the compass of the world, they must find the want of a whole day in their computation of the volcans or vent of fire. chap. 24.. although we find vent of fire in other place, as mount aetna and wesuvio, which now they call mount s^ma, yet be that notable which be find at the indies ordinary, these volcans be rock or pike of most high mountain which raise themselves above the top of all other mountain. upon their top they have a plain, and in the midst thereof a pit or great mouth which descend even unto the foot thereof, a thing very terrible to behold. out of these mouth there issue smoke and sometime fire. some cast little smoke and have, in a manner, no force of volcans as that of arequipa, which be of a unmeasurable height and almost all find it can be mount up in less than two. day. yet they have not find any show of fire, but only the relic of some sacrifice which the indian make while they be gentile, and sometime it do cause a little smoke. the volcan of mexico, which be near to the village of angel, be likewise of a admirable height, whereas they mount thirty league in turn. from this volcan issue, not continual, but sometime almost every day, a great exhalation or whirlwind of smoke which ascend direct up like to the shot of a crossbow, and grow after like to a great plume of feather, until it cease quite and be present, convert into a obscure and dark cloud. most common, it rise in the morning after the sun rise and at night when it set. although i have see it break out at other time. sometime it do cast forth great store of ash. after this smoke they have not yet see any fire come from it. yet they fear it will issue forth and burn all the land round about, which be the best of all the kingdom. and they hold it for certain that there be some correspondency betwixt this vulcan and the sierre of tlaxcala, which be near unto it that cause the great thunder and lightning they do common hear and see in those part. some spaniard have mount up to this volcan and give notice of the mine of sulphur to make powder thereof. cortes report the care he have to discover what be in this volcan, the. volcans of guatimalla be more renown as well for their greatness and height, which those that sail in the south sea discover a far off. as for the violence and terror of the fire, it cast the three and twenty day of december in the year of our lord god, one thousand five hundred eighty and six, almost all the city of guatimalla fall with a earthquake and some people slay. this volcan have then, six month together, day and night, cast out from the top and vomit as it be a flood of fire, the substance fall upon the side of the volcan, be turn into ash like unto burn earth. a thing, pass man judgement to conceive how it can cast so much matter from its centre during six month, be accustom to cast smoke alone, and that sometime, with small flash. this be write unto i be, at mexico by a secretary of the audience of guatimalla, a man worthy of credit, and at that time it have not cease to cast out fire. this year past be in quitto, in the city of king. the volcan which be near thereunto cast such abundance of ash that in many league compass thereabouts it darken the light of the day and there fall such store in quitto as they be not able to go in the street. there have be other volcans, see, which cast neither smoke flame. nor yet ash. but in the bottom they be see to burn with a quick fire without die. such a one be that which in our time a covetous and greedy priest see persuade himself that they be heap of gold he do see burn. imagine it can be no other matter or substance which have burn so many year and not consume. and in this conceit he make certain kettle with chain and a instrument to gather and draw up the gold out of this pit or volcan. but the fire scorn. he for no soon do his iron chain and cauldron approach near the fire, but sudden they be break in piece. yet some tell i that this man be still obstinate, seek other invention for. to draw out this gold as he imagine. what shall be the reason why the fire and smoke continue so long in these vulcan? chap 25.. there be no need now to make any mention of other vulcan. see, we may well understand by the former what they be. yet be it worthy the search. what shall be the cause why the fire and smoke continue in these volcans? for that it seem a prodigious thing, yea against the course of nature, to vomit and cast out so many flame. whence do this matter proceed? or whether it be engender within the bowel thereof? some have hold opinion that these volcans consume the inner substance they have of nature and for this reason they believe that natural they shall end, whenas they have consume the fuel, as a man may say, that be within they. according to which opinion, we see at this day some mountain and rock from whence they draw a burn stone which be light but very hard and be excellent to build with as that which be carry to mexico, and in effect there be some show of that which have be speak, that these mountain or rock have sometime a natural fire which have die after the matter be consume, and so these stone have remain, burn and pierce with the fire, as we see. for my part, i will not contradict it that in those place there have not be fire sometime, or volcans, but there be some difficulty to be believe it shall be so in all volcans. consider the matter they cast out be almost infinite, and that be gather together, it can not be contain in the same concavity from whence it go. moreover, there be some volcans that, in hundred yea, thousand of year, be always of one fashion: cast out continual smoke, fire and ash. pliny, the historiographer of natural thing, as the other pliny, his nephew report, search out the secret how this shall pass, and approach too near the exhalation of fire of one of these volcans. die and think by his diligence to find. a end thereof, have a end of his life. for my part, upon this consideration, i think that, as there be place in the earth who virtue be to draw vaporous matter and to convert it into water, which be the fountain that always run and have always matter to make they run for that they draw unto they the substance of water in like sort, there be place that have the property to draw unto they hot exhalation and to convert they into fire and smoke which, by their force and violence, cast out other thick matter which dissolve into ash, into pumice, stone or such like substance, and for a sufficient argument to prove it to be so. in these volcans they sometime cast smoke and not always, and sometime fire and not always, which? be. according to that, it can draw unto it and digest as the fountain which in winter abound and in summer decrease, yea, some be quite dry up, according to the force and vigour they have and the matter that be present. even so, it be of these volcans which cast fire more or less at certain season. other say that it be hell fire which issue there to serve as a warning, thereby to consider what be in the other life. but if hell, as divine hold, be in the centre of the earth, the which contain in diameter above two thousand league, we can not judge that this fire be from the centre, for that hell fire, as saint basil and other teach, be very different. from this which we see for that it be without light, basil, psal 28.. and in exam and burn, without comparison, much more than we, and therefore i conclude that what i have say seem to i more reasonable of earthquake, chap 26.. some have hold that from these volcans which be at the indies the earthquake proceed be very common there, but for that they ordinary chance in place far from those volcans. it can not be the total cause. it be true they have a certain sympathy one with another for that. the hot exhalation which engender in the inner concavity of the earth seem to be the material substance of fire in the volcans, whereby there kindle a other, more gross matter and make these show of flame and smoke that come forth and these exhalation find no easy issue in the earth, move it to issue forth with great violence, whereby we hear that horrible noise under the earth and likewise the shake of the earth, be stir with this burn exhalation, even as gunpowlder in mine have fire put to it, break rock and wall and as the chestnut lay into the fire, leap and break with a noise, whenas it cast forth the air which be contain within the husk by the force of the fire. even so, these earthquake do, most common, happen in place near the water or sea, as we see in europe and at the indies, that town and city far from the sea and water be least afflict therewith, and contrariwise, those that be seat upon port of the sea, upon river, the sea coast and place near unto they feel most this calamity. there have happen in peru, the which be wonderful and worthy to be note, earthquake which have run from chille unto quitto and that be above hundred league- i say the great that ever i hear speak of, for lesser be more common- there, upon the coast of chille, i remember not well in what year there be so terrible a earthquake as it overturn. whole mountain and thereby stop the course of river which it convert into lake. it beat down town and fly a great number of people, cause the sea to leave her place some league, so as the ship remain on dry ground, far from the ordinary road, with many other heavy and horrible thing. and as i well remember, they say this trouble and motion cause by the earthquake run three hundred league along the coast. soon after which be in the year eighty two, happen that earthquake of arequipa which in a manner overthrow the whole city, since in the year eighty six, the nine of julie fall a other earthquake in the city of king, the which, as the viceroy do write, have run a hundred. three score and ten league along the coast and overthwart in the sierre fifty league. the mercy of the lord be great in this earth quake to forewarn the people by a great noise which they hear little before the earthquake. who teach by former experience, present, put themselves in safety, leave their house, street and garden to go into the field so as, although it ruin a great part of the city and of the chief building, yet there die not above fifteen or twenty person of all the inhabitant. it cause the like trouble and motion at sea, as it have do at chille, which happen present after the earthquake, so as they may see the sea, furious to fly out of her bound and to run near two league into the land, rise above fourteen fathom. it cover all that plain, so as the ditch and piece of wood that be there swim in the water. there be yet a other earthquake in the realm and city of quitto, and it seem, all these notable earthquake upon that coast have succeed one a other by order, as in truth it be subject to these inconvenience. and therefore, although upon the coast of peru there be no torment from heaven as thunder and lightning, yet be they. not without fear upon the land. and so every one have before his eye the herald of divine justice. to move, he to fear god. for as the scripture say, return then to our purpose. i say the sea coast be most subject to these earthquake. the reason be in my judgement for that. the water do stop the conduit and passage of the earth by which the hot exhalation shall pass which be engender there, and also the humidity thicken the superficies of the earth do cause the fume and hot exhalation to go close together and encounter violent in the bowel of the earth, which do afterward break forth. some have observe that such earthquake have usual happen whenas a rainy season fall after some dry. ye^res, whereupon they say that the earthquake be most rare. where be most well the which be approve by experience, those of the city of mexico hold opinion that the lake whereon it be seat be the cause of the earthquake that happen there, although they be not very violent, and it be most certain that the town and province, far within the land and far from the sea, receive sometime great loss by these earthquake, as the city of chachapoyas at the indies, and, in italy, that of ferrara- although upon this subject it seem this latter be near to a river and not far from the adriatic sea- shall rather be number among the sea-towne in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred eighty. and one. in cugiano, a city of peru otherwise call the peace, there happen a strange accident, touch this subject: a village call angoango, where many indian dwell that be sorcerer and idolater, fall sudden to ruin, so as a great part thereof be raise up and carry away and many of the indian smother. and that which seem incredible yet testify by man of credit, the earth that be ruin and so beat down do run and slide upon the land for the space of a league and a half, as it have be water or wax melt, so as it stop and fill up a lake and remain so spread over the whole country. how the land and sea embrace one a other, chap 27. i. will end with this element of earth, unite it to the precedent of water who order and embrace, be true of itself, admirable. these two element have one sphere, divide between they and entertain and embrace one another in a thousand sort and manner. in some place the water encounter the land furious, as a enemy, and in other place it environ it after a sweet and amiable manner. there be part, whereas the sea enter far within the land as come to visit it, and in other part the land make restitution, cast his cape, point and tongue far into the sea, pierce into the bowel thereof. in some part one element end and another begin, yield by degree one unto another. in some place where they join it be exceed deep, as in the land of the south sea and in those of the north, whereas the ship ride close to the land and although they sound three score and ten, yea, four score fathom, yet do they find no bottom, which make man conjecture that these be pike or point of land which rise up from the bottom, a matter worthy of great admiration. hereupon, a very expert pilot say unto i that the land which they call of woolve and other, that lie at the entry of the coast of new spain, be call be of this manner. moreover, there be a place in the midst of the great ocean, without the view of land and many league from it. where be see as it be, two tower or pike of a very high, elevate rock rise out of the midst of the sea and yet join unto it. they find no bottom. no man can yet perfect, comprehend, nor conceive the full and perfect form of the land at the indies, the bound be not whole discover to this day. yet we may guess that it be proportion, like a heart with the lung. the broad of this heart be from bresil to peru, the point at the straight of magellan, and the top where it end be the firm land, and there the continent. begin by little and little to extend itself until we come to the height of florida and the upper land which be not yet well discover. we may understand other particularity of this land at the indies by the commentary which the spaniard have write of their success and discovery and amongst the rest of the peregrination which i have write, which in truth be strange and may give a great light. this in my opinion may suffice at this time to give some knowledge of thing at the indies touch the common element of the which all part of the world be fame. the four book of the natural and moral history of the indies, of three kind of mixture or compound of the which i must entreat in this history, chap 1. have entreat in the former book, of that which concern the element and the simple of the indies. in this present book we will discourse of mixture and compound seem fit for the subject we shall treat of, and although there be many other sundry kind yet, we will reduce this matter into three, which be metal, plant and beast. metal be as plant hide and bury in the bowel of the earth, which have some conformity in themselves in the form and manner of their production, for that we see and discover, even in they branches- and as it be a body from whence they grow and proceed. which be the great vein, and the less so as they have a knit in themselves and it seem. proper that these grow like unto plant, not that they have any inward vegitative life be only proper to plant. but they be engender in the bowel of the earth by the virtue and force of the sun and other planet and in long continuance of time they increase and multiply after the manner of plant and even as metal be plant hide in the earth. so we may say that plant be, live creature fix in one place, who life be maintain by the nourishment which nature furnish from their first begnning. but live creature surpass plant in that they have a more perfect be and therefore have need of a more perfect food and nourishment. for the search whereof nature have give they a move and feel to discover and discern it. so as the rough and barren earth be, as a substance and nutriment for metal and that which be fertile and better season, a nourishment for plant, the same plant serve as a nourishment for live creature, and the plant and live creature together as a nourishment for man. the inferior nature always serve for the maintenance and sustentation of the superior, and the less perfect yield unto the more perfect, whereby we may see how much it want that gold and silver and other thing which man so much esteem by their covetousness, shall be the happiness of man, whereunto he shall tend see they be so many degree in quality inferior to man, who have be create and make only to be a subject to serve the universal creator of all thing as his proper end and perfect rest, and to which man all other thing in this world be not propound or leave, but to gain this last end. who so will consider of thing, create and discourse according to this philosophy may draw. some fruit from the knowledge and consideration thereof, make use of they to know and glorify their author. but he that will pass on far to the knowledge of their property and profit and will curious search they out, he shall find in these creature that which the wiseman say that they be: snare and pitfalle to the foot of fool and ignorant, into the which they fall and lose themselves daily sap 14.. to this intent, therefore, and that the creator may be glorify in his creature. i pretend to speak of some thing in this book whereof there be many at the indies worth the report: touch, metal, plant and beast, which be proper and peculiar in those part, but for that it be a great work to treat thereof exact and require great learning and knowledge. yea, much more leisure than i have. my intent be only to treat of some thing succinct, the which i have observe as well by experience as the report of man of credit touch. these three thing which i have propound leave to man more curious and diligent to treat more ample of these matter of the abundance and great quantity of mettle. at the west indies, chap 2.. the wisdom of god have make metal for physic and for defence, for ornament and for instrument for the work of man, of which four thing we may easy yield example, but the principal end of metal and the last thereof be for that. the life of man have not only need of nourishment, as the beast, but also he must work and labour according unto the reason and capacity which the creator have give. he, and as man understanding, do apply itself to diverse art and faculty. so the same author have give order that he shall find matter and subject to diverse art for the conservation, reparation, surety, ornament and exaltation of his work. the diversity, therefore, of metal, which the creator have shut up in the closert and concavity of the earth, be such and so great that man draw profit and commodity from every one of they. some serve for cure of disease, other for arm and for defence against the enemy, some be for ornament and beautify of our person and house, and other be fit to make vessel and yron-worke with diverse fashion of instrument which the industry of man have find out and put in practice, but above all, the use of metal which be simple and natural, the communication and commerce of man have find out, one which be the use of money, the which, as the philosopher say, be the measure of all thing. ^^ri^t^. ^ ethic, cap 5.. and although natural and of itself, it be but one only thing, yet in value and estimation we may say that it be all thing, money be unto we, as it be meat, clothing, house, horse and general whatsoever man have need of. by this mean all obey to money and, as the wise man say, to find a invention that one thing shall be all man, guide or thrust forward by a natural instinct, choose the thing most durable and most maniable, which be mettle, and among metal, give they the pre-eminence in this invention of money, which, of their nature, be most durable and incorruptible, which be silver and gold, the which have be in esteem not only among the hebrew, assyrian. greek, roman and other nation of europe and asia, but also among the most retire and barbarous nation of the world, as by the indian. both east and west, where gold and silver be hold in great esteem, employ it for the work of their temple and palace and for the attire and ornament of king and great personage. and although we have find some barbarian which know neither gold nor silver as it be, report of those of florida which take the bag and sack wherein the silver be the which they cast upon the ground and leave as a thing unprofitable and pliny. likewise write of the babitacques which abhor gold and therefore they bury it to the end that no man shall use it. but at this day they find few of these floridiens or babitacques. but great number of such as esteem, seek and make account of gold and silver have no need to learn it of those that go from europe, it be true their covetousness be not yet come to the height of we, neither have they so much worship gold and silver, although they be idolater as some blind christian who have commit many great outrage for gold and silver. yet be it a thing very worthy consideration that the wisdom of the eternal lord will enrich those part of the world which be most remote and which be people with man of less civility and government. plant there great store of mine, and in the great abundance. that ever be, thereby to invite man to search out those land and to possess they to the end that, by this occasion, they may plant religion and the worship of the true god among those that know it. not fulfil therein the prophecy of isaiah ^^ie 54.. say that the church shall stretch forth her bound not only to the right but also to the left, which be understand as s augustine. say that the gospel shall be spread abroad, aug lib 1.. con^o^ ^^ang, cap 31.. not only by those that, sincere and with a true and perfect charity, preach and declare it, but also by those that publish it, tend to temporal end, whereby we see that the indian land be more abundant in mine. and riches have be in our age best instruct in the christian religion the lord. use our desire and inclination to serve his sovereign intention. hereupon a wise man say that what a father do to marry his daughter, well be to give she a great portion in marriage. the like have god do for this land, so rough and laboursome. give it great riches in mine that by this mean it may be the more seek after. at the west indies then there be great store of mine of all sort of metal as copper, iron, lead, tin, quickesilver, silver and gold, and among all the region and part of the indies, the realm of peru, abound most in these metal, especial with gold, silver, quick silver. or mercury, whereof they have find great store and daily discover new mine. and without doubt, according to the quality of the earth, those which be to discover be, without comparison, far more in number than those which be yet discover. yea, it seem that all the land be sow with these metal, more than any other in the world that be yet know unto. we, or that ancient writer have make mention of of the quality and nature of the earth, where the metal be find, and that all these metal be not employ at the indies and how the indian use they chap 3.. the reason why there be so great abundance of metal at the indies, especial at the west of peru, as i have say, be the will of the creator, who have impart his gift as it please he. but come to a natural and philosophical reason. philo, lib 5. genes, mund, it be very true, which philon, a wise man, write, say that gold, silver and metal grow natural in land that be most barren and unfruitful. and we see that in land of good temperature, the which be fertile with grass and fruit, there be seldom find any mine for that nature. be content to give they vigour to bring forth fruit more necessary for the preservation and maintenance of the life of beast and man. euseb. lib 8.. c, 9, and contrariwise to land that be very rough, dry and barren, as in the high mountain, and inaccessible rock of a rough temper, they find mine of silver, of quickesilver and of gold. and all those riches which be come into spain since the west indies be discover have be draw out of such place, which be rough and full, bare and fruitless. yet the taste of this money make these place please and agreeable. yea, well inhabit with number of people, and although there be, as i have say, many mine of all kind of metal, as at the indies, yet they use none but those of gold and silver and as much quickesilver as be necessary to refine their gold and silver. they carry iron thither from spain and china. as for copper, the indian have draw of it and use it for their arm, the which be not usual of iron but of copper. since the spaniard possess the indies, they have draw very little. neither do they take the pain to seek out these mine, although there be many busy themselves in the search of rich and more precious metal wherein they spend their time and labour. they use no other metal as copper and iron, but only that which be send they from spain or that which remain of the refine of gold and silver. we find not that the indian in former time use gold, silver or any other mettle for money and for the price. of thing, but only for ornament, as have be say, whereof there be great quantity in their temple, palace and tomb, with a thousand kind of vessel of gold and silver which they have. they use no gold nor silver to traffic or buy withal, but do change and truck one thing for another. as homer and pliny report of the ancient, they have some other thing of great esteem, plin lib 33.. cap 3. which go currant among they for price and in steed of coin, and unto this day this custom continue among the indian, as in the province of mexico, in steed of money they use cacao, which be a small fruit, and therewith buy what they will. in peru they use to the same end the, which be a leaf the indian esteem, much as in paraguay they have stamp of iron for coin and cotton weave in s croix of the sierre final. the manner of the indian traffic and their buy and sell be to exchange and give thing for thing, and although there be great and famous fair yet have they no need of money nor of broker for that. every one have learn what he be to give in exchange for every kind of merchandise. since the spaniard enter the indian have use gold and silver to buy withal and in the begin there be no coin, but silver by weight be theirprice and money, as they report of the ancient. roman since ^li^, lib 33.. c 4: for a great benefit, they have forge coin in mexico and peru. yet unto this day they have not in the west indies coin any money of copper or other mettle, but only of silver and gold. for the richness of that country, have not admit nor receive such money as they call bullion, nor other kind of alloy which they use in italy and in other province of europe, although in some land of the indies, as s dominique and port, they use coin of leather which be square, the which be currant. only in those land have little silver or gold. i say little although there be much for that. no man dig it and refine it. but for that, the riches of the indies and their manner to labour in the mine consist of gold, silver and quicke^silver. i will speak some thing of these three metal. leave the rest for this time of gold which they dig and refine at the indies, chap 4.. gold, among other metal, have be always hold the most excellent and, with reason, be the most durable and incorruptible of all other. for sire which consume and diminish the rest, amend it and bring it to perfection. gold, which have often pass through the fire, keep his colour and be most fine and pure, which proper be call, as pliny say, obriso, whereof the scripture make so often mention, and use, which consume all other metal. as the same pliny say, do not any thing waste gold, plin, lib 33.. c 3. nor yet hurt it, neither be it eat nor grow old. and although his substance and body be firm and solid, yet do it yield and bow. wonderful, the beater and drawer of gold know well the force it have to be draw out without break all which thing. well, consider with other excellent property will give man of judgement to understand wherefore the holy scripture do compare charity to gold, apoc 3. and 21. cant 3. psal 67. 3. reg 6. to conclude, there be little need to relate the excellency thereof to make it more desirable for the great excellency it have be to be know as it be among man for the supreme power and greatness of the world. come therefore to our subject. at the indies there be great abundance of this mettle. and it be well know by approve history that the of peru do not content themselves with great and small vessel of gold as pot, cup, goblet and flagon, yea with kowle or great vessel, but they have chair also and litter of massy gold. and in their temple they have set up main image of pure gold, whereof they find some yet at. mexico, but not such store as when the first conqueror come into the one and the other kingdom who find great treasure and without doubt there be much more hide in the earth by the indian, it will seem ridiculous to report that they have make their horse shoe of silver for want of iron and that they have pay three hundred crown for a bottle of wine and other strange thing. and yet in truth this have come to pass. yea and great matter. they draw gold in those part after three sort, or at the least i have see all three use, for either they find gold in grain, in powder or in stone. they do call gold in grain, small morsel of gold which they find whole, without mixture of any other mettle, which have no need of melt or refine in the fire, and they call they pippin, for that common they be like to pippin or seed of melon or pompion, and that whereof job speak when he say job 18.. though sometime there be great and such as i have see weigh many pound, it be the excellency of this mettle alone, as pliny affirm to be find thus pure and perfect, which be not see in any other metal, plin lib 3. ca 5, which be always earthly and have a scum and need purge by the fire. i have likewise see silver natural, like to yea. there be a other kind which the indian call papas, and sometime they find piece very five and pure, like to small round root, the, which be rare in that mettle but usual in gold. they find little of this gold in pippin. in respect of the other kind, gold in stone be a vein of gold that grow or engender within the stone or flint, as i have see in the mine of curuma within the government of salines, very great stone pierce and intermix with gold other, that be half gold and half stone. the gold which grow in this manner be find in pit or mine which have their vein like to the silver mine, but it be very hard to draw it forth, agatarchides. write in his first book of the erithrean or red sea, as photion report in his of the manner and fashion to refine gold draw out of stone, the which the ancient king of egypt be wont to use. and it be a strange thing to see how that which be write resemble proper to the manner they use at this day in refine these metal of gold and silver, the great quantity of gold which be draw at the indies, be that in powder, the which be find in stream and place where much water have pass, because the sloud at the indies abound in this kind of gold. as the ancient, for this occasion do celebrate the river of tagus in spain, pa^olus in asia and ganges in the east indies, and call^d the^ the which we other call gol^e in powder, and of this sort be the great quantity of gold they have at this day, at this present, in t^e ^lands of barlovent, hispaniola, cuba and port. there have be and be great quantity in the river, but they bring little from thence into spain for want of the natural inhabitant of the country and the difficulty to draw it. there be great abundance in the kingdom of chille, of quitto and in the new realm of grenado, the most famous gold be that of caranava in peru and of valdivia in chille. for that it rise with his alloy and perfection, which be twenty three carat and a half and sometimes more. they make account likewise of the gold of vera^^a to be very fine. they bring much gold to mexico from the philippines and china, but common it be weak and of base alloy. gold be common find mix with silver or with copper. but that which be mix with silver be common of few carra^s than that which be mix with copper. if there b^^a si^e part^ of silver, (@), 3 (@), pliny say it. be then proper call fl^^^^, which have the property to shine more at the light of the fire, then fine gold or fine silver, that which be incorporate with copper, be common of a high value. they refine, powldr gold in basin, wash it in many water until the sand fall from it and the gold, as most heavy, remain in the bottom. they refine it likewise with quickesilver and strong water, for that the alum whereof they make this water have the virtue to separate gold from dross or from other metal. after it be purify and melt, they make brick or small bar to carry it unto spain, for be in powder they can transport it from the indies, for they can neither custom it mark. it nor take say until it be melt the foresay. his^^ria^ grapher report that spain, above all other country of the world, do abound in gold and silver, (@) 33. (@) especial and portugal, and above all the asturia^s, whence, he say, they bring every year twenty thousand pound of gold and that they find not so great abundance in any other place. the which be confirm in the book of macabee, where it be say that amongst the great riches of the roman, 1. ma^cab 8. they have in their power the gold and silver of spain. at this day, the great treasure of spain come from the indies, wherein the divin^ providence have appoint one realm to serve another, which do impart their wealth to participate. their government for the good the one of the other in communicate mutual the good and grace they do enjoy. we can not value nor esteem the quantity of gold that be bring from the indies, but we may well say it be much more than that which (@) report be bring yearly from spain to rom^ in the fleet where i come, which be in the year 1585.. the declaration of the firm land be of of twelve casson or chest of gold, every casson at the least weied four arobe that be a hundred weight and a thousand fifty and six mare from new spain, which be for the king only, beside that which come for merchant and private man, be register and much that come. unregistered. this may suffice. touch the gold of the indies. and now we will speak of silver, of the silver at the indies, chap 5.. we read these word in the book of job. silver have certain beginning and root in his vein, job 28.. and gold have a settle place where it engender and thicken: iron with dig, be draw out of the earth and stone, melt with heat, be turn into copper. hereby, he wise, show in few word the nature of silver, gold, iron and copper. we have speak something of the place where gold be engender and congeal, which be either of the foresay stone in the depth of mountain and in the bowel of the earth, or in the sand of river and where brook have run, or else on the top of mountain, the which gold in powder run down with the water, and this be the common opinion they hold at the indies, whereupon many of the common sort believe that the deluge have drown. all, even to the high hill, have be the cause that, at this day, they find this gold in the river and in place so far off. now we will show how they discover the mine of silver, their vein, root and beginning whereof job. speak, and first i will say that the reason why they give silver the second place among all other metal be for that it approach near to gold then any other be more durable and less indomage by the fire and more maniable than any other. yea, it pass gold in brightness, beauty and sound, the which be clear and agreeable for the colour be more conformable and resemble the light and the sound more pierce, more lively and more delicate. likewise, there be some place where they value silver more than gold. it be yet a argument to judge that gold be more precious than all other metal, for that it be find with great difficulty and nature seem more spare in bring it forth, although there be country, as they say, of chine, where they find gold more easy than silver, yet it be more common and ordinary to find silver with more facility and great abundance than gold. the creator have furnish the west indies with so great a treasure of silver as all that which we read of in ancient history and that which be speak of the mine of spain and other province be not comparable to that we see in those part. the mine of silver be common find in mountain and high rock, very desert, although they have sometime be find in plain and champain. there be two different kind: the one they call straggle, the other fix and settle. the straggle be piece of mettle find in certain place, the which draw away there be no more find. but the fix vein be those which have a continuance in depth and length, like to great branch and arm of tree, and when they find any one of they, they common find many in the same place. the manner to purge and refine silver which the indian have use be by melt in dissolve this mass of mettle by fire which cast the earthly dross apart, and by his force separate silver from lead, tin from copper and other metal mix. to this end they do build small furnace in place, whereas the wind do common blow, and with wood and coal make their refine the which furnace in ptru they call guayras, since the spaniard enter beside this manner of refine which they use to this. day. they likewise refine silver with quickesilver and draw more by this mean then in refine it by fire. for there be some kind of silver mettle find which can by no mean be purge and refine by fire, but only with quickesilver. but thi^ kind of mettle be common, poor and weak, the which usual they find in great abundance. they c^l that poor which yield least silver and great quantity of other mettle, and that rich which yield m^st silver. it be strange to see not only the difference betwixt the refine of mettle by fire and without it, by quickesilver, but also that some of these metal which be refine by the fire can not well be melt with any artificial wind, as with bellows. but when it be kindle and blow with the natural air or natural wind, the mettle of the mine of porco be easy refine with bellows, and that of the mine of potozi can be melt with bellows, but only by the breath of their guayras, which be small furnace upon the side of the mountain build express where the wind lie, within the which they melt this metal. and though it be hard to yield a reason for this difference, yet be it most certain and approve by long experience. so, as the greedy desire of this mettle so much value among man have make, they seek out a thousand gentle invention and devise, whereof we will hereafter make mention, the chief place of the ind^^s from. whence they draw silver, a^e, n^w. spain^ and p^ru. but the mine of p^ru far surpass the rest, and among all other of the world, those of potozi, whereof we will entreat little at leisure, be the most famous and remarkable thing at the indies of the mountain or hill of potozi and the discovery thereof, chap 6.. the mountain or hill of potozi, so famous, situate in the province of charcas in the kingdom of peru, distant from the equinoctial towards the south or pole, antarctic 21. degree and two, three so, as it fall under the tropic border, upon the burn zone. and yet this region be extreme cold yea, more than old castill in the kingdom of spain and more than flanders itself, although by reason it shall be hot or temperate in regard of the height and elevation of the pole where it be seat. the reason of this so cold a temperature be the height of the mountain, whereas cold and intemperate wind, continual blow, especial that which they call thomahavi, which be boisterous and most cold it rain, most common in june, julie and august. the ground and soil of this mountain be dry, cold and very unpleasant yea altogether barren, which neither engender nor bring forth any fruit, grass nor grain. it be natural, inhabitable for the intemperature of the heaven and the barrenness of the earth. but the force of silver, which draw unto it the desire of all thing, have people this mountain, more than any other place in all these kingdom, make it so fruitful of all kind of meat, as there want nothing that can be desire, yea in great abundance, and although there be nothing but what be bring by carriage. yet every place abound so with fruit conserves, exquisite wine, silk and all other, delicate as it be not inferior to any other part this mountain, be of colour- dark red- and be in form, please, at the first sight, resemble perfect, the fashion of a pavilion or of a sugar loaf. it. exceed all other hill and mountain about it in height. the way whereby they ascend be very rough and uneven, and yet they go upon horseback. it be round at the top and at the foot it have a league in circuit. it contain, from the top to the bottom, 1680.. common yard, the which reduce to the measure of spanish league, make a quarter of a league. at the foot of this mountain, there be another small hill that rise out of it, in the which there have be sometime mine of mettle disperse which be find as it be in purse and not in fix or continue vein. yet be they very rich though few in number, this small rock be call by the indian guayna. potozi, which be young potozi, at the foot whereof begin the dwelling of the spaniard and indian which be come to the riches and work of potozi, which dwelling may contain some two league in circuit and the great traffic and commerce of all peru be in this place. the mine of this mountain be not dig nor discover in the time of their, which be the lord of peru, before the spaniard enter. although they have dig and open the mine of porco near to potozi, distant only six league. the reason may be the want of knowledge thereof, although some do report- i know not what fable- that have sometime labour to open those mine. a voice be hear, command they not to touch it be. reserve for other. in truth, they have no knowledge of potozi, nor of the wealth thereof, till after twelve year that the spaniard be enter into peru, the discovery whereof be make. in this manner, a indian call gualpa, of the nation of chumbibilca, which be a province of cusco, go one day to hunt for venison, pass towards the west, whither the beast be flee, he beguine to run up against the rock which at that time be cover and plant with certain tree they call, and with thick bush. and as he strive to get up a way which be somewhat rough and uneasy, he be force to lay hold upon a branch which issue from a vein of a silver i which, since they have call rich, which he pull up, perceive in the hole or root thereof mettle, the which he know to be very good by the experience he have of the mine of porco. and after find upon the ground certain piece of mettle which lie, break and disperse near to this vein, be scarce, well able to judge thereof, for that the colour be spoil and change by the sun and rain, he carry it to porco to try by the guayras, which be the trial of mettle by fire, and have thereby find the great riches and his happy fortune. he secret dig and draw mettle out of this vein, not impart it to any man until that a indian call guanca, of the valley of xaura, which be upon the bordure of the city of king, who remain at porco near unto gualpa of chumbibilca, perceive one day that he make a refine and that his wedge and brick be great than such as be usual make in those place and also increase in his expense of apparel. have till then live but base. for this reason and for that the mettle his neighbour refine be different from that of porco, he think to discover this secret and wrought so that, although the other keep it as secret as he can, yet through importunity he be force. to carry, he unto the rock of potozi, have enjoy this rich treasure full two month. and then gualpa the indian will guanca, for his part, to take a vein which he have discover near to the rich vein which at this day be call the vein of diego centeno, that be not less rich but more hard to dig and to draw forth. and so, by agreement, they divide between they the rich rock in the world. it chance, after the indian, guanca find some difficulty to dig and draw forth his mettle be most hard, and the other, gualpa, refuse to impart any of his mine unto he, they fall at debate. so, as guanca of xaura, grieve therewith and with some other discontent, discover this secret unto his master call villaroel, a spaniard, who then remain at porco. this villaroel, desirous to understand the truth, go to potozi and find the riches his yanacona, or servant, have discover unto he cause the indian guanca to be enrol. undertake with he the say vein which be call centeno, they call it. undertake that be as much as to note and mark the i and so much ground in circuit for he which the law grant unto those that discover any mine or unto those that dig they by mean whereof have discover they to the justice, they remain lord of the i to dig and draw forth the silver as. be their own, pay only their duty unto the king, which be a five part, so as the first discovery and inregistr of the mine of potozi be the 21. of april, in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred forty five, in the territory of porco, by the say villaroel, a spaniard, and guan^a, a indian, present, after they discover another vein, which they call the vein of tin, the which be very rich although it be rough and very painful to work in the mettle be as hard as slint, since the thirty day of august, in the same year of a thousand five hundred forty and five, the vein call mendieta be enrol, and these be the four principal vein of potozi. they say, of the rich vein, the first that be discover that the metal lie above the ground the height of a lance, like unto rock, raise the superficies of the earth like unto a crest of three hundred foot long and thirteen foot broad, and that this remain bare and uncover by the deluge. this vein have resist the violence and force of the water as the hard part, the mettle be so rich as it be half silver, and this vein continue in his bounty fifty or three score stade, which be the height of a man, and then it fail. in this manner, the mine of potozi be discover by the divine providence, who, for the felicity of spain, will have the great treasure that ever be in this world discover at such time, whenas the emperor charles, the five of famous memory hold the empire, the kingdom of spain and the signiory of the indies present? after that the discovery of potozi be know. in peru, many spaniard and the most part of the bourgeois of the silver city, which be eighteen league from potozi, come thither to take mine. yea, there come many indian from diverse province, especial than guayzadore of porco, so as, within a short space, it be the best people habitation of all, the kingdom of the treasure which be daily draw from. the rock or mountain of potozi, chap 7.. i have often doubt if in ancient history there be find any so rich mine as those we have see in our time in peru. if there be ever rich mine in the world and famous for this effect, they have be those of spain, which they of cartbage do enjoy. and since the roman, the which, as i have say, be not only famous and esteem in profane book but also in the holy scripture, he that make most particular mention of these mine, at the least that i have see be pliny ^lin ^b, 33. c 6, who write thus in his natural history: they find silver almost in all province, but that of spain be the best. which grow and engender in a barren soil, upon mountain and rock. it be a certain and infallible thing that in place where they have once discover any of these vein, there be other not far off, which be likewise find in all other metal, and for this the greek, in my opinion, call they metal. it be strange that the pit or hole of these mine of spain, the which they begin to dig in hannibal time, be at this day and hold the name of their discoverer. among these mine, that which bebello discover, which hold his name unto this day be very famous and they say it yield so great riches to hannibal that, eu^rie day they gather three hundred pound weight of silver and unto this day they have always continue labour in this mine. so, as it be now, dig 15. hundred pace deep into the mountain, out of which pit, notwithstanding the depth, the gaskin that labour in, they draw out the water that they may work with more ease, while their candelle and light last g^n^bra^^^^ ch^onograph, and that in such abundance as it seem to be a river, hitherto be the word of pliny, the which i will set down word by word, the better to content, such as. know what mine be, see that what be try at this day be then in use, and true, the riches of this mine of hannibal, upon the pirrenean hill, be great and famous, which the roman possess have continue the work even unto pliny time, which be about three hundred year, the depth of this mine be fifteen hundred pace, which be a mile and a half, and it be so rich in the beginning that it be worth daily to the master thereof three hundred pound, at twelve ounce to the pound. but although this be a great treasure, it do not approach near to that which in our time have be find in potozi. for, as it appear by the register of the house of contraction of that province, and as many ancient man worthy of credit do testify, whenas the licentiate polo govern that province, the which be many year after the discovery of this mountain, they do every saturday enter a hundred and fifty and two hundred thousand piece, whereof the king five amount to thirty and forty thousand piece, and for every year a million and a half or little less. so as, according to that computation, they do draw every day from this my thirty thousand piece, every ^eece be worth 13. rial and a. four part, whereof there come to the king for his five, six thousand piece a day. there be yet another thing to be speak of, to show the riches of potozi that the account which have be make be only of silver, that be mark and custom. and it be well know in peru that they have long use silver in these realm, which they call currant, which be neither mark nor custom. and they hold it for certain, which know these mine, that in these day the great part of silver draw at potozi be not custom. and this, have course, amongst the indian and much among the spaniard, as i have see, continue to mytime. so as it may appear, the three part of the riches of potozi, yea the one half, come not to light. neither be it custom there be yet a more notable consideration in that which pliny say. they have dig a fifteen hundred pace in this mine of bebell^ and that continual, they find water which be the great hindrance they have to draw forth their mettle. but in this of potozi, although they have dig two hundred stade or height of a man in depth, yet do they never find any water which be the great happiness of this mountain. but the mine of p^r^o, who mettle be good and very rich be at this day, leave for the discommodity of water which they have find in. their work, for they be two insupportable labour in search of the mettle first to dig and break the rock and then to draw out the water. all together, the first of they, that be to cut through the rock, be pain enough, yea, very hard and excessive. final, at this day, the king receive for his five yearly from the mine of potozi a million of silver, beside the wealth that grow by quickesilver and other royal prerogative, which be a great treasure. some man of judgement have cast up the account, say that what have be bring into the custom house of potozi unto the year of our lord, one thousand five hundred eighty and five, amount unto a hundred thousand million of piece of essay. whereof every piece be worth thirteen rial and a four part, not reckon the silver which have be carry away without custom or that have be enter in other royal custom house, or the silver that have be wrought in the country which be not enter the which be innumerable although the first register of entry be not so exact. keep as at this day, for that, in the beginning and first discovery, they make their receipt by roman- so great be their abundance- but by the instruction and remembrance of don francisco de toledo, the viceroy, in the year of our saviour christ one thousand five hundred seventy and four, they find seventy and six million to that year, and from that year to eighty five inclusive. it appear by the royal register, there be thirty five million more enter. they send this account to the viceroy from potozi, in the year i have mention, be then in peru, and since the wealth that have come from peru by ship have amount to much more in that fleet where i come, in the year one thousand five hundred eighty seven, there be eleven million transport in the two fleet of peru and mexico, whereof two, three be in that of peru and almost the one half for the king. i think good to set this down, particular to show the power which his heavenly majesty have give to the king of spain. heap so many crown and kingdom upon they who, by the especial favour of heaven, have join the east with the west, indies environ the whole world with their power. this digression shall serve to show the riches of potozi. we will now show how they labour in the mine and how they refine their metal. how they labour in the mine of potozi, chap 8. boctius complain of the first inventor of mine. bo^tius consolat speak well, ponder a, alas, who be the first, so curious and accurse, who dig out of the i man mind to undermine heavy weight of gold over better. conceal before and pearl creep into ground pale for fear to be find gal, gold, wring ring, precious but perilous thing. with reason he call they precious danger, lib 33. c^ 4 for the great labour and peril wherewith they draw out these metal which man so much esteem. pliny say that in italy there be many mine, but the ancient will not suffer their people to work in. they only to preserve the people. they bring these metal from spain and make the spaniard labour in the mine as tributary. the like do spain now with the indies, for there remain many mine of mettle. yet in spain they will not seek, they nor suffer any to work in. they by reason of the inconveniency which happen. daily, but they bring they from the indies where they dig it with much labour and peril. this rock of potozi contain, as i have say, four principal vein, that be the rich vein, that of centeno, that of tin (@) and that of mendieta. all these vein be of the east part of the mountain, as look to the sun rise, for on the west part there be not any. the foresay vein run from north to south, which be from pole to pole. in the large place they have six foot and in the narrow a span breadth. there be other of diverse fashion that run out of the say vein, like as out of the great arm of tree. there common sprout forth less every. vein have diverse mine which be part and portion of the same, distinct and divide betwixt diverse master by who name they be common, call the great mine, contain fourscore yard- neither may it be more by the law, and the least contain four. all these mine be at this day, very deep in the rich i, they reckon, 78. mine which be 80. yard deep, or a hundred stade or height of a man, and in some place two hundred, in the vein of centeno, be 24. mine, whereof some be 70. or 80. stade deep, and so of the other vein of this mountain. for a remedy to this great profundity, they have invent mine which they call socca bone, which be cave or make at. the foot of the mountain, the which go cross till they encounter with the vein. for we must understand that, although the vein run north to south, as have be say, yet be it in decline from the top to the foot of the mountain, which may be, as they believe by conjecture, above twelve hundred stade, and by this account, although the mine extend in such a profundity, yet there remain six time as much space unto the bottom or root, the which they say be most rich and abundant as the body and spring of all vein, although unto this day we have see the contrary by experience. for the high the vein be to the superficies of the earth, the more rich they find it. and the deep it go, the poor it be, and of the base aloy. they then invent the soccabon by which they enter to work in the mine, very easy, with less charge, pain and danger. they have eight foot in breadth and a in height, the which they shut with door by they. they draw forth their mettle very easy, pay to the proprietary of the soccabon the five part of all the mettle they draw forth. there be nine already make and other be begin they be twenty and nine year in make of one soccabon, as they call it, of the venom that flow from the rich vein. it be begin in the year 1550. the eleven year of the discovery and be end in the year 1585.. the eleven of august this soccabon cross the rich vein thirty five stade from the root or spring, and from thence where it meet to the mouth of the i be a hundred thirty five stade. so as they must descend all this depth to labour in the i this soccabon contain from his mouth unto the vein of crusero, as they call it, 250.. yard in which work be spend twenty nine year, whereby we may see what great pain man take to draw silver out of the bowel of the earth. they labour in these mine in continual darkness and obscurity, without knowledge of day or night, and forasmuch as those place be. never visit with the sun, there be not only continual darkness but also a extreme cold, with so gross a air, contrary to the disposition of man, so as such as new enter, be sick, as they at sea, the which happen to i in one of these, mine, where i feel a pain at the heart and beat of the stomach. those that labour therein use candle to light. they divide their work in such sort as they that work in the day rest by the night, and so they change. the mettle be common, hard, and therefore they break it with hammer, split and hew it by force, as if they be saint, after they carry up this mettle upon their shoulder by ladder of three. branch, make of neat leather, twist like piece of wood which be cross with staff of wood, so as by every one of these ladder they mount and descend together they be ten stade long a piece, and at the end of one begin another of the same length. every ladder beginning and end at platform of wood where there be seat to rest. they like unto gallery, for that there be many of these ladder to mount by, one at the end of another, a man carry, ordinary, the weight of two arrobe of mettle upon his shoulder, every arobe be 25.. pound tie together in a cloth in manner of a skip, and so mount they three and three. he that go before carry a candle. tie to his thumb for, as it be say, they have no light from heaven. and so go they up the ladder, hold it with both their hand to mount. so great a height, which common be above a hundred and fifty, stade a fearful thing, and which breed a amazement to think upon it, so great be the desire of silver that for the gain thereof man endure any pain. and true. it be not without reason that pliny, treat of this subject, exclaim and say thus: we enter even into the bowel of the earth. plin in proem, lib 33., cap 6. and go hunt after riches, even to the place of the damn, and after, in the same book he say, those that seek for. metal perform work more than giant, make hole and cave in the depth of the earth, pierce mountain so deep by the light of candle, whereas the day and the night be alike, and in many month they see no day. so as often the wall of their mine fall, smother many of they that labour therein. and afterwards, he add, they pierce the hard rock with hammer of iron weigh 150 pound and draw out the mettle upon their shoulder, labour day and night, one deliver his charge to another, and all in darkness, only the last see the light. with wedge and hammer, they break the flint how hard and strong soever, for the hunger of gold be yet more sharp and strong, this pliny say. who, although he speak as a historiographer of that age, yet do he seem to prophesy of this time, neither be it less. which photion of agatharchides report of the great travel they endure, who they call chrysios, in draw out of gold. for, as the say author say, gold and silver be as painful to dig and draw forth as they be please to possess. how they refine the mettle of silver. chap 9, the vein, as i have say, where they find silver, run betwixt two rock, which they call the chase, whereof the one be common, as hard as flint and the other soft and easy to break. this mettle be not always equal and of the same bounty, for you shall find, in one and the same vein, one sort of mettle very rich, which they call c^cilla or tacana, from which they draw much silver, and another be poor, from whence they draw little. the most rich mettle of this mountain be of the colour of amber and the next be that which incline to black. there be other somewhat red, and other of the colour of ash, final of diverse and sundry colour which seem to such as know they not to be stone of no value. but the miner do present know his quality and perfection by certain sign and small vein they find in they, they carry all this mettle. they. draw out of these, mine upon indian sheep which serve they as ass to carry it to the mill. the rich mettle be refine by melt in those small furnace which they call guayra^ for that be most leadie by reason whereof it be most subject to melt, and for the better melt thereof, the indian cast in a matter they call soroche, which be a metal full of lead. the metal be in these furnace, the filth and earthy dross through the force of the fire remain in the bottom and the silver and lead melt so as the silver swim upon the lead until it be purify. then, after they refine the silver many time after this manner of melt they have usual draw out of. one quintal of mettle, thirty, forty and fifty piece of silver. and yet i have see some most excellent that have be, show i, where they have draw in the melt two hundred, yea, two hundred and fifty piece of silver of a quintal of mettle. a rare wealth and almost incredible if we have not see the trial thereof by fire. but such metal be very rare, the poor mettle be that which yield two, three, five or six piece or little more. this mettle have common little lead but be dry and therefore they can refine it with fire. and for this reason in potozi there be great store of these poor metal whereof they make no great account but be reject like straw and as the scum of the good mettle, until they find mean to refine it by quickesilver, whereby the scum they call oquiache be of great profit for the quickesilver. by a strange and wonderful property, purify the silver and be apt for these metal which be dry and poor, wherein they consume less quickesilver, then in the rich, for the rich they be, the more need of quickesilver they have. at this day the most usual manner of refine in potozi be by quickesilver, as also in the mine of cacatecas and other of new spain, there be in old time upon the side and top of potozi above six thousand guayras, which be small furnace where they melt their mettle, the which be place like light, a pleasant sight to behold by night, cast a light a far off like a flame of fire. but at this day there be not above two thousand, for that, as i have say, they use little melt but refine it by quickesilver, the which be the great profit and for that the property of quickesilver be admirable and that this manner of refine of silver be remarkable. i will discourse. of quickesilver, of the mine and work, and what be requisite for that subject of the wonderful property of quickesilver, chap 10.. qvickesilver, so call by the latin, for that it run and slide sudden from place to place. among all other metal have great and wonderful virtue, the first be, although it be a true mettle, yet be it not hard, neither have it any certain form nor subsistence like to other metal, but be liquid, not like unto gold and silver melt, but of his own proper nature. and although it be a liquor, yet be it more heavy than any other mettle and therefore all other swim above and sink not to the bottom, be more light. i have see two pound of iron put. into a barrel of quickesilver, the which do swim about like unto wood or cork upon the water. pli lib 33.. ca 6, pliny give a exception hereunto say that gold alone do sink and not swim above it. i have not see the experience, but it may be this grow by reason that quickesilver by nature do environ gold and cover it, which be one of the most important property it have for it join with gold in a strange manner. it seek it where it lie and environ it in such sort as it do distinguish and sep^rate it from any other body or mettle wherewith it be mix. for this reason such take gold as will preserve themselves from the dangerr and discommodity of quickesilver. they have use a remedy to those in who ear they have put quickesilver to cause they to die. secret to put little plate of gold into their ear, for that gold have the virtue to draw out mercury. and after they draw out thief plate all white with the quickesilver, it do stick unto. they be one day. at madril i go to see the exquisite work which a rare work man of milan make for s laurence the royal. it be my hap to be there one day. whenas they gild certain piece of a countertable of brass which be do with quickesilver and for that the fume of mercury be mortal, he tell i that the workman preserve themselves from this venom by swallow a. double ducat of gold roll up, the which be in the stomach, draw unto it all the quickesilver that enter in fume by the ear, eye, nostril and mouth, and by this mean free themselves from the danger of quickesilver, which the gold gather in the stomach and after cast out by the excrement. a thing true, worthy of admiration. after the quickesilver have purify and purge gold from all other metal and mixture, he be likewise separate from the gold, his friend, by the heat of the fire, the which purify it from all quickesilver. pliny say, plin lib 33.. c 6, that by a certain art and invention they do separate gold from quickesilver. it seem to i the ancient have no knowledge to refine silver. by quickesilver, which, at this day, be the great use and chief profit of quickesilver. for that he say plain that quickesilver join with no other mettle but with gold, and when he make mention of refine of silver, he speak only but of the manner of melt, whereby we may infer that the ancient have no knowledge of this secret. in truth, though, there be a league and sympathy betwixt gold and quickesilver. yet, whereas the mercury find no gold, it join with silver, though not in the like manner as with gold, but in the end it do cleanse and purge it from earth, copper and lead, among the which the silver grow, without any need of fire to melt it. yet must they use fire? to separate it from the silver. as i will show hereafter, quicksilver hold no account of other metal but of gold and silver, but contrariwise it do corrupt, they, force and consume they and fly from they as much as may be the which be likewise admirable. and for this cause they put it in earthen vessel or in beast skin, for if it be put in vessel of copper, of iron or other mettle, it present, pierce and corrupt they, and therefore pliny call it the poison of all thing, for that it consume and spoil all. we find quicksilver in the grave of dead man which, after it have consume the body, come forth pure and whole. there have be likewise find in the bone and marrow of man and beast who have receive it in fume by the mouth and nostril, congeal within they and pierce even unto the bone. therefore it be a dangerous thing to frequent so perilous and mortal a creature. it have a other property, which be to run and make a hundred thousand small drop, whereof not one be lose, be they never so little, but they return every way to their liquor. it be almost incorruptible, have nothing in a manner that may consume it and therefore pliny, call it the eternal sweat. it have yet another property: that although it do separate gold from copper and all other metal, yet they that will guild copper, brass or silver use quickesilver as the mean of this union, for with the help thereof they guild metal. amongst all the wonder of this strange liquor, that seem to i most worthy observation that, although it be the weighty thing in the world, yet be it convert into the light of the world which be smoke, and sudden the same smoke, which iss o light a thing, turn again into so heavy a substance as be the proper liquor of quickesilver whereinto it be dissolve. for this smoke encounter the mettle on high, be a solid body, or come into a cold region sudden. it thicken and be convert into quickesilver, and if you set he once again to the fire he do likewise return into smoke to be resolve again into quickesilver. a strange transmutation of so heavy a substance into so light a thing, and of so light into so heavy the, which we may hold for a rare thing in nature and therefore the author of nature be just to be glorify in these and all other strange property of this mettle. see that all thing create do proper, obey their secret and unknown law of the place where they find quickesilver and how they discover these rich mine in guancavilca, chap 11.. qvickesilver be find in a kind of stone, which do likewise yield vermilion, which the ancient call minium and at this day they call the image of crystal miniade, which be paint with quicksilver. the ancient make great account of this minium or vermilion, hold it for a sacred colour, as pliny report say that the roman be accustom to paint the face of jupiter and the body of those that triumph in ethiopia, yea, their idol and their governor likewise have their face colour with this minium and this vermilion. be so esteem at rome, which they bring only from spain, where they have many pit and mine of quickesilver which continue there to this day, that the roman suffer it not to be refine in spain. leave. they shall steal some of it, but they carry it to rome, seal up in a mass as they draw it out of the? i and after refine it, they do yearly bring from spain, especial from andalusie, about ten thousand pound weight which the roman value as a infinite treasure. i have report all this out of that author to the end. that those which doesee what pass at this day in peru may have the content to know what chance in former age among the mighty lord of the world. i speak for the king of peru and for the natural indian thereof which have labour and dig long in these mine of quickesilver, not know what quickesilver be, seek only for cinabrium or vermilion. which they call limpi, the which they esteem much for that same effect, that pliny report of the roman and ethiopian that be to paint the face and body of themselves and their idol. the like have be much practise by the indian especial when they go to the war and use it at this day in their feast and dance, which they call slubber, suppose that their face and visage, so slubber, do much terrify, and at this day they hold it for a ornament and beautify. for this cause, there be strange work of mine in the mountain of guan^avilca, which be in peru, near to the city of guamangu^, out of the which they draw this metal. it be of such a manner that if, at this day they enter by the cave or soccabone which the indian make, in those day, they lose themselves, find no passage out. but they regard not quickesilver, which natural be in the same substance or mettle of vermilion, neither have they knowledge of any such matter. the indian be not alone for so long a time without the knowledge of this treasure, but likewise the spaniard who, until the year of the incarnation of our saviour, one thousand five hundred three score and six and threescore and seven, at such time as the licentiate castro govern in peru, discover not the mine of quickesilver, which happen in this manner. a man of judgement call henrique guard, a portugal. bear have a piece of this colour mettle, as i have say, which the indian call limpi, with which they paint their face, as he behold it well, find it to be the same which they call vermilion in castille, and for that he know well that vermilion be draw out of the same mettle that quickesilver be he conjecture these mine to be of quickesilver. go to the place whence they draw this mettle to make trial thereof, the which he find true, and in this sort the mine of palcas in the territory of guamangua be discover. great number of man go thither to draw out quickesilver and so to carry it to mexico where they refine silver by the mean of quickesilver, wherewith many be. enrich this country of mine which they call guancavilca, be then people, with spaniard and indian that come thither and come still to work in these mine of quickesilver, which be in great number and very plentiful. but of all these mine, that which they call de cabrera or of saint, be goodly and notable it be a rock of most hard stone, interlace all with quickesilver, and of that greatness that it extend above four score varre or yard in length and forty in breadth, in which mine they have many pit and ditch of three score and ten stade deep, so as three hundred man may well work together, such be the capacity thereof. this mine be discover by a indian of amador of cabrera, call. navincopa of the village of acoria, the which amador of cabrera cause to be register in his name. he be in surte against the procurer fiscal, but the usufruite be adjudge to he by sentence as the discoverer. since he sell his interest to another for two hundred and fifty thousand ducat and afterward think he have be deceive in the sale, he commence a action against the buyer. be worth, as they say, above five hundred thousand ducat. yea, some hold it to be worth a million of gold. a rare thing to see a mine of that wealth. whenas don francisco of toledo govern in peru, there be one which have be in mexico and observe how they refine silver with mercury, call pero fernandes, who offer to refine silver at potoz^ with mercury and have make trial thereof in the year of our redemption, one thousand five hundred seventy and one, perform it with credit. then begin they to refine silver at potozi with quicksilver which they transport from guancavelicqua which be a goodly help for the mine. for by the mean of quickesilver, they draw a infinite quantity of metal from these mine, whereof they make no account. the which they call scrape, for as it have be say, the quickesilver purify the silver, although it be dry, poor and of base alloy which can not be do by melt in the fire. the catholic king draw from it quickesilver mine without any charge or hazard, almost four hundred thousand piece of a i, the which be fourteen rial a piece or little less, beside the right that rise in potozi, where it be employ the which be a great riches. they. do yearly, one with another, draw from these mine of guancavilca eight thousand quintal of quickesilver, yea and more. the manner how to draw out quickesilver and how they refine silver, chap 12.. let we now speak how they draw out quickesilver and how they refine silver therewith. they take the stone or mettle where they find the quickesilver, the which they put into the fire in pot of earth well lute be, well beat. so as this mettle or stone come to melt by the heat of the fire, the quickesilver separate itself and go forth in exhalation, and sometime even with the smoke of the fire, until itincounter some body where it stay and congeal and if it pass up high without meet of any hard. substance. it mount up until it be cold and then congeal. it fall down again. when the melt be finish, they unstoppe the pot and draw forth the mettle, sometime stay until it be very cold, for if there remain any fume or vapour which shall encounter they that unstopped the pot, they be in danger of death or to be benumine of their limb or at the least to lose their tooth, and for that they spend a infinite quantity of wood. in the melt of these metal, a miller call rodrigo de tores find out a profitable invention which be to gather certain straw which grow throughout all those mountain of peru, the which they call ycho. it be like unto a hard reed wherewith they make their fire. it be a strange thing to see the force which this straw have to melt and dissolve these metal, the which fall out. as pliny say that there be gold which melt more easy with the flame of straw. plin lib 33.. c 4 then with hot burn coal. they put the quickesilver thus melt into skin, for that it keep best in leather, and in this sort they lay it into the king storehouse, from whence they carry it by sea to ariqua and so to potozi by land upon their sheep. there be yearly spend in potozi for the refine of metal about six or seven thousand quintalle of quickesilver. beside that, they draw from the plate which be the earth or dross of the first wash of these metal which be make in cauldron, the which plate they burn in their furnace to draw out the quickesilver which remain in they, and there be above fifty of these furnace in the city of potozi and in tarpaya. the quantity of metal which they refine, as some man of experience have make the account, do amount yearly to above three hundred thousand quintalle. from the earth and dross whereof be melt and refine, they may draw yearly above two thousand quintalle of quicksilver. we must understand there be diverse sort of metal, for some yield much silver and waste little quickesilver. other consume much quickesilver and yield little. silver, and there be other which consume much quickesilver and yield much silver, and other that consume little quickesilver and also yield little silver and as man encounter in these metal. so they grow rich or poor in their traffic. although common, the rich mettle yield much silver and consume much quickesilver, and likewise that which be poor, yield little silver and consume as little mercury. they first beat and grind the mettle very small with hammer and other instrument which beat this stone like unto tan mill and be well beat. they searce it in a copper searce, make the powder as small and fine as if it be horse hair. these searce be well fit, do sift thirty quintalle in a day and a night then. they put the powder of the mettle into the vessel upon furnace, whereas they anoint it and mortify it with brine. put to every fifty quintalle of powder five quintal of salt. and this they do for that the salt separate the earth and filth to the end. the quickesilver may the more easy draw the silver unto it. after they put quick silver into a piece of holland and press it out upon the mettle which go forth like a dew, always turn and stir the mettle to the end. it may be well incorporate. before the invention of these furnace of fire, they do often mingle their mettle with quickesilver in great trough, let it settle some day, and do then mix it and stir it. again until they think all the quickesilver be well incorporate with the silver, the which continue twenty day and more, and at the least nine day, since they discover, as the desire to get be diligent, that to shorten the time fire do much help to incorporate silver, the soon with quickesilver they in vent these furnace whereon they set vessel to put in their mettle with salt and quickesilver, and underneath they put fire by little and little in furnace, make for the nonce underneath, so as in five or six day the quickesilver be incorporate with the silver. and when they find that the mercury have do his part and assemble all the silver, leave nothing behind but be well imbrue as a sponge do water. divide it from the earth, lead and copper with the which it be engender. then, after they separate it likewise from the quickesilver, the, which they do in this sort- they put the mettle in cauldron and vessel full of water where with certain wheel they turn the mettle round about as if they shall make mustard, and so the earth and dross go from the mettle with the water that run away. the silver and quickesilver, as most ponderous, remain in the bottom. the metal which remain be like unto sand. then they take it out and wash it again in great platter of wood or keeler full of water, still, draw the earth from it until they leave the silver and quickesilver. well, cleanse there slip. away also some small portion of silver and quickesilver with the earth and dross which they call wash, the, which they after wash again and draw out the remainder. when the silver and quickesilver be cleanse and begin to shine and that there remain no earth, they put all the mettle into a cloth which they strain out very forcible, so as all the quickesilver pass out, be not incorporate with the silver and the rest remain as a loaf of silver like to a mark of almond press to draw oil and be thus press. the remainder contain but the six part in silver and five in mercury, so as if there remain a mark of threescore pound, ten be of silver and fifty of mercury of. these mark, they make pin, as they call. they like pine, apple or sugar loaf, hollow within the which they common make of a hundred pound weight. then, to separate the silver from the quickesilver, they put it into a violent fire, which they cover with a earthen vessel, like to the mould of a sugar loaf, or unto a capuchon or hood, the which they cover with coal and set fire unto it, whereby the quickesilver exhale in smoke, the which strike against the capuchon of earth, it thicken and distill, like unto the smoke of a pot cover, and by a pipe, like unto a limbeck, they receive the quickesilver which distill. the silver remain without change the form, but in weight it be diminish five. part of that. it be and be spongious, the which be worthy the observation. of two of these loaf they make one bar of silver in weight, 65. or 66. mark, and in this sort they carry it to the touch. custom and mark. silver draw with mercury be so fine that it never abate of two thousand, three hundred and fourscore of alloy, and it be so excellent that the workman be enforce to allay it, put some mixture to it, as they do likewise in their mint, whereas their money be stamp silver endure all these martiredome, if we may so call it, to be refine, the which, if we consider well it be, a body frame where they grind, sift, kneade, lay the leaven and bake the silver. beside all this, they wash it and wash it again, they bake it and bake it again. endure the pestell, sives trough furnace, cauldron, press and final by the water and fire. i speak this for that see. see this art. in potozi. i do consider what the scripture speak of: the just mat 3. eccles 2. psal 11, and that which they speak in another part, so as to purify silver, to refine and cleanse it from the earth and stone where it engender. they purge and purify it seven time, for in effect it pass their hand seven time yea often, until it remain pure and fine. so be it in the word of god, where the soul must be so purify that shall enjoy the heavenly perfection of their engine to grind the mettle and of their trial of silver, chap 13.. to conclude this subject of silver and of metal, there remain yet two thing to speak of: the one be of their engine and mill, the other of their essay or trial. i have say before how they grind their metal for the receive of the quicksilver which be do with diverse instrument and engine, some with horse, like unto hand-mille, other like water-mill, of which two sort there be great number, but for that the water they do use common be but of rain, whereof they have not sufficient, but three month in the year, december, january and february. for this reason they have make lake and stand pool which contain in^circuite about a thousand and six hundred rod and in depth three stade, there be seven. with their sluice, so as when they have need of any water, they raise up a sluice from whence run a little stream of water, the which they stop upon holiday, and when the lake and pool do fill and that the year abound with rain, their grind do then continue six or seven month. so as, even for silver sake, man desire a good year of rain in potozi, as they do in other place for bread. there be some other engine in tarapaya, which be a valley three or four league distant from potozi, whereas there run a river. as in other part the difference of these engine, be that some go with six pestle, some with twelve and other with fourteen, they grind and beat. the mettle in mortar labour day and night, and from thence they carry it to be sift. upon the bank of the brook of potozi there be forty eight water-mill of eight, ten and twelve pestell and four. on the other side, which they call in the city of tarapaya, there be two and twenty engine all upon the water. beside there be thirty go with horse in potozi and many other in divers^partes. so great the desire of man be to get silver which be try by deputy appoint by the king to give the alloy to every piece. they carry the bar of silver unto the assay master who give to every one his number for that they carry many at once. he cut a small. piece of every one, the which he weigh just, and put they into a cruset which be a small vessel make of burn bone beat. after he place every crusible in his order in the furnace. give they a violent fire than the mettle melt and that which be lead go into smoke and the copper and tin dissolve. the silver remain most fine of the colour of fire. it be a strange thing that be thus refine, although it be liquid and melt, yet it never spill, be the mouth of the crusible turn downwards but it remain fix without the loss of a drop. the assay master know by the colour and other sign when it be refine. then do he draw the crucible from the fire and weigh every piece. curious, observe what every one want of his weight, for that which be of high alloy, waste but little, and that which be base diminish much. and according to the waste he see what alloy he bear. according to the which he mark every bar punctual, their balance and weight be so delicate and their grain so small as they can take they up with the hand but with a small pair of pincer, and this trial they make by candle light that no air may move the balance, for of this little the price of the whole bar depend. in truth, it be a very delicate thing and require a great dexterity. psal 65. prover 17.27, which the holy scripture use in many place to show how god prove his choose and to note the difference of the merit of soul, whereas god give the title of a assay-maister to the prophet jeremy, that he may try and declare the spiritual virtue of man and of his work, which be the proper work of the spirit of god, be he that weigh the soul of man. 6. prover 1.. we will rest content with what we have speak touch silver, metal and mine, and will pass to the two other mixture, the which be plant and beast of emerald, chap 14.. it shall not be from the purpose to speak something of emerald, both for that it be a precious thing as gold and silver as also for that they take their beginning from mine and metal. pli lib 3^, ca 3, as pliny report, the emerald have be in old time in great esteem, as the same author write, give it the three place among all jewel and precious stone that be next to the diamond and pearl. at this day they do not so much esteem the emerald nor the pearl, for the great abundance be bring of these two sort from the indies. only the diamond hold the principality, the which can not be take from it. next the ruby come in price and other stone. which they hold more precious than the emerald man be so desirous of singularity. and rare thing that what they see to be common they do not esteem. they report of a spaniard who be in italy when the indies be first discover show a^ emerald to a lapidary who ask he the value thereof, after he have well view it be of a excellent lustre and form, he prize it at a hundred ducat. he than show he a other great than it, which he value at three hundred ducat. the spaniard drink with this discourse, carry he to his lodging, show he a casket full. the italian see so great a number of emerald, say unto he, sir, these be well worth a crown a piece. the like have happen both at the indies and in spain, where the stone have lose their estimation for the great abundance they find of they there. pliny report many excellency of the emerald, among the which he say plin, lib 37. c 5, that there be nothing more please, nor more healthful for the sight wherein he have reason, but his authority import little. see there be such store. plin, lib 9, c 35. it be report that lelia, a roman dame, bestow upon a scoffion and a garment embroider with pearl and emerald, 400000.. ducat, the which at this day may be do with less than forty thousand ducat, yea, two such in diverse part of the indies and the king of mexico do much esteem. they some do use to pierce their nostril and hang therein a excellent emerald. they hang they on the visage of their idol. the great store be find in the new kingdom of grenado and peru, near unto manta and port vieil. there be towards that place a soil which they call the land of emerald for the knowledge they have of abundance to be there. and yet unto this day they have not conquer that land. the emerald grow in stone, like unto crystal. i have see they in the same stone fashion, like a vein, and they seem by little and little to thicken and refine. i have see some that be half white and half green, other all white and some green and very perfect. i have see some of the bigness of a nut and there have be some great find, but i have not know that in our time they have find any of the form and bigness of the plat or jewel they have at genes, the which they esteem and with reason to be a jewel of great price and no relic. yet, without comparison, the emerald which theophrastus speak of, which the king of babylon present to the king of egypt, surpass that of genes. it be four cubit long and three broad, and they say that in jupiters temple there be a needle or pyramid make of four emerald stone of forty cubit long and in some place four broad and in other two, and that in his time there be in tir, in hercules temple, a pillar of a emerald. it may be, as pliny say, it be of some green stone somewhat like to the emerald, and they call it a false emerald. as some will say that in the cathedral church of cordou^ there be certain pillar of emerald which remain, since it be a mesquite for the king miramamolin moor which reign there in the fleet. the year one thousand five hundred eighty and seven, in the which. i come from the indies. they bring two chest of emerald. every one weigh at the least four arobe, whereby we may see the abundance they have. the holy scripture commend these emerald as precious jewel, exod 29.39, apoc 21.. they number they amongst the precious stone which the high priest carry on his ephod or breastplate, as those which do beautify the wall of the heavenly jerusalem of pearl, chap 15.. now that we entreat of the great riches that come from the indies, it be no reason to forget the pearl which the ancient call marguerite and at the first be in so great estimation as none but royal person be suffer to wear they, but at this day there be such abundance as the negres. themselves do wear chain thereof. they grow in shell or oyster in eat, whereof i have find pearl in the midst of. they, these oyster, within be of the colour of heaven, very lively, in some place they make spoon, the which they call mother of pearl. the pearl do differ much, inform in bigness, figure, colour and polish. so likewise in their price they differ much. some they call maria be like the small grain of bead, other be noster, be big. seldom shall you find two of one greatness, form and colour. for this reason the roman, as pliny write, call they union plin, lib 3. c 3^. whenas they do find two that be alike in all point, they raise the price much especial for. carering. i have see some pair value at thousand of ducat, although they be not like to cleopatra, two pearl whereof pliny report either of they be worth a hundred thousand ducat, with the which this foolish queen win a wager she have make against marc anthony to spend in one supper above a hundred thousand ducat. so at the last course she dissolve one of these pearl in strong vinegar and drink it up. they say the other pearl be cut in two and place in the pantheon at rome, at th'^ares, of the image of venus. esope report of clovis, the son of a comedian who in a banquet present to every one of his guest, amongst other meat, a rich pearl dissolve in vinegar to. make his feast the more royal and sumptuous. these be the folly of those age and those at this day be nothing less for that. we see not only hat and band but also buskin and woman pantofle, yea of base condition, embroider all over with pearl. they fish for pearl in diverse part of the indies. the great abundance be in the south sea, near unto panama, where the island of pearl be, as they call they. but at this day they find great store, and the best, in the north sea, the which be near to the rive of hatch. i do see they make their fish the which be do with great charge and labour of the poor slave which dive six, nine yea, twelve. fathom into the sea to seek for oyster, the which common be fasten to the rock and gravel in the sea. they pull they up and bring they above the water to their canoe where, the^ open, they draw forth the treasure they have within they. the water of the sea in this part be very cold, but yet the labour and toil be great. in hold of their breath, sometime a quarter, yea half a hour together be under the water at their fish, and to the end these poor slave may the better continue and hold their breath. they feed they with dry meat, and that in small quantity, so as covetousness make, they abstain and fast. thus, against their will, they employ their pearl to diverse work and they pierce they to make chain, whereof there be great store in every place in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred eighty one. i do see the note of what come from the indies: for the king there be eighteen mace of pearl beside three casket, and for particular there be twelve hundred threescore and four mark and beside they seven casket, not pierce, which heretofore we will have esteem and hold for a lie of the indian bread and of may chap 16.. in our discourse of plant, we will begin with those which be proper and peculiar to the indies, and after with the rest that be common to the indies. and europe, and forasmuch as plant be chief create for the nourishment of man and that the chief whereof he take his nourishment be bread, it shall be good to show what bread the indian use and whereon they live for want thereof. they have, as we have here, a proper name whereby they note and signify bread which at peru they call, and in other place by another name. but the quality and substance of the bread the indian use differ much from we, for we find not they have any kind of wheat or barley, nor any other kind of grain which they use in europe^o. ^o, make bread withal instead, whereof they use other kind of grain and root among the which may hold the first place, and with reason: in castille they call it indian wheat and in italy they call it turkey grain. and even as wheat be the most common grain for the use of man in the region of the old world, which be europe, asia and africa, so in the new find world the most common grain be may the, which be find almost in all the kingdom of the west indies, as at peru, new spain, in the new kingdom of granado, in gautimalla, in chille and upon the main land. i do not find that in old time, in the land of barlovente, as cuba s dominique jamaique and s i^an that they use may. at this day they use much yuca, and whereof we will present entreat. i do not think that this may be any thing inferior to our wheat in strength nor substance, but it be more hot and gross and engender more blood, whereupon they that have not be accustom thereunto, if they eat too much, they swell and become scab. it grow upon cane or reed, every one bear one or two grape or branch to the which the grain be fasten, and although the grain be big yet find they great store thereof. so, as in some cluster, i have tell seven. hundred grain. they must plant it with the hand, one by one and not very thick. it desire a hot and moist ground and grow in great abundance in many place of the indies. it be not strange in those country to gather 300.. or measure for one sow. there be difference of may, as there be of wheat. one be great and very nourish, another small and dry, which they call moroche. the green leaf and cane of may be a good food for their mule and hor^es and it serve they for straw when it be dry. the grain be of more nourishment for horse, then barley, and therefore in those country they use to water their horse before they eat, for if they shall drink. after they will swell, as when they eat wheat. may be the indian bread, the which they common eat boil in the grain hot and they call it mote as the chinois and jopponois eat their rice sod with the hot water. sometime they eat it bake. there be some may, round and big as that of lucanas, which the spaniard eat roast as a delicate meat and have a better taste than buarbense or roast peason. there be another kind of eat it more pleasant, which be to grind the may and to make small cake of the flower ^he which they put in the fire and then bring they hot to the table in some place. they call they arepa^. they make also round bowl of. this paste, and so trim they that they continue long eat it as a dainty dish. they have invent at the indies, for friandise and pleasure, a certain kind of paste they do make of this flow, mix with sugar, which they call biscuit and mellinder. this may serve the indian not only for bread but also for wine, for they do make their drink thereof, wherewith they be soon drink than with wine of grape. they make this wine of may in diverse sort and manner, call it in peru acua, and by the most common name of the indies, chicha, and the strong be make like unto beer, steep the grain until it break, after they boil it in such sort that it grow so strong. as little overthrow a man. in peru they call this sora. it be defend by the law for the great inconvenience that grow thereby make man drink. but this law be ill observe for that. they use it still. yea, they spend whole day and night in drink, carouse 14. c, 22. pliny report that this manner of beverage of grain steep and after sodden wherewith they be drink, be in old time use in spain, france and other province, as at this day in flanders they use ale make of malt. there be another manner of make this, acua or chicha, which be to champ the maize and make a leaven thereof and then boil it. yea. the indian hold opinion that to make good it must. be champ by old wither woman, which make a man sick to hear, and yet they do drink it. the cleanly manner, the most wholesome and that which least harm be to roast the may which the most civil indian do use, and some spaniard, yea for physic, for in effect they find it a very wholesome drink for the reins. so as you shall hardly find any one at the indies complain of pain in the back for that, they do drink of this chicha. the spaniard and indian eat this may boil and roast for daintiness. when it be tender in the grape like milk, they put it into the pot and make sauce that be good to eat. the bud of may be very fat. and serve instead of butter and oil. so as this may, at the indies, serve both for man and beast, for bread, wine and oil. for this reason, the viceroy, don francisco de toledo, say that peru have two thing rich and of great nourishment, which be may and the cattle of the country. in truth, he have reason, for these two thing do serve they as a thousand. i will ask, soon than i can answer it, whence may be first carry to the indies and why they do call this profitable grain in italy, turkey grain. for in truth, i do not find that the ancient make any mention of this grain, though that that pliny write to come from the indies into italy ten year. before he do write it, have some resemblance unto may, for that it be a grain, as he say, that grow in reed and cover itself with the leaf and have the top like hair, be very fertile. all which thing agree not with mill. to conclude, god have impart to every region what be needful. to this continent, he have give wheat, which be the chief nourishment of man, and to the indian he have give may, which have the second place to wheat for the nourishment of man and beast, of yucas, papas, chune and ris, chap 17.. in some part of the indies they use a kind of bread they call cacavi, which be make of a certain root. they call yuca, this yuca be. a great and gross root, which they cut in small morsel. they grate or scrape it and then put it in a press to strain, make a thin and broad cake thereof, almost ' like unto a moor target or buckler. then do they dry it and this be the bread. they eat. it have no taste, but be healthful and of good nourishment. for this reason we say: be at s dominike, that it be the proper food for great eater, for that they may eat much without any fear of surffet. they must of necessity water this cacavi before they eat it. it be sharp and easy. water with water or broth, wherein it be very good, for that. it swell much, and so they make. capirotades, but it be hardly steep in milk, in honey of cane or in wine, for that these liquor can pierce it as it do bread make of wheat of this cacavi, there be one kind more delicate than any other, which be that they make of the slow call xauxau, which they do much esteem in those part. for my part, i esteem more a morsel of bread, how hard and black soever. it be a strange thing that the juice or water that come from this root when they strain it, which make the cacavi be a deadly poison and kill any that drink thereof, but the substance that remain be a very wholesome bread and nourishment. as we have say, there be another kind of. yuca, which they call sweet, and have not this poison in the juice. this be eat in the root, boil or roast and be good meat. cacavi will keep long, and therefore they carry it to sea in steed of biscuit. the place where they use most of this bread be at the land of barlovente, which be s dominicke cuba port and some other thereabouts, for that the soil of these land will neither bear wheat nor may, for whenas they sow wheat it come up well and be present, green, but so unequal as they can gather it, for of the seed sow at one instant, some be spindle, some be in the ear and some do but bud, one be great and a other little. one be in the grass and another in the grain, and although they have carry labourer thither to see if there be any tillage or art to be use, yet can they find no remedy for the quality of the earth. they carry meal from new spain or the canary which be so moist that hardly can they make any profitable bread or of good taste. the wafer cake wherewith they say mass do bend like to wet paper by reason of the extreme humidity and heat which be joint in that country. there be a other extreme, contrary to this, which hinder the grow of or wheat in some part of the indies, as on the height of the sierre of peru and the province which they call of colao, which be the great part of this realm where the climate be so cold and dry as it will not suffer any of these seed to grow in steed thereof. the indian use a other kind of root which they call papas. these root be like to ground nut. they be small root which cast out many leaf. they gather this papas and dry it well in the sun, then beat it. they make that which they call chuno, which keep many day and serve for bread in this realm. there be great traffic of chuno, the which they carry to the mine of potozi. they likewise eat of these papas, boil or roast. there be one sweet of these kind, which grow in hot place, whereof they do make certain sauce and mince meat which they call locro. to conclude, these root be the bread of that land, so as, when the year be good, they rejoice much for that. oftentimes they freeze in the earth, so great be the cold of that region. they carry may from the valley or sea coast, and the spaniard, which be dainty, carry likewise from the same place wheat meal, whereof they do make good bread because that the land be dry. in other part of the indies, as at the philippines, they use rice instead of bread, whereof there grow very good and in great abundance in all that country and in china, and it be of good nourishment. they seethe it in purcelaine and after mix it hot with the water, amongst other meat. in many place they do make their wine and drink of this rice steep and then, after boil it, as they do the beer in flaunders or the acua in peru, rice be a meat not much less common. and general throughout the world than wheat or maize and perchance more for, beside that, they use it in china, joppon and the philippines and in the great part of the east indies. it be a grain most common in africa and ethiopia, it require a wet ground, almost overflow, like to a meadow in europe, peru and mexico, where they have the use of wheat, they eat rice as a meat and not for bread. they seethe it with milk or with broth or in some other sort. the most exquisite rice come from the philippines and china, as have be say, and this may suffice to understand what they eat general at the indies, in stead of bread of diverse root which grow at the indies. chap 18.. although in these part the land be more abundant and fertile in fruit that grow upon the earth by reason of the great diversity of fruit, tree and plant, we have yet for root and other thing that grow under the earth, the which they use for meat. in my opinion there be great abundance there, for of these kind of plant we have readish, turnip, parsnep, carrot, lieke, garlic and some other profitable root, but in those country they have so many diverse sort as i can reckon they those which i now remember. beside papas, which be the principal, there be ocas, camote, cochu^ha, mani and a infinite number of other kind, as the patattres which they eat as a delicate and toothsome meat. they have. likewise carry fruit to the indies from these part, the which prosper better there than the indian plant do bring into europe. the reason, in my opinion, be for that there be great variety of temperature then in these part, by mean, whereof the plant in those region do rise and prosper better, fit themselves to the temperature they require and the root and plant which grow there and be not transport from hence be better than they be here, for onion, garlic and parsnip be not in spain as they be at peru, and as for turnip there be so great abundance as they have increase in. so i place in such sort that, as they have affirm to i, they can not destroy the. abundance which grow up for to sow corn. there we have see reddish root as big as a man arm, very tender and of a good taste, and of these toote i have speak. some serve for ordinatie meat, as the camore, which be roast serve as pulse. there be other root that serve they for dainty, as the cochuch^. it be a small sweet root which some preserve for more delight. there be other root fit to cool, as the, which be in quality very cold and moist, and in summer it refresh and quench the thirst. but the papas and ocas be the chief for nourishment and substance. the indian esteem garlic above all, the root of europe, and hold it for a fruit of great. force wherein they want no reason for that, it comfort and warm the stomach, for that they eat it with a appetite, raw as it come out of the ground, of diverse sort of green herb and pulse, and of those they call concombre, pine or pine apple, small fruit of chille and of prune. chap 19, se^ing, we have begin with the lesser plant. i may, in few word, touch that which concern flower and potherb and that which the latin call, without any mention of tree, there be some kind of these shrub at the indies which be of very good taste, the first spaniard name. many thing at the indies with such spanish name, as they do most resemble as pine, concombre and prune, although they be very different fruit to those which be so call in spain. the pine or pine-aples be of the same fashion and form outward to those of castle, but within they whole differ for that they have neither apple, norscale but be all one flesh which may be eat when the skin be off. it be fruit that have a excellent smell and be very pleasant and delightful in taste. it be full of juice and of a sweet and sharp taste. they ^ate it be cut in morsel and steep a while in water and salt. some say that this breed choler and that the use thereof be not very healthful, but i have not seen^ any experience thereof that may breed belief. they grow one by one, like a cane or stalk, which rise among many leaf, like to the lily, but somewhat big. the apple be on the top of every cane. it grow in hot and moist ground, and the best be those of the land of barlovente. it grow not in peru, but they carry they from the andes, the which be neither good nor ripe. one present one of these pineapple to the emperor charles the five, which must have cost much pain and care to bring it so far with the plant from the indies. yet will he. not try the taste i have see in new spain conserves of these pine, which be very good. those which they call concombre, be no tree but shrub, continue but one year. they give it this name for that some of this fruit, and the most part, be in length and roundness like to the concombre of spain, but for the rest they differ much, for they be not green but violet, yellow or white, neither be they thorny or rough, but polish, and even have a very different taste and far better than that of spain, for they have a sharp, sweet taste, very pleaasant when it be ripe, yet be it not so sharp as the pine. they be very cool, full of liquor and of easy digestion and in time of heat, fit to refresh, they take away the rind, which be white, and all that remain be meat. they grow in a temperate soil and require water, and although for the resemblance they call they concombre, yet be there, many of they round and other of a different fashion. so as they have not the figure of concombre, i do not remember to have see this kind of fruit in new spain, nor at the land, but upon the of peru, that which they call the little fruit of chille be of the same sort, very pleasant to eat and come near the taste of cherry. but in all other thing it differ. much for that it be no tree but a herb which grow little and spread upon the earth, cast forth this little fruit, the which in colour and grain resemble almost the mulberry, when it be white and not ripe yet be it more rough and big than the mulberry. they say this little fruit be natural find in the field of chille, where i have see of they. they set it upon plant and branch and it grow like any other shrub. those which they call prune be very the fruit of tree and have more resemblance than the rest to our plumb. there be diverse sort whereof they call some prune of nicaragua, the which be very red and small and have little meat upon the stone, but that little be of a exquisite taste and of a sharpness as good, or rather better, than cherry. they hold this fruit to be very wholesome and therefore they give it to sick folk, especial to provoke a appetite. there be other that be great and of a dark colour, they have much meat but it be gross and of no taste like to the chavacanas which have every one, two or three small stone. but to return to potherb, i find not that the indian have any garden of diverse herb and plant but do only till the land in some. part for pulse which they use as those which they call fr^solles and which serve they as our lentil bean or tare. neither have i know that these pulse or any other kind that be in europe be there before the spaniard enter, who carry plant and pulse from spain thither where they now grow and increase wonderful and in some place exceed great the fertility of these part, as if we speak of melon which grow in the valley of yuca in peru, who root, become a stalk that continue many year, carry melon yearly and they trim it like unto a tree, a thing which i do not know to be in any part of spain but that be more monstrous, of the calibass or indian. pompion and the greatness they have as they grow, especial those which be proper to the country, which they call capallos, the which they eat, most common in lent boil and trim with some other sauce. there be a thousand kind of calibass, some be so deform in their bigness that of the rind cut in the midst and cleanse, they make as it be basket to put in all their meat for their dinner. of the lesser they make vessel to eat and drink in and do trim they handsome for many use. i have speak this of small plant. we will now speak of great, but first of their axi, which be of the lesser of axi, or indian pepper, chap 20.. they have not find at the west indies any kind of spice proper or peculiar to they as pepper, clove, cinnamon, nutmeg or ginger, although one of our company who have travel much and in diverse part, tell we that in the desert of the island of jamaique he have find tree where pepper grow, but they be not yet assure thereof. neither be there any trade of these spice at the indies. the ginger be carry from the indies to hispaniola and it have multiply so as at this day they know not what to do with the great abundance they have in the fleet. the year 1587. they bring 22053. quintal of ginger to sevill, but the natural spice that god have give to the west. indies, be that we call in castill indian pepper and in india axi as a general word. take from the first land of the land which they conquer. in the language of cusco it be call vchu and in that of mexico chili. this plant be well know and therefore i will speak little. only we must understand that in old time it be much esteem among the indian which they carry into place where it grow, not as a merchandise of consequence. it grow not upon cold ground, as on the sierre of peru, but in hot valley where it be often water. there be of this axi of diverse colour. some be green, some red, some yellow and some of a burn colour which they call. caribe, the which be extreme, sharp and bite. there be a other sort, not so sharp but be so sweet as they may eat it alone as any other fruit. there be some of it very small and please in the mouth, almost like to the smell of musk, and be very good. that which be sharp and bite in this be the vein and the grain, only the rest be not for that they eat it green and dry whole and beat in the pot and in sauce. be the chief sauce and all the spice they have at the indies. when this axi be take moderate, it help and comfort the stomach for digestion, but if they take too much it have bad effect for of. itself it be very hot, fume and pierce, great so as the use thereof be prejudicial to the health of young folk, chief to the soul, for that it provoke to lust. it be strange that although the fire and heat of it be well know by experience, and that every man say it burn in the mouth and the stomach, yet some yea, many hold that the indian pepper be not hot but cold and well temper. but i may say to they: the like shall be of pepper, though they bring i as many experience as they will of the one and the other. yet be it a very mockery to say it be not hot. see it be in the high degree they use salt. to temper this, axi have great source to correct it, and so they moderate one with the other by the contrariety that be in they. they use also tomates, which be cold and very wholesome. it be a kind of grain, great and full of juice, the which give a good taste to sauce and they be good to eat. they have general throughout the indies of this indian pepper at the land new spain, peru and all the rest that be discover. and as maize be the general grain for bread, so axi be the most common spice for sauce of the plane tree chap 21.. come to the great plant or tree at the indies, the first that shall be needful to treat of be the plane, or as the vulgar call it. i have be sometime in doubt whether the plane which the ancient have so much celebrate and that of the indies be of one kind, this well observe, and that which they write of the other. without all doubt they will appear to be of sundry kind. the reason why the spaniard call it plane, for the indian have no such name, be as in other tree, for that they have find some resemblance of the one with the other, even as they call some fruit- prune, pine and cucumber- be far different from those which be call by those. name in castille. the thing wherein be most resemblance, in my opinion, betwixt, the plane at the indies and those which the ancient do celebrate, be the greatness of the leaf. for that these have. they very great and cool, and the ancient do likewise much esteem they for the greatness and coolness of their leaf. it be also a plant that require much water and in a manner continual, which agree with the sacred scripture that say like to the plane near the water. but in truth there be no more comparison nor resemblance of the one with the other. then there be, as the proverb say, betwixt, a egg and a chestnut. for first the ancient plane carry no fruit, at the least they make no. account the^ of. but the chief reason why they esteem it be for the shadow, for that there be no more sun under a plane than under a roof. and contrariwise, the reason why they shall regard it at the indies, yea make great account thereof- be by reason of this fruit, which be very good, for they have little shade. moreover, the ancient plane have the body so big and the bough so spread, plin ^^b 2.. c^ 1, that pliny report of one licinius, a roman captain, who, with eighteen of his companion, dine at ease in the hollow of one of these plane, and of the emperor caius caligula, who, with eleven of his guest, feast upon the top of a other plane, where he make they a sumptuous banquet. the indian plane have neither so great nor hollow body, not so broad bough. he say, moreover, that the ancient planes grow in italy and in spain, although they have be bring thither from greece and first from asia. but the indian plane grow neither in italy nor in spain. i say they grow not there, for although we have see some at sevill, in the king garden, yet they prosper not. nor. be of any account final whatsoever, they find alike, betwixt the one and the other be very different. for although the leaf of the ancient planes be very great, yet be they not such nor so great as those at the indies. see that pliny compare it to the leaf of a vine or fig tree, pli. lib 11.. c 16, the leaf of the indian plane be of a wonderful bigness and be in a manner sufficient to cover a man from the foot to the head, so as no man can doubt, but there be great difference betwixt the one and the other. but put the case that this indian plane be different from the ancient, yet deserve it no less commendation, it may be more. by reason of the profitable quality it have, it be a plant that make a stock within theearth, out of the which spring many and sundry scion and sprig divide and not join together. these sprig grow big, every one, make a small tree apart, and in grow they cast forth these leaf which be of a fine, green, smooth and great, as i have say, when it be grow to the height of a and a half or two, it put forth one only bough of fruit, whereon sometime there be great number of this fruit and sometime less. i have tell upon some of these bough, three hundred, whereof every one be a span long more or less, and two or three finger big. yet be there much difference herein. betwixt some and other, they take away the rind and all the rest be a firm kernel and tender good to eat and nourish. this fruit incline more to cold than heat. they be accustom to gather the bough, or cluster, as i have say, be green, and put they into vessel where they ripen, be well cover, especial when there be a certain herb mingle with it which serve for this effect. if they suffer, they to ripen on the tree. they have a better taste and a very good smell, like to camoiss or sweet apple. they last almost all the year. for that there be always young one that grow out of this stock so as when one end another begin to yield his fruit, the one be half ripe and the other begin to bud anew. so as one succeed another and the fruit continue the whole year in gather the cluster, they cut the sprig or stalk for that it bear but one and never, but once. but as i have say, the stalk remain and cast forth new siene or stalk until it grow old and die. this plane continue many year and require much. moisture and a very hot ground they put at the foot of it for the better entertain thereof and they make small grove and very thick which be of great profit and revenue unto they, for that it be the fruit they use most at the indies and be general in all place, although they say the first beginning come from ethiopia, and in truth the negro use they much and in some place they serve they as bread, yea, they make wine of they. they eat this fruit raw like other fruit. they likewise roast it and make many sort of potage and conserves and in all thing it serve very well. there be a kind of small plane, white and very delicate, which in hispaniola they call dominique. there be other which be strong and big and red of colour. there grow none in the kingdom of peru but be bring from the indies as from mexico, cuernavaca and other valley, upon the firm land and in some land there be great store of planes, like unto thick grove. if this plant be fit for the fire, it be the most profitable of all other, but it be nothing fit for neither the body, no^ the bough will burn, and much less will it serve for building. be a sappy wood and without force. yet don alonze darzilla, as it be, say: use the leaf of this tree dry. to write a part of the auricana, and in truth it may serve for want of paper. see that the leaf be as broad as a sheet of paper, or little less, and four time as long, of cacao and coca, chap 22.. although the plane be the most profitable, yet that cacao be most esteem at mexico and the coca in peru, in which two tree they have great superstition. the cacao be a fruit little less than almond, yet more sit the which be roast, have no ill^taste. it be so much esteem amongst the indian yea and among the spaniard that it be one of the rich and the great traffic of new spain, for be a dry fruit and that keep long without corruption. they carry whole ship load from the province of guatimalla- the last year a english pirate do burn in the port of guatulco in new spain above a hundred thousand charge of cacao. they use it in steed of money, for with five cacaos they buy one thing, with thirty a other and with a hundred a other, without any contradiction, and they use to give it to the poor that beg for alm. the chief use of this cacao be in a drink which they call, whereof they make great account in that country, foolish and without reason for it be loathsome to such as be not acquaint with it, have askumme or froth that be very unpleasant to taste if they be not very well conceit. thereof. yet it be a drink very much esteem among the indian wherewith they feast noble man. as they pass through their country, the spaniard, both man and woman that be accustom to the country, be very greedy of this chocholate, they say. they make diverse sort of it, some hot, some cold and some temperate, and put therein much of that chili yea. they make paste thereof, the which they say be good for the stomach and against the catarrh whatsoever it be such as have not be nourish. there be not very curious thereof the tree whereon this fruit grow be of reasonable bigness and well fashion. it be so tender that to keep it from the burn of the sun they plant near unto it. a great tree which serve only to shadow it, and they call it the mother of cacao. there be place where they be like to the vine and olive tree of spain, the province where there be great abundance for the traffic of merchandise, be guatimalla. there grow none in peru but coca, wherein they hold a other great superstition which seem to be fabulous. in truth, the traffic of coca in potozi do yearly mount to above half a million of piece. for that they use fourscore and ten or four score and fifteen thousand basket every year. in the year one thousand five hundred eighty three they spend a hundred thousand. a basket of coca in cusco be worth two piece and a half and three. and in potozi it be ready, worth four piece and five tomines and five piece try it be a kind of merchandise by the which all their market and fair be make with great expedition. this coca whereof they make such account be a small green leaf which grow upon small tree about a fathom high and in hot and moist ground. every four month it cast forth this leaf, which they call or tremoy. it require great care in plant, be very tender and much more to keep it. when it be gather they lie it in order in long and narrow basket and so lade their sheep of the country which go in troop with one, two or three thousand basket of this merchandise they bring. it common from the andes and valley where there be a extreme heat and where it rain continual the most part of the year, wherein the indian endure much labour and pain to entertain it and often many die for that. they go from the sierre and cold place to till and gather they in the andes and therefore there have be great question and diversity of opinion among learned man whether it be more expedient to pull up these tree or to let they grow. but in the end they remain. the indian esteem it much and in the time of their king it be not lawful for any of the common people to use this coca without licence from the governor. their use be to carry it in their mouth, chaw it and suck out the juice, but they swallow it not. they say it. give they great courage and be very please unto they. many grave man hold this as a superstition and a mere imagination. for my part, and to speak the truth, i persuade not myself that it be a imagination, but contrariwise i think it work and give force and courage to the indian. for we see the effect which can be attribute to imagination, as to go some day without meat but only a handful of coca and other like effect, the sauce wherewith they do eat this coca be proper enough, whereof i have taste, and it be like the taste of leather. the indian, mingle it with the ash of bone, burn and beat into powder, or with lime, as other affirm, which seem to they please and of a good taste. and they say it do they much good, they willing, employ their money therein and use it as money. yet all these thing be not inconvenient, be not the hazard of the traffic thereof wherein so many man be occupy. the signor use coca as a delicate and royal thing which they offer most in their sacrifice. burn it in honour of their idol, of maguey, tunal cochenille, anir and cotton, chap 23.. maguey be a tree of wonder whereof the notary, or chapeton as the indian call they, be wont to write miracle in that it yield. water, wine, oil, vinegar, honey, syrup, thread, needle and a thousand other thing. it be a tree which the indian esteem much in new spain and have common in their dwelling, some one of they for the maintenance of life. it grow in the field and have great and large leaf, at the end whereof be a strong and sharp point which serve to fasten little pin or to sow as a needle, and they draw out of this leaf as it be a kind of thread which they use. they cut the body, which be big when it be tender, wherein be a great hollowness by which the substance mount from the root and be a liquor which they drink like water, be sweet and fresh. this liquor be sodden, turn like wine, which grow to vinegar, suffer it to sour and boil it more. it become as honey and boil it half. it serve as syrup, which be healthful enough and of good taste. in my judgement, it be better than the syrup of raisin. thus do they boil this liquor and use it in diverse sort, whereof they draw a good quantity. for that, in some season they draw daily some pot of this liquor. there be also of these tree in peru, but they be not so profitable as in new spain. the wood of this tree be hollow and soft and serve to keep fire, like to the match of a harquebus, and preserve it long. i have see the indian use it to that end. the tunal be another famous tree in new spain. if we may call a tree, a heap of leaf gather together one upon another, it be the strange fashion tree of all other. for first there grow one leaf out of the ground than another upon it, and so one upon one till it come to his perfection. but as the leaf grow up and on the side, those underneath do become great and lose in a manner the form of leaf, make a body and branch which be sharp, prick and deform, so as in some place they do call it a thistle. there be thistle or wild tunal, the which do carry no fruit, or else it be very prick without any profit. there be likewise plant tunal which yield fruit, much esteem among the indian, the which they call, and they be much great than plumb and long. they open the shell which be fat, and within it be meat and small grain, like to those of fig, which be very sweet. they have a good taste, especial the white which have a please smell, but the red be not usual so good. there be another sort of tunal which they esteem much more, although it yield no fruit. yet it bear a other commodity and profit, which be of the grain, for that certain small worm breed in the leaf of this tree, when it be well, husband and be thereunto fasten cover with a certain small fine web which do compass they in dainty, and this be that indian cochenille so famous, and wherewith they die in grain, they let it dry and be dry, carry it into spain, which be a great and rich merchandise. the arobe of this cochenille or grain be worth many ducat in. the fleet the year 1587.. they do bring five thousand six hundred seventy seven arobe, which amount to two hundred four score three thousand seven hundred and fifty piece, and common there come every year as great a wealth. these tunal grow in temperate ground incline to cold. in peru there grow none to this day. i have see some plant in spain, but they deserve not estimation. i will speak something likewise of the, although it come not from a tree but from a herb, for that it serve for the die of cloth and be a merchandise which agree with the grain. it grow in great abundance in new spain, from whence there come in the fleet. i mention 5263. arobe or thereabouts which amount to. so many piece cotten likewise grow upon small shrub and great tree, like to little apple, which do open and yield forth this web which be gather, they spin to make stuff. it be one of the thing at the indies of great profit and most in use for it serve they both instead of flax and wool to make their garment. it grow in a hot soil and there be great store in the valley and sea coast of peru, in new spain, the philippines and china, but the great store of any place that i know be in the province of tucuman, in that of saint croix of the sierre and at paraguey. whereas cotten be their chief revenue, they carry cotton into spain from the. island of saint dominike and the year that i speak of, there come 64000.. arobe at the indies, whereas this cotton grow, they make cloth which both the man and woman use common, make table napkin. thereof yea and sail for their ship. there be some course and other that be fine and delicate. they die it into diverse colour, as we do by our woollen cloth in europe of mamey, guayavo and paltos, chap 24.. these plant we have speak of be the most profitable of the indies and the most necessary for the life of man. yet there be many other that be good to eat, among the which the mamey be esteem, be in fashion, like to great peach and big they have one or. two stone within. they and their meat be some what hard. there be some sweet and other somewhat sour and have the rind hard. they make conserves of the meat of this fruit which be like to marmelade. the use of this fruit be reasonable, good, but the conserves they make thereof be better. they grow in land. i have not see any in peru. it be a great tree, well fashion and a reasonable fair leaf. the guayavo be other tree which common carry a ill fruit full of sour kernel and be like to little apple. it be a tree little esteem upon the firm land and at the land, for they say it smell like to the punaise. the taste and savour of this fruit. be very gross and the substance unwholesome. in s dominique and other land there be whole mountain full of these guayavo and they say there be no such kind of tree before the spaniard come there, but that they bring they. they know not from whence. this tree have multiply infinite for that there be no beast that will eat the kernel or the grain, so as be thus scatter on the earth, be hot and moist. it multiply in this sort. in peru the guayavo differ from other for that the fruit be not red but white, neither have it any ill smell, but be of a very good taste and, of what sort of guayavo soever it be, the fruit be as good as the best. of spain, especial of those which they call guayavos de matos and of other little white guayvilles. it be a fruit reasonable, wholesome and agree with the stomach, be of a strong digestion and cold. the palta common. be hot and delicate. the palto be a great tree and carry a fair leaf which have a fruit like to great pear within it, have a great stone and all the rest be soft meat so as when they be full ripe they be, as it be, butter and have a delicate taste. in peru the palta be great and have a very hard scale which may be take off whole. this fruit be most usual in mexico. have a thin skin which may be peel like a apple. they hold it for a very wholesome meat and, as i have say, it decline a little from heat. these mamaye, guayavos and paltos be the indian peach, apple and pear, and yet will i rather choose they of europe but some other, by use, or it may be by affection, do more esteem those of the indies? i doubt not. but such as have not see nor taste of these fruit will take small pleasure to read this discourse. yea, they will grow weary to hear it, as i have do in write it, which make i, to abridge it, speak of some other sort of fruit, for it be impossible to entreat of they all, of chicocapote, amonas and capollis, chap 25.. some desirous to augment. thing at the indies have give out that there be no kind of fruit like unto cotignac or marmelade, and another which taste like a meat make of almond and cream, which they call blanckemanger, for that, the taste of they deserve. these name the marmalade, be that which they call capotes or chicocapotes, which have a sweet taste and near unto the colour of marmalade, some crollos, for so they call the spaniard bear at the indies say that this fruit pass all the fruit of spain in excellency. yet be i not of that opinion. at the least they say it pass all other fruit in taste, but i will not dwell upon this question for that it do not deserve it, those chicocapotes or capotes. wherein there be little difference, grow in the hot part of new spain. neither have i knowledge of any such fruit in the firm land of peru. as for the blanckemanger, it be that or guanavana, which grow in the firm land, which be fashion like unto a pear, a little sharp and open within it, be white, tender and soft like butter, sweet and of a- please taste it. be no whit meat, though. they call it blanckemanger, but in truth they have add much unto it by give this name, although it be delicate and of a saucy and delicious taste and according to the judgement of some, it be hold for the best fruit of the indies, yet have it many black kernel within it. and the best which i have see be in new spain where the capoly grow which be like unto cherry with a stone, but some, what big the form and shape, be like unto cherry of a good taste, be sweet and sharp. but i have not see any capollye in any other country of many sort of fruit: tree of almond of the andes and almond of chachapoyas, chap 26.. it be not possible to reckon all the fruit and tree at the indies, for that i remember not many, and there be many more whereof i have no knowledge and in my opinion it be troublesome to speak of all those. i now remember there be some gross fruit, as those which they call lucume of. which fruit, they speak in a proverb that it be a counterfeit price. the guanos, pacaye, hubos and the nut which they call imprison, which fruit, seem to many to be the same kind of nut we have in spain. yea, they say. if they be often transplant from place to place, they will carry nut altogether like to those of spain, and the reason why the fruit be so unpleasant be for that they be wild. to conclude, we ought well to consider the providence and riches of the creator who impart to so diverse part of the world such variety of fruit tree, all for the service of man that inhabit the earth. and it be a admirable thing to see so many different form taste. and effect unknown, whereof we do never hear speak before the discovery of the indies, and whereof pliny himself, dioscorides and theophrastes yea, the most curious, have no knowledge, notwithstanding all their search and diligence. there have be some curious man of our age which have write some treatise of the indian plant of herb and river and of their operation for physic, to who they may fly for their better instruction. i only pretend, and in few word, to treat superficial of that which come to memory touch this subject. yet do i not think it good to pass away under silence the or indian palm by reason of a very notable property it have. i call they palm, not proper or that it bear date, but that they be tree like to other palm. they be high and strong and the high they grow, the broad they stretch out their branch. these yield a fruit which they likewise call, whereof they common make vessel to drink in and some they say have a virtue against poison and to cure the pain in the side. the nut and meat be dry, be good to eat and come near in taste to green chestnut. when the coco be tender upon the tree, the substance within it be as it be milk which they drink for daintiness and to refresh they in time of heat. i have see of these tree in s jean de. port and other part of the indies, and they report- a wonderful thing- that every month or moon this tree cast forth a new branch of this, so as it yield fruit twelve time in the year, as it be write in the apocalypse, and in truth this seem like unto it, for that all the branch be of different age, some beginning, other be ripe and some half ripe. these be common of the form and bigness of a small melon. there be of another kind, which they call coquillo, the which be a better fruit, whereof there be some in chille. they be some what less than nut, but more round. there be another kind of which have not the kernel so oily, but within they have a great number of small fruit like almond, like unto the grain of a poungarnet. these almond be thrice as big as those of castille and resemble they in taste, though they be more sharp and likewise moist and oily it be a good meat. they use it also in feast, for lack of almond, to make marchpane and such other thing. they call they almond of the andes for that. these grow abundant upon the andes of peru. they be so strong and hard as to open they. they must beat they with a great stone when they fall from the tree if they chance to hit any one on the. head, he have no more need of any surgeon. it be a incredible thing that within the hollow of these, which be no big than the rest or little more, there be such a multitude of these almond. but as touch almond and other fruit all tree must yield to the almond of chachapo^^s, which i can otherwise call it, be the most please delicate and wholesome fruit of all that i have see at the indies. yea, a learned physician, do affirm that amongst all the fruit at the indies or in spain, none come near these almond in excellency. there be both great and less than those of the andes, but all be fat than those of castille. they be very tender to eat and they have much juice and substance and be oily and very pleasant. they grow upon high tree, bear great leaf and as it be a pre^ious thing, so nature have give they a good cover and defence, be in a husk somewhat big and more prick than a chestnut. yet when this husk be dry, they easy draw forth the grain. they say that the ape, who be very greedy of this fruit and whereof there be abundance in chachapoyas of peru, which be the only country, to my knowledge, where these tree do grow, fear they shall prick they. and yet, desirous to draw forth the almond, they cast they from the top of the tree against the stone and have break the husk. they open they to eat the fruit, at their pleasure, of many and diverse flower and of some tree which yield only a flower. and how the indian do use they chap 27.. the indian be great lover of flower, and in new spain more than in any other part of the world, and therefore they be accustom to make many kind of nosegay. which there they call suchilles, with such pretty variety and art as nothing can be more please. they have a custom among they that the chief man offer their suchillo or nosegay in honour to nobleman and to their guest, and they present we with such abundance as we pass through that country as we know not what to do with they, and at this day they use the principal flower of castill to that end. for that they grow better there than here as gillyflower, rose, jasmin, violet, orange flower and other sort which they have transport ou^^f. spain. the rise tree grow too fast in some place, so as they bear no rose, it chance one day that a rose tree be burn and the scion which sprowt out present bare abundance of rose, and thereby they learn to prune they and to cut off the superfluous branch, so as at this day they yield reasonable store of ros^s. but beside these kind of flower, which have be transport from hence, there be many other, who name i do not know whereof, some be red, blue, yellow, violet and white, with a thousand different colour, which the indian do use to carry on their head as feather for ornament. true it be that many of these flower, be only please to the sight, have no good. savour, either they be gross or else they have none at all. and yet there be some of a excellent scent, as those which grow upon a tree- term by they floripondio- or carry flower which bear no fruit. but only these flower, which be great than the lily and be like to little bell, all white, which have within they small thread as we see in the lily. it leave not all the year to bear these flower who smell, be wonderful, sweet and agreeable, especial in the cool of the morning, the viceroy don francisco de toledo send of these tree unto king philip as a thing worthy to be plant in royal garden in new spain. the indian esteem much of a flower which they call volosuchil, which signify flower of the heart, for that it bear the form of a heart and be not much less. there be likewise a other great tree which bear this kind of flower without any fruit. it have a strong savour and in my opinion, too violent, the which may seem to some more please it be a thing. well know that the flower which they call of the sun ^^th the figure of the sun and turn according to the motion thereof. there be other kind, which they call gilleflower of the indies, the which be like to a fine orange tawny or a violet. those have no scent of any account, but only be fair. to the eye, there be other flower which, beside the bea^^ie of the eye, although they have no smell yet, have they a savour like unto cress, the which, if you shall eat with outlook of they, you will judge they to be no other. the flower of granadille be hold for a admirable thing, and they say it have in it the mark of the passion, and that therein they note the nail, the pillar, the whip and crown of thorn and the wound wherein they be not altogether without reason. and yet to find out and observe these thing, it require some piety to cause belief. but it be very exquisite and fair to the eye, although it have no smell, the fruit which they also. call granadille be eat and drink or, to speak more proper, suck for a refresh. this fruit be sweet, and too sweet, after some opinion. the indian have use in their feast and dance to carry flower in their hand and the king and nobleman carry they for their greatness. for this reason we common see their ancient picture with flower in their hand, as we see here, with glove. i think this sufficient touch flower. they use bazilic to this effect, although it be no flower but a herb only, which they be won^ to plant careful in their garden. but now they regard it not so as it grow, only about their pool and pond of balm, chap 28.. the sovereign creator, have not only fashion. plant to serve as meat but also for recreation, for physic and for the cure of man. i have speak somewhat of those that serve for nourishment, which be the chief, and a little of those that serve for recreation. and now we be to entreat of those which be proper for physic, wherein i will speak something. and although all plant be medicinal when they be well know and apply, yet there be some thing especial which we see direct ordain by the creator for physic and for the health of man, as liquor oil, gum and rozine, which come from diverse plant and herb and which easy show by experience whereto they be proper. above all balm. be with reason, esteem for the excellent smell but much more for the exquisite effect it have to cure wound and diverse other remedy, as experience have teach in the cure of disease. the balm which come from the west indies, be not of the same kind of right balm which they bring from alexandria or cairo, and in old time be in judea, which judea, as pliny write, do, of all the world. possess this greatness until the emperor vespasian bring it to rome and into italy. pli, lib 12, c, 15. the reason why i say the liquor of the one and the other be not of one kind, be for that the tree from whence it come be very different for the. balm tree of palestine be small and fashion like to a vine, as plinic report. who have see it and those that at this day that have see they in the east say as much as also the holy scripture call the place where the balm thicken can^. 1. vine of enguaddy for the resemblance it have to vine at the indies. i have see the tree from whence they draw the balm, which be as big as a poungarnet tree and some thing near the fashion and if my memory fail, i not it have nothing common with the vine, although that strabo write that the ancient tree of balm, strab, lib 16. geograp be of the bigness of a poungarnet tree, but in their accident and operation their liquor be alike, as likewise they be in their admirable smell and in the cure and heal of wound. in colour and substance, see they report of other balm that there be some white vermilion, green and black, the which be likewise see in that of the indies. and as they draw forth the ancient in cut and make incision in the bark to cause the liquor to distill out, so do they with that at the indies, although it distill in great abundance. and as in the ancient, there be one kind which be pure, the which they call opobalsamum, which be the very tear that distill. so as there be another sort, which be not so exquisite, the which they draw from the bark and leave strain and boil on the fire, the which they call the like. be also in the indian balm there be one, pure that distill from the tree, and other that the indian draw out by strain and boil the leaf and wood. yea, they do sophisticate and augment it with other liquor to make it increase. it be not without reason they call it balm, for in truth it be so, although it be not of the same kind of the ancient, yet it be much esteem and shall be more if the great abundance be not the cause, as in emerald and pearl, that which import most. be the use wherein it be employ for cream and unction in the church and in such veneration for that, the apostolic sea have give liberty to give cream of balm at the indies and that they shall use it in confirmation and other ceremony which they use. they bring balm to spain from new spain, from the province of guatimalla, from chiappa and other place where it abound most, although the most esteem be that which come from the island of tollu, which be upon the main land not far from carthagene. this balm be white and common. they hold the white to be more perfect than the red, although pliny give the first place to the vermilion, pli^ li 12. c 25, the second to the. white, the three to green and the last to black. but it seem that strabo esteem more the white balm as we do. monardes discourse at large of the indian balm in the first and second part, especial of that of carthagene and tollu, which be all one. i have not find that the indian in old time do much esteem balm, nor yet employ it in any important use, although monardes say that the indian cure their wound therewith, and from thence the spaniard learn it of amber and other oil, gum and drug which they bring from the indies, chap 29.. next to balm, amber hold the second place. it be another liquor which be likewise sweet and medicinal but more thick and turn into a paste of a hot complexion and a good perfume, the which they apply to wound bruise and other necessity, wherein i will refer myself to the physician especial, to doctor monardes, who in his first part, have write of this liquor and many other, that be physical, which come from the indies, this amber, come from new spain, which have that advantage above other province in gum, liquor and juice of tree whereby they have such abundance of matter for perfume and physic, as be the whereof there come great store copal or suchicopal, which be another kind, storax and incense, which have excellent operation and have a very good smell. fit for fumigation, likewise the tacamahaca and caranna, which be also very medicinal. they bring likewise from this province oil of aspic, which the physician and painter use much, the one for plaster, the other to varnish their picture. they bring also for the physician, cassia fistule, the which grow plentiful in s dominique. it be a great tree which carry these cane as his fruit. they bring in the fleet wherein i come from s dominique, forty eight quintalle of cassia fistule, be not less know for a thousand remedy wherein it be use. there come in the same fleet fifty quintalle from the same island. there be much of this sa^cepar^ille at peru, and most excellent in the province of gua^aquill, which be under the line. many go to be cure into this province and it be the opinion of some that the pure water only which they drink give they health, for that it pass by root, as i have say, from whence it draw this virtue, so as there need no great cover or garment to make a man sweat in that country. the wood of guayac, which they call, or indian wood, grow abundant in the same land and be as heavy as iron, so as it present sink in the water hereof. they bring in the same fleet 350. quintal, and they may have bring twenty yea, a hundred thousand of this wood if there be use for it. there come in the same fleet and from the same island. 130.. quintalle of bresil wood, the which be fiery red, so well know and much use in die and other thing. there be at the indies infinite number of other aromatical wood, gum, oil and drug, so as it be not possible to name they all, neither do it now much import. i say only that in the time of the king of c^sco and the mexicaine king, there be many great personage expert in cure of disease with simple and do goodly cure, have the knowledge of the many virtue and property of herb, root, wood and plant which grow there and whereof the ancient of europe have have no knowledge. there be a thousand of these simple, fit to purge as the root of mechoacan, the. pignon of punua, the conserve of guanucquo, the oil of figtree and many other thing, the which be well apply and in time they hold to be of no less efficacy than the drug that come from the east, the which may be see in read the discourse which monardes have make in the first and second part, where he treat ample of tobacco or petum, whereof they have make notable experience against poison. tobacco be a small tree or plant, common enough, the which have in it rare virtue as, among other, it serve for a counterpoison, like to many and diverse other plant, for the creator of all thing have impart his virtue at his pleasure, not willing that any thing shall grow idle, but it. be another sovereign gift to man to know they and their proper use, the which the same creator give to who he please. doctor francis hernandes have make a goodly work upon this subject of indian plant, liquor and other physical thing by the king, express commission and commandment cause all the plant at the indies to be lively paint which they say be above a thousand two hundred, and that the work cost above three score thousand ducat. out of which work the doctor antonius, a italian physician, have make a curious extract. send he to the foresay book that desire more exact to know the plant at the indies, especial for physic of great forest at the indies of cedar, of ceivas and other great tree. chap 30.. although from the beginning the earth do bring forth plant and tree by the commandment of the lord, yet have it yield more in one place than in another. and beside the plant and tree which by the industry of man have be transplant and carry from place to place, there be many which nature itself have bring forth. i do believe that of this sort there be more at the new world, which we do call the indies, either in number or diversity, than in the old, as europe, asia or africa. the reason be for that the climate at the indies be general hot and moist, as we have declare in the second book, against the opinion of the ancient, which cause the earth. natural for to bring forth a infinite number of wild plant whereby the great part of the indies be inhabitable, be almost impossible to travel by reason of the wood and thick forest that be there, which they labour daily to cut down. it have be needful pass through some part of the indies, especial where they new enter, to make their way in, cut down tree and pull up bush, so that, as some religious man have write that have try it, they can not sometime have pass above a league. in a day, one of our brother, a man worthy of credit report unto we, that be stray in the mountain, not know which way he shall pass, he fall among such thick bush that he be force to go upon they without set foot to the ground by the space of fifteen whole day and to see the sun or to mark some way in this thick forest full of wood. he be force to climb to the top of the high tree to discover, he that shall read the discourse of his travel, how often he be lose and the way he pass with the strange adventure that happen unto he. the which i have write brief, be so worthy the knowledge and have myself travel. little over the mountain at the indies, be it. but the eighteen league, betwixt de dios and panama, may well judge what great forest there be, so as have no winter in those part to nip they with cold and the humidity of the heaven and earth. be so great as the mountain bring forth infinite forest and the plain which they call savanas, great plenty of grass. there be no want of pasture for feed, of timber building, nor of wood for fuel. it be impossible to set down the difference and form of so many wild tree for that the name of the great part be unknown: cedar in old time. so much esteem be there very common both for building and ship, and they be of diverse sort, some white and some red, very odoriferant. there be great store of bay tree, very pleasant to behold, upon the andes of peru, upon the mountain in the land of nicaragua and in new spain. there be also infinite number of palm and ceivas, whereof the indian make their canoe, which be boat make of one piece. they bring into spain from the havana excellent timber. in the island of cuba there be infinite number of like tree, as ebon, caovana, grenadille, cedar and other kind which i do not know. there be great pine tree in new spain, though they be not so strong as those in spain. they bear no pignous or kernel but empty apple. the oak, as they call they of guaiaquil be a excellent wood and sweet when they cut it. yea, there be kane, or most high reed of who bough or small reed. they do make bottle and pitcher to carry water and do likewise use they in their building. there be likewise the wood of mansle or fir, whereof they make mast for their ship and they hold they as strong as iron. be a tree of many virtue which cast forth small bough, whereof the indian make wine. in mexico they call it the tree of peru. for that it come from thence, but it grow also in new spain, and better than those in peru. there be a thousand other tree which be a superfluous labour to entreat of, whereof some be of a exceed greatness. i will speak only of one, which be in tlaco, chavoya, three league from guayaca in new spain. this tree be measure within, be hollow, be find to have nine fathom and without near to the root, sixteen and somewhat high twelve. this tree be strike with lightning from the top to the bottom, through the heart, the which cause this hollowness. they say that before the thunder fall upon it, it be able to shadow a thousand man and therefore they do assemble there for their dance. and superstition. yet to this day there do remain some bough and verdure, but not much. they know not what kind of tree it be, but they say it be a kind of cedar. such as shall find this strange, let they read what pliny report of the plane of lydia plin, lib 12.. c 1 the hollow whereof contain four score foot and one and seem rather a cabin or a house than the hollow of a tree, his bough like a whole wood, the shadow whereof cover a great part of the field by that which be write of this tree. we have no great cause to wonder at the weaver who have his dwell and loom in the hollow of a chestnut tree and of another chestnut tree, if it be not the very same, into the hollow whereof there enter eighteen man on horseback and pass out without disturb one another. the indian do common use their idolatry in these tree so strange and deform even, as do the ancient gentile, as some writer of our time do. report of plant and fruit which have be carry out of spain to the indies, chap 31.. the indian have receive more profit and have be better recompense in plant that have be bring from spain than in any other merchandise, for that those few which be carry from. the indies into spain, grow little there and multiply not, and contrariwise, the great number that have be carry from spain to the indies prosper well and multiply great. i know not whether i shall attribute it to the bounty of the plant that go from hence or to the goodness of the soil that be there. final there be at the indies any good thing that spain bring forth, in some place it be better, in some worse, as wheat, barley, herb and all kind of pulse, also lettuce, colewort, radish, onion, garlic, parsley, turnip, parsenep, becengenes or apple of love, siccorie, beet, spinach, pease, bean, vetch and final whatsoever grow here of any profit. so as all that have voyage thither have be curious to carry. seed of all sort and all have grow, although diverse, some more, some less. as for those tree that have most abundant fructify, be orange tree, lemon, citron and other of that sort, in some part there be at this day, as it be, whole wood and forest of orange tree, the which seem strange unto i. i ask who have plant the field with so many orange tree they make. i answer that it do come by chance for that orange be fall to the ground and rot. their seed do spring, and of those which the water have carry away into diverse part, these wood grow so thick, which seem to i a very good reason. i have say that this fruit have general increase most. at the indies, for that i have not be in any place. but i find orange tree, for that all their soil be hot and moist, which this tree most desire. there grow not any upon the sierre or mountain, but they carry they from the valley or sea coast. the conserve of orange which they do make at the land be the best i have see any where peach press and apricocke have great multiply, especial in new spain. at peru there grow few of these kind of fruit except peach, and much less in the land. there grow apple and pear yet, but scarce. there be but few plumb, but abundance of fig chief in peru. they find quince in all the country of the indies. and in new spain, in such abundance as they give we fifty choice, one for half a rial. there be great store of pomegranate, but they be all sweet, for the sharp be not there esteem. there be very good melon in some part of peru. cherry, both wild and tame, have not prosper well at the indies, the which i do not impute to want of temperature, for that there be of all sort, but to carelessness or that they have not well observe the temperature. to conclude, i do not find that in those part there want any dainty fruit. as for gross fruit, they have no beillotte nor chestnut. neither do i find that any have grow there to this day. almond grow there, but rare. they carry from spain, for such as be dainty mouth, both almond nut and filbert, but i have not know they have any meddler or servise which import little. in my judgement, this may suffice to show that there want no delightful fruit. now let we speak somewhat of plant that profit and which have be carry from spain, and so will end that treatise be too troublesome- of grape, vine, olive, mulberry and kane of sugar, chap 32.. i mean by profitable plant those which, beside that which they eat in the house, bring silver to their master. the chief of these be the whereof come wine, vinegar, grape green and dry verjuice and syrup, but the wine be the best there. grow no wine nor grape in the island nor firm land. but in new spain there be some vine which bear grape and yet make no wine. the cause be for that: the grape ripen not well by reason of the rain that fall in the month of july and august, which hinder their ripen, so as they serve only to eat. they carry wine out of spain and from the canary to all part of the indies, except peru and the realm of chille, where there be vine that yield excellent wine, which increase daily, both in quantity, for that it be a great riches in that country, and in beauty, for that they be become, with time and practice, more expert vignerous. the vine of peru. be common in hot valley, where there be water, which they water with the hand, because there fall no rain at all from heaven, and upon the and sierre it come not in time there be some place where the vine be not water, neither from heaven nor earth, and yet they increase in great abundance, as in the valley of yca and in the ditch that they call villacuzi, in which place they find ditch or the earth sink down amongst the dead sand, which be throughout the year of a wonderful coolness, and yet it rain. not there at any time, neither be there any manner of mean to water it, artificial, the reason be because the soil be spongeous and suck up the water of. the river that fall from the mountain which moisten these sand, or else it be the moistness of the sea, as other suppose, which pass over this sand, be the cause why it be not barren nor unprofitable, as the philosopher teach, the vine have, so increase there. as for this cause only, the tithe of the church be multiply five or six time double within these twenty year. the most fertile valley for vine be victor, near to arequipa, yca in the territory of lima and caraguato in the country of chuquiavo. they carry this wine to potozi, cusco and diverse part, which yield a great revenue. for, notwithstanding all the abundance, they have a bottle or arobe be there worth five or six ducat. and if it be spanish wine, as they common carry in their fleet, it be worth ten or twelve. they make wine like to that of spain, in the realm of chille be, in the same climate, but it corrupt be carry to peru. they eat the grape where they can drink the wine, and it be strange that in the city of cusco you shall find ripe grape all the year long. the reason be, as they say, for that those valley bring forth fruit in diverse month of the year, either for that they cut their vine in diverse season, or that this variety proceed from the quality of the soil. but whatsoever it be, it be most certain there be some valley which carry fruit. all the year. if any one wonder at this, it may be he will wonder much more at that which i shall say, and perchance not believe it. there be tree in peru whereof the one part yield fruit one six month of the year and the other half part yield fruit the other six month. in malla, which be thirteen league from the city of king, there be a fig tree whereof the one half, which be towards the south, be green and yield his fruit one season of the year, that be when it be summer, upon the sierre, and the other, moiety towards the or sea coast, be green and yield his fruit in the other contrary season, when it be summer, upon the which. grow from the diverse temperature and the air which come from the one part and the other. the revenue of wine there be not small, but it go not out of the country but the silk that be make in new spain be transport into other country. as to peru, there be no mulberry tree in the indies but such as be bring from spain and they grow well, especial in the province which they call mistecqua, where there be silkworm and they put to work the silk they gather whereof they make very good taffeta. yet to this day they have make neither damask satin nor velvet. the sugar yet be a great revenue, for they not only spend it at the indies but also they carry much into spain, for the cane grow exceed well in many part of the indies. they have build their engine in the land, in mexico, in peru, and in other part, which yield they a very great revenue. it be tell i that the engine for sugar in nasca be worth yearly above thirty thousand piece of revenue, that of chicama join to truxillo, be likewise of great revenue, and those of new spain be of no less. and it be a strange thing to see what store they consume at the indies. they bring from the island of s dominique in the fleet wherein i come, eight. hundred ninety eight chest of sugar, which be, as i do see ship at port, every chest, in my opinion, wey eight arobe, every arobe weigh five and twenty pound, which be two hundred weight of sugar be the chief revenue of these land. so much be man give to the desire of sweet thing. there be likewise olive and olive tree at the indies, i say in mexico and in peru. yet have there not be to this day any mill for oil, for that they eat all their olive and dress they well. they find the charge be great to make oil than the profit, and therefore they carry all the oil they do spend from spain. and here we will end with plant and will pass to such beast as be at the indies of beast, bear, wool and of cow, chap 33.. i ^inde there be three kind of beast at the indies, whereof some have be carry from spain, other be of the same kind we have in europe and yet not carry by the spaniard, and other be proper to the indies, whereof there be none in spain of the first kind, be sheep, kine, goat, swine, horse, ass dog, cat and other such beast, for there be of all these kind at the indies the small. cattle have great multiply and if they can make profit of their wool by send they into europe, it be one of the great riches the indies have, for there the flock of sheep have great pasture whereas their feed fail. not in peru there be such store of pasture and feed as no man have any proper to himself, but every man feed his troop where he please. for this reason there be common great store of flesh and very good, cheap and all other thing that come from sheep as milk and cheese. for a time they lose their woolle, until that some begin to husband it and to make cloth and cover, which have be a great help for the poor sort of the country. for that the cloth of castille be very dear there. there be many clothier in peru but more in new spain. yet the cloth that come from spain be far better, whether the will be more fine or the work man more expert. in former time there be man that do possess threescore and ten yea, a hundred thousand sheep, and at this day they have not many less. if this be in europe it be a very great substance, but in that country it be but a mean wealth. in many part of the indies, and i think in the great part, small cattle do not increase and profit well by reason that the grass be high and the soil so vicious that they can feed. so well as great cattle and therefore there be a infinite number of line, whereof there be two kind. some be ^ame and go in troop, as in the land of charca and other province of peru, as also in all new spain. from these tame kine they draw such profit as they do in spain that be the flesh, butter calf and ox to till the ground. the other kind be wild, which live in the mountain and forest and therefore they tame they not, neither have they any master to who they be proper both for the roughness and thickness of the forest as also for the great multitude there be, and he that first kill they be the master, as of any wild beast. these wild kine have so multiply in s dominique and thereabouts that they troop together in the field and wood by thousand, have no master to who they appertain. they hunt these beast only for their hide. they go to the field on horseback with their weapon to hough. they course the kine and when they have strike any and stay they, they be their own. they flay they and carry the hide home, leave the flesh which every one neglect for the abundance there be so, as some have testify in this island, that in some place the air have be corrupt with the abundance of these stink carcase. the hide they bring into spain be one of the best revenue of the land and of new. spain. in the fleet the year 1^87, there come from s dominique 3^444 hide and from new spain 64350.. which they value at 96532. piece. so as when they discharge one of these fleet, it be admirable to behold the river of sevill and in the arsenal where they unlade so many hide and so much merchandise, there be also great number of goat who chief profit be their tallow, beside their kidmilke and other commodity. for that both rich and poor use this tallow for light, for as there be a great quantity, so do they make very good account of it, yea more than of oil. but all the tallow they use be only of the male. they ice their skin for shoe. yet i hold they not so good as those which be carry from castill horse have multiply there and be very excellent in many place. yea, in many part there be race find as good as the best in spain as well for pass of a carrier and for pomp, as also for travel, and therefore they use horse most common although there be no want of moil whereof there be many especial where they make their carriage by land. there be no great number of ass, have no great use for they, neither for travel nor service. there be some few ca^mells. i have see some in peru that be bring from the canary and have multiply there. little in s dominique dog have so multiply in. number and bigness as at this day it be the scourge and affliction of that island. for they eat the sheep and go in troop through the field such that kill they be reward, like to they that kill woolve in spain. at the first there be no dog at the indies, but some beast like unto little dog, the, which the indian call alco, and therefore they call all dog that go from spain by the same name, by reason of the resemblance that be betwixt. they, the indian, do so love these little dog that they will spare their meat to feed they, so as when they travel in the country they carry they with they upon their shoulder or in their bosom, and when they be sick they keep they with they without any use but only for company of some beast of europe which the spaniard find at the indies, and how they shall pass thither chap 34.. it be certain that they have carry from spain all these beast whereof i have speak, of which kind there be none at the indies, when they be first discover, about a hundred year since. for beside that it may be well approve by witness at this day, live it be also a. sufficient argument to see that the indian, in their tongue, have no proper word to signify these beast, but they use the same spanish name, although they be corrupt for be ignorant of the thing they take, the word common to those place from whence they come. i have find this a good rule to discern what thing the indian have before the spaniard come there and what they have not, for they give name to those they have and know before and have, give new name to these that be new, come unto they, which common be the same spanish name, although they pronounce they after their manner. as for a horse, wine and wheat they find of some sort of beast that be in europe and be not carry thither by the spaniard. there be lion, tiger, bear, boar, fox and other fierce and wild beast whereof we have treat in the first book, so as it be not likely they shall pass to the indies by sea, be impossible to swim the ocean and it be a folly to imagine that man have embark they with they. it follow, therefore, that this world join with the new in some part by which these beast may pass genes 6. and so, by little and little, multiply this world. the lion which i have see be not red, neither have they such hair as they usual. paint they with. they be grey and not so furious as they seem in picture. the indian assemble in troop to hunt the lion and make as it be a circle, which they do call chaco, wherewith they environ they and after they kill they with stone, staff and other weapon. these lion use to climb tree where be mount. the indian kill they with lance and crossbow, but more easy with harquebuss. the tiger be more fierce and cruel and be more dangerous to meet because they break forth and assail man in treason. they be spot, as the historiographer describe they. i have hear some report that these tiger be very fierce against the indian, yet will they not adventure at all upon the spaniard, or very little, and that they will choose a indian in the midst of many spaniard and carry he away. the bear, which in cusco they call be of the same kind that we be, and keep in the ground. there be few swarm of bee, for that their honniecombe be find in tree or under the ground and not in hive as in castille. the honey comhe which i have see in the province of charcas, which they call chiguanas be, of a grey colour, have little juice and be more like unto sweet straw than to honey comb, they say the bee. be little like unto fly and that they swarm under the earth, the honey be sharp and black. yet in some place there be better and the comb better fashion, as in the province of tucuman, in chille and in carthagene. i have not see nor hear speak^ of wild boar, but of fox and other wild beast that eat their cattle and foul. there be more than their shepherd will willing have. beside these beast that be furious and hurtful, there be other that be profitable and have not be transport by the spaniard as stags and diere, whereof there be gro^t abundance in all the forest but the great part be a kind of diere without horn. at the least i have never see nor hear. speak of other and all be without horn, like unto. it seem not hard to believe but be almost certain that all these beast, for their lightness and be natural wild, have pass from one world to a other by some part where they join. see that in the great land, far from the main land. i have not hear that there be any, though i have make diligent inquiry of fowl which be here and be at the indies and how they can pass thither. chap 35. we may more easy believe the same of bird, and that there be of the same kind that we have as partridge, turtle, pigeon, stockdove, quail and many sort of falcon which they send from new spain and peru to the nobleman of spain, for they make great account of they. there be also heron and eagle of diverse kind, and there be no doubt, but these bird and such like have soon pass thither than lion, tiger and stags. there be likewise, at the indies, great number of parrot, especial upon the andes of peru and in the land of port and saint dominique, where they flee by flock as pigeon do here. to conclude, bird with their wing may go where they will, and true, many. kind may well pass the gulf. see it be certain, as pliny affirm, pli, li, 10. c, 23. that there be many that pass the sea and go into strange region, although i have not read that any fowl have pass by flight so great a gulf as be the indian ocean. yet hold i it not altogether impossible, see the common opinion of mariner, that you shall find they two hundred league and more from the land, and, as aristotle do teach, that bird endure the water easy, have little respiration, as we see in sea foul which dive and remain long under the water. even so, we may say that the fowl which be at this present upon the main land and in the land at the indies, may pass the sea, rest themselves in some small land or upon some land which they discover by a natural instinct- as pliny report of some- or peradventure, fall into the water when they be weary of fly- pli lib 10. c, 2d, and after begin their flight a new when they have little rest. as for the fowl which we see in the land where there be no beast, i believe certain that they pass by one of the foresay mean. but for other bird which we find upon the main land, especial those who flight, be short, it be more credible that they come thither, as the beast do, which be of the same kind that we have in europe. for at the indies there be great bird, very heavy as ostrich, whereof there be many in peru, which do use sometime to terrify the indian sheep, as they do go with their burden but leave these bird that govern themselves without the care of man, but only for hawk. let we now speak of tame fowl. i wonder, at hen, see there be some at the indies, before the spaniard come there, the which be well, approve, for they have a proper name of the country and they call a hen gualpa and the egg p^nto, and they use the same proverb we do to call a coward a hen. those that be at the discovery of the land of solomon do report that they have see hen there, like unto we. we may conceive that the hen be so tame, a foul and so profitable man may carry they with they when they pass from one place to another. as we see at this day the indian in their travel carry their hen with they, or chicken upon the burden they have on. their shoulder, and likewise they carry they easy in their cage of reed or wood. final, there be at the indies many kind of beast and bird such as we have in europe, as i have specify, and other sort which i leave to other to discourse of. how it spould be possible that at the indies there shall be any sort of beast whereof the like be nowhere else? chap 36. 4 be a matter more difficult to show and prove what begin many and sundry sort of beast have which be find at the indies, of who kind we have none in this continent. for if the creator have, make they there. we may not then allege nor fly to noah ark. neither be it then. necessary to save all sort of bird and beast if other be to be create anew. moreover, we can not affirm that the creation of the world be make and finish in six day if there be yet other new kind to make and special, perfect beast and no less excellent than those that be know unto we. if we say, then, that all these kind of creature be preserve in the ark by noah, it follow that those beast, of who kind we find not any but at the indies, have pass thither from this continent, as we have say of other beast that be know unto we. this, suppose i demand how it be possible that none of their kind shall remain here, and how they be find, there be, as it be, traveller and stranger. true it be a question that have long hold. i in suspen, i say, for example, if the sheep of peru and those which they call pacos and guanaco be not find in any other region of the world, who have carry they thither, or how come they there, see there be no show nor remainder of they in all this world, if they have not pass from some other region, how be they form and bring forth there it may be god have make a new creation of beast, that which i speak of, these pacos and guanaco. may be say of a thousand different kind of bird and beast of the forest which have never be know, neither in shape nor name, and whereof there be no mention make, neither among the latin, nor greek, nor any other nation of the world. we must then say that, though all beast come out of the ark, yet by a natural instinct and the providence of heaven, diverse kind disperse themselves into diverse region, where they find themselves so well as they will not part, or if they depart, they do not preserve themselves but in process of time perish whole. as we do see it, chance in many thing, for if we shall look precise into it, we shall find that it be not proper and peculiar alone to the indies, but general to many other nation and province of asia, europe and africa where they say there be certain kind of creature that be not find in other region, at the least, if they be any, where else they be know to be carry from thence. see, then these creature come out of the ark, as for example the elephant which we find only in the east indies, and from thence have be impart to other region. we may say as much of these creature of peru and of other of the indies which be not find. in any other part of the world. we may likewise consider well upon this subject, whether these beast differ in kind and essential from all other, or if this difference be accidental, which may grow by diverse accident. as we see in the lineage of man, some be white, other black, some giant, other dwarf, and in ape, some have no tail, other have, and in sheep, some be bare, other have fleece, some great and strong with a long neck, as those of peru, other, weak and little, have a short neck, as those of castille. but to speak direct, whoso will, by this discourse, show only these accidental difference, preserve the propagation of beast at the indies and reduce they to those of europe? he shall undertake a charge he will hardly discharge with his honour. for if we shall judge the kind of beast by their property, those of the indies be so diverse as it be to call a egg a chestnut, to seek to reduce they to the know kind of europe of fowl that be proper to the indies, chap 37.. there be many kind of notable fowl at the indies, either of the same sort that we be or of different. they bring certain bird from china that have no foot and all their body be almost feather. they sit not upon the ground but hang upon bough by string or feather which they have, and so rest themselves like fly or airy thing in peru there. be bird, which they ^^ll tomineios, so small that often time i have doubt see they fly, whether they be bee or butterfly, but in truth they be bird. contrariwise, those which they call condore be of a exceed greatness and of such a force that not only they will open a sheep and eat it, but also a whole calf. those which they call and other poullaze, which in my opinion be of the kind of raven, be of a strange lightness and have a very quick sight, be very fit to cleanse city. for that they leave no carrion nor dead thing. they pass the night on tree or upon rock and in the morning they come to the city and town sit on the top. of the high building where they attend their prey. their young have white feather as they report of raven, and so change into black the guacamayac be bird, big than parrot, and resemble they something they be esteem for the variety of their feather, which be very fair and please, in new spain there be abundance of bird with excellent feather, so as there be not any find in europe that come near they, as we may see by the image of feather they bring from thence, the which be, with great reason, much value and esteem, give cause of admiration that with the feather of bird they shall make so excellent a work and so perfect, equal, as they seem proper to be the true colour of. a painter and have so lively and please a regard as the painter can exceed it with his pencil and colour, some indian, which be good and expert workman in this art, will represent perfect in feather whatsoever they see draw with the pencil. so as the painter of spain have in this point no advantage over, they don philip the prince of spain his schoolmaster. do give unto he three figure or portraiture, make of feather as it be, to put in a breviary, his highness do show they to king philip. his father, the which his majesty behold attentive, say that he have never see in so small a work, a thing of so great excellency and perfection, one day, as they present to pope sixtus. another square big than it wherein be the figure of st francis and that they have. tell he it be make of feather by the indian he desire to make trial thereof. touch the table with his finger to see if it be of feather. for that it seem strange to see they so proper fit that the eye can not judge nor discern whether they be natural colour of feather or artificial. do with the pencil. it be a goodly thing to see the lustre which a green, a orange, tawny, like gold and other fine colour do cast and behold they another way. they seem dead colour. they make the best and goodly figure of feather in the province of mechovacan and in the village of pascaro. the manner be: with small, delicate pinsor they pull the feather from the dead fowl and with a fine paste they cunning, join they together. they take the small and delicate feather of those bird which in peru they call t^miney^s or other like unto they, which have the most perfect colour in their feather, the indian beside these image do use feather in many other most excellent work, especial for the ornament of king and nobleman, their temple and idol. there be also other great bird which have excellent and fine feather whereof they make plume of sundry colour, especial when they go to war. enrich they. with gold and silver, very artificial, which be a matter of great price. they have the same bird still, but they be not so curious. neither do they make so many gentle devise as they be wont. there be other bird at the indies, contrary to these of so rich feather, the which, beside that they be ill favour, serve to no other use but for dung, and yet perchance they be of no less profit. i have consider this wonder at the providence of the creator who have so appoint that all creature shall serve man. in some land or phares, which be join to the coast ^of peru, we see the top of the mountain all white, and to sight you will take it for snow. or for some white land, but they be heap of dung of sea foul which go continual thither and there be so great abundance as it rise. many else, yea, many lance in height which seem but a fable. they go with boat to these land only for the dung, for there be no other profit in they and this dung be so commodious and profitable as it make the earth yield great abundance of fruit. they call this dung guano, whereof the valley have take the name, which they call limagua^a. in the valley of peru, where they use this dung, and it be the most fertile of all that country. the quince, poungranet and other fruit there exceed all other in bounty and greatness, and they say the reason be for that. the water wherewith they water it pass by a land compass with this dung which cause the beauty of this fruit. so as these bird have not only the flesh to serve for meat, their sing for recreation, their feather for ornament and beauty, but also their dung serve to fatten the ground, the which have be so appoint by the sovereign creator for the service of man, that he may remember to acknowledge and be loyal to he from who all good proceed of beast. for the chase, chap 38.. beside the beast of chase whereof we have speak, which be common to the indies and europe, there be other which i do not remember to have see here, unless perhaps they have be bring from thence. there be beast call sainos, make like small hog, which have this singular to themselves to have their navel upon the ridge of their back. these go by, troop through the wood. they be cruel and nothing fearful, but contrariwise they assail and have their talent sharp as razor, wherewith they make dangerous wound and incision. if such as hunt they put not themselves in safety. such as hunt they, for the more safe kill of they, they climb up into tree. whither the sainos or hog come present in troop, bite the tree when they can hurt the man, and then with their lance they kill what they will. they be very good to eat, but they must of necessity cut off the round piece where the navel grow upon the back, for otherwise within a day they corrupt there be another kind of little beast like to suck pig, and they call they guadatinaias. i be in doubt whether there be any swine at the indies, ^efore the spaniard come thither like to these in ^paine for that. in the discovery of the land of solomon, it be say, they find hen and swine of spain. but howsoever it be, it be most certain that this cattle have. great multiply at the indies. they eat the flesh fresh and hold it to be as wholesome and as good as if it be of mutton, as in carthagene. in some part they be become wild and cruel, the which they hunt like wild boar, as we see in s dominique and other land where the beast live in the forest. in some place they feed they with the grain of may and they grow wonderful fat to have the grease which they use for want of oil. in some place they make gamon, as in toll^ca of new spain and in at peru. return then to such beast as be peculiar there, even as the sainos be like unto swine, though somewhat less. even so the dantes resemble small kine but more unto mule, have no horn. the hide of these beast be much esteem for jerkin and other cover. they be so hard as they resist any blow whatsoever. and as the dantes be defend by the hardness of their hide, so those which they call armadillo be by the multitude of their scale which open and shut as they please like to a cuirass, there be little beast which go through the wood, call armadillos by reason of the defence they have, hide themselves within their scale and open when they list. i have eat of they and do not hold it for a meat of any great worth. but the flesh of the yguanas be a better meat. but more horrible to the eye, for they be like to the very lizardes of spain, although they be of a doubtful kind for that. they go to the water and come to land. they climb the tree upon the bank and as they cast themselves from the tree into the water, the boat watch underneath to receive. they, the chinchilles, be a other kind of small beast. like squirrel, they have a wonderful, smooth and soft skin which they wear as a healthful thing to comfort the stomach and those part that have need of a moderate heat. they make cover and rug of the hair of these chinchilles which be find on the sierre of peru, where there be likewise a small beast very common which they call cuye and which the indian hold for a very good meat, and they be accustom often to offer these cuye in their sacrifice. they be like small coney and have their borow i^ the ground and in some place they have undermine all the land. some be grey, some white and some speckled. there be other small animal which they call viscachas and be like to hare, although they be big, they hunt they and eat the flesh of common hare. there be great store in some part. there be also coney in the realm of quitto. but the good be come from spain. there be another strange beast, the which, for his great heaviness and slowness in move, they call perico-ligero or the little light dog. he have three nail to every hand and move both hand and foot, as it be by compass and very heavy. it be in face like to a monkey and have a shrill cry. it climb tree and eat ants of. or indian monkey, chap 39. throughout all the mountain, either of these land, of the firm land or of the andes, there be infinite number of or monkey, which be a kind of ape, but very different in that they have a tail, yea, a very long one, and amongst they there be some kind which be thrice yea, four time big than the ordinary, some be all black, some bay, some grey and some spot. their agility and manner of do be admirable for that. they seem to have reason and discourse to go upon tree wherein they seem to imitate bird, go from to panama. i do see in capira one of these monkey leap from one tree to a other, which be on the other side of a river, make i, much to wonder. they leap where they list, wind their tail about a branch to shake it, and when they will leap further than they can at once, they use a pretty devise: tie themselves by the entail one of another, and by this mean make as it be a chain of many. then do they launch themselves forth and the first holpen, by the force of the rest, take hold where he list, and so hang to a bough and help all the rest till they be get up. it be long to report the foolery trick, traverse and pleasant. sport they make when they be teach, which seem not to come from bruit beast but from a manlike understanding. i see one in carthagen^ in the governors house. so teach as the thing he do seem incredible, they send he to the tavern for wine, put the pot in one hand and the money in the other, and they can not possible get the money out of his hand before he have his pot full of wine. if any child meet he in the street and throw any stone at he, he will set his pot down on the one side and cast stone against the child till he have assure his way. than will he return to carry home his pot. and which be more, although he be a good bibber of wine, as i have oftentimes see, he drink when his master have give it he, yet will he never touch it until leave be give he they, tell i, moreover, that if he see any woman paint he will fall upon they, pull off their attire and will seek to bite they. this may be a addition which i have not see, but i do not think there be any beast in the world approach so near the conversation of a man as this monkey do. they report so many thing which, for fear i shall be think to give credit to fable or they shall be so esteem i think best to omit. bless the author. of all creature in that he will kind of beast only for the recreation and delight of man. some report that they carry these or monkey to solomon from the west indies, but for my part i hold it be from the east indies of vicugne and tarugne of peru, chap 40. among the most remarkable thing at the indies of peru be the vicugne and sheep of the country, as they call they, which be tractable beast and of great profit. the vicugne be wild and the sheep be tame. some think that the vicugne be those which aristotle, arist, libr 3. the partib animal c 2. lib 10. c 72, pliny and other author call which be wild goat, and in truth they have some resemblance. for the lightness they have in the wood and mountain. but yet they be no goat, for the vicugne have no horn as those have whereof aristotle make mention. neither be they the goat of the east indies, from who they draw the bezoar stone. for if they be of that kind, it be a diverse one, as in the race of dog, the masty be diverse from the greyhound. the vicugne of peru be not those beast which carry the bezoar stone in the province of new spain, which there they call bezaar, for that they be a kind of stag and venison. yet do i not know in any part of the world there be any of these beast, but in peru and in chille, which be country join one to another. these vicugne be great than goat and less than calf. their hair be of the colour of dry rose, somewhat clear. they have no horn. like stag and goat, they feed upon the high top of the mountain which they call the snow. nor frost do not offend they, but contrariwise they seem to delight in it. they go in troop and run most light. when they meet with any traveller or beast they fly away, seem very fearful, and in fly they drive their young one before they. they do not find that they multiply much and therefore the king do defend the hunt of vicugne, if it be not for their feast or by their commandment. some complain that since the spaniard enter there they have give too much liberty to hunt the vicugne, and by this mean they be much diminish the manner the indian use in their hunt. they assemble many man together to the number of 1000 or 2000 yea more and environ a great circuit of wood. they hunt their game until they have compass it in on all part, and by this mean they common take three or four hundred and so choose what they list. they let go the rest, especial the female, for breed they be accustom to. sheer these beast and of their fleece to make cover and rug of great value. for that, this wool be like to white silk, which last long and as the colour be natural and not die, so be it perpetual. the stuff that be make of this wool be very fresh and good in summer and they hold they profitable for the inflammation of the reins and other part, temper the excessive heat. this wool have the like virtue when it be make in quilte, and therefore some use it to that end for the trial they have make thereof. they say, moreover, that this wool or cover make thereof be physical for other indisposition. as for the gout, yet do i not know that they have make. any certain trial thereof, the flesh of these vicugne be not good, although the indian eat it and dry it for the effect of physic. i will say what i have see upon the sierre of peru. come one night into a tambo or inn, be much afflict with pain in my eye. think they will fall out, the which do common happen in those part, for that they pass through place cover with snow which be the cause of this accident. be trouble with this pain and out of patience there come a indian woman which say to i, father, lay this to thy eye and thou shall be cure. it be a piece of the flesh of vicugne, new kill and all bloody. i use this. medicine and present the pain cease and soon after go quite away. beside these chaco, which be the most common manner of hunt at the indies, they have use another, more private, to take they which, be that come near, they do cast certain line with plummet of lead which entangle their leg so as they can run, and by this mean they take the vicugne. the chief reason why this beast be esteem be by reason of the bezoar stone they find in they, whereof we will entreat hereafter. there be another kind of beast, which they call tarugues, which likewise be wild and more nimble than the vicugne. they be great of body and more hot. they have soft ear and hang they go, not in. troop as the vicugne. i have not see they but alone and most common in high place. they also draw bezoar stone from these tarugues, which be great and have more operation and virtue of pacos guanaco and indian mutlon, chap 41.. there be nothing at peru of great riches and profit than the cattle of the country, which our man call indian sheep and the indian, in their general language, call they lama. for all thing. well, consider it be a beast of the great profit and least charge of any that i know. from they they draw meat and clothing, as from the sheep of spain, moreover, they have the benefit to carry all thing they have need of. use they to bear their burden, and they have no need either of shoe or saddle, nor yet of oat. but he serve his master for nought feed on the grass he find in the field. so as god have furnish they of sheep and mare, and all in one beast, and as it be a poor nation, so will he in this point free they from charge for that. there be much pasture upon the sierre and this kind of cattle have no need of any other charge. there be two kind of these sheep, or lamas. the one they call pacos or sheep bear wool, and the other be bare and have little wool. so be they better for burden. they be big than great sheep. and less than calf. they have a very long neck, like to a camel, whereof they have good need. for be high of stature, they have need of a long neck, else shall they be deform. they be of diverse colour, some all white, other all black, some grey and some spot, which they call moromoro. the indian have great superstition in choose the beast for sacrifice, of what colour they shall be, according to the diversity of season, and sacrifice their flesh. be good although it be hard, but that of their lamb be the better and the most delicate that can be eat. yet they eat not many. for that, the chief fruit and profit they yield be their wool to make clothes and their service. to carry burden. the indian make stuff of this wool wherewith they clothe themselves. the one be gross and common, which they call hanaca, and the other fine and delicate, which they call cumbi. they make carpet and cover and other exquisite work which last long and have a very fair lustre, like half silk, and that which be most rare be their manner of weave their work, be both side alike, so as you shall not find any end in a whole piece. the ingua, king of peru, have many chief workman to make this work of cumb^ and the which for the most part be resident in the province of join to the great lake of. they die this wool into diverse fine colour with sundry. kind of herb whereof they make many sort of work, both course and fine. all the indian, both man and woman, work in the sierre and have their looseness in their house, have no need to buy any stuff for their necessary use. of the f^esh of these sheep they make cuschargui or dry flesh, the which will last very long, whereof they make great account. they be accustom to drive troop of these sheep with burden and to go in band three hundred five hundred yea a thousand in a company with wine, maize, quickesilver and all other ^indes of merchandise and of silver which be the best of all. they carry bar of silver from potozi to ariq^^ which be three score and ten league i. have often w^ondered to see these troop of sheep lade with a thousand or two thousand bar of silver and much more, which be above three hundred thousand ducat, without any other guard o rescort than some indian which serve only to guide these sheep and to lade and unlade. they or at the most some few spaniard, and they sleep all night in the midst of the field without other guard. and yet, in so long a way and so weak a guard, they never find want or loss of any thing in so great a treasure of silver. so safe be the way. in peru, the burden which one of these sheep do common carry be of four or six arrobe, six arobe () hundred and fifty pound weight. when their voyage be long, they go not above two, three or four league at the most on a day. those that guide those troop have their ordinary lodging where they be assure to have water and pasture, and there they unlade and set up their tent, make fire and dress their meat, which be not painful, although it be a ^leugmatike and slow manner of travel. when there be but one day journey, one of these sheep will bear eight arobe in weight or more, and bear this burden eight or ten league in a day, as the poor soldier be. wont to do when they march through peru. this kind of cattle delight most in a cold air, and for this cause they live upon the sierre and die in the by reason of the heat. sometime these sheep be all cover with ice and frost, and yet they continue sound and well. the bare sheep be pleasant to behold, for they will stay upon the way, raise up their neck and will look upon any one very wistly, and so they remain a long time without move or any show of fear which give occasion of laughter. see they thus to stand. and yet sometime they do grow amaze sudden and run away with their burden, even to the high rock, so as not be able to. come unto they, they be constrain to kill they with a harquebus lest they shall lose their bar of silver which they sometime carry. the pacos will grow reasty under their burden, lie down and will endure to be cut in a thousand piece before they will rise. when this humour take they, whereof the proverb grow in peru to say that one be reastie to signify he be obstinate for that. when any of these beast be moody, it be with excess, the remedy they have be to stay and sit down by the paco, make much on he until the fit be past and that he rise, and sometime they be force to stay two or three hour. they have a disease like to scab, which they call, whereof they common die. the ancient have a remedy to bury they quick, that have the lest they shall infect the rest. be a very contagious disease and go from one to another. a indian that have one or two of these sheep be not repute poor, for one of they be worth six or seven piece of assay and more according to the time and place, of the bezaar stone, chap 42.. the bezaar stone be find in all these beast before mention which be proper to peru, whereof some author of our time have write whole book which they may read that desire to have a more particular knowledge. for the present subject it shall be. sufficient to say that this stone, which they call bezaar, be find in the stomach and belly of this beast, sometime one alone, sometime two, three and four. they be very different in form, greatness and colour. for that some be small, like filbert and less, other like walnut, some like pigeon egg and other as big as a hen egg. and i have see some as big as a orange. in form, some be round, other in fashion like to lentil, and many other. form for their colour: some be black, some white, some grey, dark green and other as if they have be guild. it be no certain rule to judge the best and most fine by the colour or form all these stone be make. and fashion of diverse film and skin one upon another. in the province of xaura and other province of peru. they find these stone in diverse kind of beast, both wild and tame, as in the guanaco, pacos, vicugne and tarugues. some add a other kind which they say be wild goat, which the indian call cypris. these other kind of beast be very well know in peru, whereof we have already discourse, the guanaco or country sheep or pacos, have common the lesser stone and black. neither be they so much approve for the use of physic. they draw the great bezaar stone from the vicugne, and they be grey or white or of a dark green, which be hold for the better. they esteem those of. the tarugues for the most excellent, whereof there be some, reasonable big. they be common white, incline to grey and they have the film common, big and thick than the rest. they find the bezaar stone equal both in male and female. all beast that engender it chaw the cuid and common feed upon the snow and rock. the indian report and teach by tradition from their father and ancient that in the province of xaura and in other province of peru there be many herb and venomous beast which poison the water and the pasture where they eat and drink and where they breathe. amidst which venomous herb there be one very well know of the vicugne, by a natural instinct and of other beast that engender. the bezaar stone, which eat this herb and by mean thereof they preserve themselves from the poison water and pasture. and they say that of this herb the stone be compound in the stomach, whence it draw all the virtue against poison and other wonderful effect. this be the opinion and tradition of the indian, discover by man of great experience in the kingdom of peru, which agree with reason and with that which pliny report, of the mountain goat, pli, lib 10. c 72, which be nourish and feed upon poison without suffer any harm. the indian be demand why the sheep, kine, goat and calf, such as be in castille, have not the bezaar stone. see that they feed on the same rock. their answer be that they believe not that those beast of castille eat of that herb or that they have find the bezaar stone in stag and fallow diere. this seem to agree with our knowledge, for that in new spain they find the bezaar stone, although there be no vicugne, pacos, tarugues nor guanaco, but only stag, in some of which they find these stone. the principal virtue of the bezaar stone be against poison and venomous disease, although there be herein diverse opinion. some hold it for a mockery, other for a miracle. howsoever it be it. be most certain that it be of a great operation when it be apply in time and convenient in a manner as herb and to person capable and dispose, for there be no medicine that do always cure infallible. in spain and italy we have see admirable effect of this stone against the t^verdette, which be a kind of plague, but not so much^s. in peru they do apply it, beat and put into some liquor which may make it fit for the cure of melancholy, the fall sickness, pestilent fever and many other disease. some take it in wine, other in vinegar with water. dezahac of league, beufe, borage and other sort. as the physician and apothecary can tell, the bezaar stone have no proper savour, as the arabian do testify. we have see notable trial and there be no doubt. but the author of this universal world have give great virtue to this stone. the bezaar stone which come from the east. indies have the first place of account they be of a olive colour, the second be those of peru and the three those of new spain. since that these stone be in request, they say the indian have make artificial one and many, when they see these stone great than the ordinary, they take they to be false and counterfeit. trial and experience be the best mistress to know they. one thing be worthy admiration: that they. grow and be fashion upon very strange thing, as upon the tag of a point, upon a pin or a piece of wood which they find in the centre of this stone, and yet do they not hold it false, for that the beast may swallow it and the stone thicken upon it and grow one upon another, and so it increase. i do see in peru two stone fashion upon pignon of castille which make we to wonder much, for that, in all peru we have not see any pine or pignon of castille, if they be not bring from spain, which seem to i very extraordinary. this little may suffice. touch the bezaar stone. they bring other physical stone from the indies, as the stone of hyiada, or of rate, the blood stone, the stone of milk and of the sea, those which they call cornerina^ for the heart, whereof there be no need to speak, have nothing common with the subject of beast whereof we have entreat, which give we to understand how the great master and author of all have impart his benefit and wonderful secret to all part of the world, for the which he be to be glorify for ever. * @ *. a prologue to the book follow have entreat of the natural history of the indies. i will hereafter discourse of the moral history, that be to say of the deed and custom of the indies. for, after the heaven, the temperature, the situation and the quality of the new world, after the element and mixture- i mean metal, plant and beast, whereof we have speak in the former book. as occasion do serve both order and reason, do invite we to continue and undertake the discourse of those man which inhabit the new world, and therefore i pretend, in the follow book, to speak what i think worthy of this subject, and for that, the intention of this history be not only to give knowledge of what have pass at the indies, but also to continue this knowledge to the fruit we may gather by it, which be to help this people for their soul health and to glorify the creator and redeemer. who have, draw they from the obscure darkness of their infidelity and impart unto they the admirable light of his gospel. and therefore i will first speak in these book, follow what concern their religion or superstition, their custom, their idolatry and their sacrifice, and after what concern their policy and government, their law, custom and their deed. and for that the memory be preserve among the mexicaine nation of their beginning, succession, war and other thing worthy, the relation. beside that which shall be handle in the six book, i will make a peculiar discourse in the seven- show the disposition and forewarning this nation have of the new kingdom of christ, our lord, which shall be extend in these country and shall conquer they to himself. as he have do^e in all the rest of the world, the which in truth be a thing worthy of great consideration to see how the divine providence have appointe^ that the light of his word shall find a passage in the further bound of the world. it be not my project at this time to write what the spaniard have do in those part, for there be book enough write upon this subject, nor yet how the lord servant have labour and profit for that require a new labour. i will only content myself to plant this history and relation at the door of the gospel, see it be already enter, and to make know the natural and moral thing of the indies, to the end that christianity may be, plant and augment as it be expound at large in the book we have write salute. and if any one wonder at some fashion and custom of the indies and will scorn they as fool or abhor they as devilish and inhuman people, let he remember that the same thing, yea worse, have be see among the greek and roman who have command the whole world, as we may easy understand, not only of our author, as eusebius of caesarea, clement, alexandrine and other, but also of their own, as pliny, denis, halicarnassis and plutarch. for the prince of darkness be the head of all infidelity, it be no new thing to find among infidel cruelty, filthiness and folly fit for such a master. and although the ancient gentile have far surpass these of the new world in valour and natural knowledge, yet may. we observe many thing in. they worthy the remembrance, but to conclude, they show to be barbarous. people who be deprive of the supernatural light want likewise philosophy and natural knowledge. the five book of the natural and moral history of the indies that the pride and malice of the devil have be the cause of idolatry, chap 1. the pride and presumption of the devil be so great and obstinate that always he seek and strive to be honour as god and do arrogate to himself all he can whatsoever do appertain to the most high god. he cease not to abuse the blind nation of the world upon who the clear light of the holy gospel have not yet shine. job 41. we read in job. of this proud tyrant who set his eye aloft and among all the son of pride, he be the king. the holy scripture instructe we plain of his vile intention and his overween treason, whereby he have pretend to make his throne equal unto god. say in isaiah, thou do say within thyself: i will mount up to heaven, esa 14. and set my chair upon all the star of heaven, and i will sit upon the top of the firmament and in the side of the north, i will ascend above the height of the cloud and will be like to the most high, ezech 2d. and in ezechiel, thy heart be lift up and thou have, say i be god, and have set in the chair. of god in the midst of the sea. thus do satan continual persist in this wicked desire to make himself god, and although the just and severe chastisement of the most high have spoil he of all his pomp and beauty, which make he grow proud, be entreat, as his felony and indiscretion have deserve, as it be write by the same prophet. yet have he leave nothing of his wickedness and perverse practice, the which he have make manifest by all mean possible, like a mad dog that bite the sword wherewith he be strike for, as it be write, the pride of such as hate, god do always increase. h^nce come the continual and strange care which this enemy of god have always have to make. he to be worship of man, invent so many kind of idolatry whereby he have so long hold the great part of the world in subjection, so as there scarce remain any one corner for god and his people of israel, mat 12.. and since the power of the gospel have vanquish and disarm he, and that by the force of the cross he have break and ruin the most important and puissant place of his kingdom, with the like tyranny he have begin to assail the barbarous people and nation far off, strive to maintain among they his false and lie divinity. the which the son of god have take from he in his church, tie he with chain, as in a cage or prison, like a furious beast, to his great confusion and rejoice of the servant of god, as he do signify in job. but in the end, although idolatry have be root out of the best and most notable part of the world, yet he have retire himself into the most remote part and have rule in that other part of the world which, although it be much inferior in nobility, yet be it not oflesse compass. there be two cause and chief motive for the which the devil have so much labour to plantidolatry and all infidelity, so as you shall hardly find any nation where there be not some mark thereof. the one be this great presumption and pride, which be such that whoso will consider how he dare affront the very son of god, and true god, in say, impudent, that he shall fall down and worship he, the which he do, mat 4. although he know not certain that this be the very god yet, have he some opinion that it be the son of god? a most cruel and horrible pride to dare thus impudent affront his god. true, he shall not find it very strange that he make himself to be worship as god by ignorant nation. see, he will seek to be worship by god himself. call himself god be a abominable and detestable creature. the other cause and motive of idolatry be the mortal hatred he have conceive for ever against mankind. for, as our saviour say, he have be a murderer from the beginning and hold it as a condition and inseparable quality of his wickedness. and for that he know the greatast misery of man be to worship the creature for god. for this reason he never leave to invent all sort of idolatry to destroy man and make he enemy to god. there be two mischief which the devil cause. in idolatry, the one that he deny his god. according to the text, thou have leave thy god who create thou, deut 32. the other, be that he do subject himself to a thing base than himself, for that all creature be inferior to the reasonable and the devil. although he be superior to man in nature, yet in estate he be much inferior. see that man in this life be capable of divinity and eternity. by this mean, god be dishonour and man lose in all part by idolatry, wherewith the devil in his pride be well content. of many kind of idolatry the indian have use chap 2. sap 14. idolatry, say the holy-ghost by the wise man be the cause, begin and end of all. misery for this cause, the enemy of mankind, have multiply so many sort and diversity of idolatry as it be a infinite matter to specify they all. yet we may reduce idolatry to two head, the one ground upon natural thing, the other upon thing imagine and make by man invention. the first be divide into two, for either the thing they worship be general, as the sun, moon, fire, earth and element, or else it be particular, as some certain river, fountain, tree or forest, when these thing be not general worship in their kind but only in particular. in this first kind of idolatry they have exceed in peru and they proper call it guaca. the second kind of idolatry, which depend of man, invention and fiction may likewise be divide into two sort: one which regard only the pure art and invention of man as to adore the image or statue of gold, wood or stone, of mercury or pallas, which neither be nor ever be any thing else but the bare picture, and the other that concern that which real have, be and be in truth the same thing, but not such as idolatry feign as the dead or some thing proper unto they which man worship through vanity and flattery, so as we reduce all to four kind of idolatry which the infidel. use of all which it behoove we to speak, something that the indian have some knowledge of: god, chap 3.. first, although the darkness of infidelity hold these nation in blindness, yet in many thing the light of truth and reason work somewhat in they, and they common acknowledge a supreme lord and author of all thing, which they of peru call vnachocha and give he name of great excellence as pachacamac, or pachayachachic, which be the creator of heaven and earth, and vsapu, which be admirable and other like name. he they do worship as the chief of all, who they do honour in. behold the heaven, the like we see amongst they of mexico and china and all other infidel which accord well with that which be say of saint paul in the act of the apostle, where he do see the inscription of a altar to the unknown god, whereupon the apostle take occasion to preach unto they say: he who you worship without know act 17. he do i preach unto you. in like sort, those which at this day do preach the gospel to the indian find no great difficulty to persuade they that there be a high god and lord over all and that this be the christian god and the true god. and yet it have cause great admiration in i that, although they have this knowledge, yet have they no proper name for god. if we shall seek into the indian tongue for a word to answer to this name of god, as in latin deus, in greek theos, in hebrew, in arabic alla, but we shall not find any in the cuscan or mexicaine tongue, so as such as preach or write to the indian, use our spanish name, dios, fit it to the accent or pronunciation of the indian tongue, the which differ much. whereby appear the small knowledge they have of god. see, they can, so much as name he, if it be not by our very name. yet in truth they have some little knowledge. and therefore in peru, they make he a rich temple which they call pachacamac, which be the principal sanctuary of the realm and, as it have be, say this word of pachacamac be as much to say as the creator. yet in this temple they use their idolatry, worship the devil and figure. they likewise make sacrifice and offering to viracocha, which hold the chief place among the worship which the king make. hereof they call the spaniard virocochas, for that they hold opinion they be the son of heaven and divine, even as other do attribute a deity to paul and barnabas, call the one jupiter and the other mercury. so will they offer sacrifice unto they as unto god and as the barbarian of melite, which be malte. see that the viper do not hurt the apostle act 1^. they call he god. as it be therefore, a truth conformable to reason that there be a sovereign lord and king of heaven. pla in tim arist, c ult. 2.. metaph: tresmegist: diman and ascl^p, who the gentile, with all their infidelity and idolatry, have not deny, as we see in the philosophy of time in plato, in the metaphysic of aristotle and in the aesculape of tresmigister, as also in the poesy of homer and virgil. therefore, the preacher of the gospel have no great difficulty to plant and persuade this truth of a supreme god be. the nation of who they preach, never so barbarous and brutish. but it be hard to root out of their mind that there be no other god, nor any other deity than one, and that all other thing of themselves have no power, be nor work proper to themselves, but what the great and only god and lord do give and impart unto they. to conclude, it be necessary to persuade they by all mean in reprove their error as well, in that wherein they general fail in worship more than one god, as in particular, which be much more to hold for god and to demand favour and help of those thing which be not god nor have any power, but what the true god, their lord. and creator have give they of the first kind of idolatry upon natural and universal thing, chap 4.. next to viracocha, or their supreme god, that which most common they have and do adore among the infidel, be the sun. and after those thing which be most remarkable in the celestial or elementary nature as the moon, star, sea and land, the guaca, or oratory which the lord of peru have in great reverence, next to viracocha and the sun, be the thunder, which they call by three diverse name: chuquilla, catuilla and intiillapa. suppose it to be a man in heaven with a sling and a mace and that it be in his power to cause rain, hail, thunder and all the rest that appertain to the. region of the air where the cloud engender it be a guaca. for so they call their oratory general to all the indian of pe^^, offer unto he many sacrifice. and in cusco, which be the court and metropolitan city, they do sacrifice child unto he. as to the sun, they do worship these three viracocha, the sun and thunder, after another manner than all the rest, as polo write, who have make trial thereof, they do put as it be a gauntlet or glove upon their hand when they do lift they up to worship they. they do worship the earth, which they call pachamama, as the ancient do the goddess tellus, and the sea likewise, which they call mamacocha, as the ancient worship thetis or neptune. moreover, they do worship the rainbow, which be the arm and blazon of the ingua, with two snake stretch out on either side among the star. they all do common worship that which they call colca and we here cabrille. they do attribute diverse office to diverse star and those which have need of their favour do worship they, as the shepherd do sacrifice to a star which they call vrcuhillay, which they hold to be a sheep of diverse colour, have the care to preserve their cattle and they imagine it be that which the astronomer call tyra. these shepherd worship two other star which walk near unto they. they call they cat^chillay and vrcuchillay and they feign they to be a ewe and a lamb other. worship a star which they call machacu^y, to which they attribute the charge and power over serpent and snake to keep they from hurt of they. they ascribe power to another star, which they call chuguinchinchay, which be as much as tiger over tiger, bear and lion. and they have general believe that of all the beast of the earth there be one alone in heaven, like unto they, the which have care of their procreation and increase. and so they do observe and worship diverse star, as those which they call chacana, topatarca, mamanan, mirco, miquiquicay and many other. so, as it seem, they approach somewhat near the proposition of plato idee. the mexicaines, almost in the same manner. after the supreme god, worship the sun, and therefore they call hernando cortez, as he have write in a letter send unto the emperor charles, the five son of the sun, for his care and courage to compass the earth. but they make their great adoration to a idol call vitzilipuztli, the which in all this region they call the most puissant and lord of all thing. for this cause the mexicaines build he a temple, the great, the fair, the high and the most sumptuous of all other. the situation and beauty thereof may well be conjecture by the ruin which yet remain in the midst of the city of mexico. but here the mexicaines idolatry have be more pernicious. and hurtful, then, that of the, as we shall see plain hereafter. for that the great part of their adoration and idolatry be employ to idol and not to natural thing, although they do attribute natural effect to these idol, as rain, multiplication of cattle, war and generation, even as the greek and latin have forge idol of phoebus, mercury, jupiter, minerva and of mars. to conclude, whoso shall near look into it shall find this manner, which the devil have use to deceive the indian, to be the same wherewith he have deceive the greek and roman and other ancient gentile. give they to understand that these notable creature- the sun, moon, star and element, have power and authority to do good or harm to man. and although god have create all these thing for the use of man, yet have he so much forget himself as to rise up against he. moreover, he have embase himself to creature that be inferior unto himself, worship and call upon their work, forsake his creator, as the wise man say well in these word: all man be vain and abuse that have not the knowledge of god, sap 13.. see, they can not know he that be by the thing that seem good unto they. and although they have behold his work, yet have they not attain to know the author. and maker thereof. but they have believe that the fire, wind, swift air, the course of the star, great river with sun and moon, be god and governor of the world and be in love with the beauty of these thing. they think they shall esteem they as god. it be reason, they shall consider how much more fair the creator be, see that he be the author of beauty and make all thing. moreover, if they admire the power and effect of these thing. thereby they may understand how much more mighty he be, that give they their be. for by the beauty and greatness of the creature they may judge what the maker be hitherto be the word of the book of wisdom, from whence we may draw a good and strong argument to overthrow the idolatry of infidel, who seek rather to serve the creature than the creator. rom 1. as the apostle do, just reprehend, they, but for as much as this be not of our present subject and that it have be sufficient, treat of in the sermon, write against the error of the indian. it shall be sufficient now to show that they do worship the great god and their vain and lie god all of one. fashion for their manner to pray to viracocha, to the sun, the star and the rest of their idol, be to open their hand and to make a certain sound with their mouth, like people that kiss, and to ask that which every one desire in offer his sacrifice. yet be there great difference betwixt the word they use in speak to the great ticiviracocha, to who they do attribute the chief power and commandment over all thing, and those they use to other, the which every one do worship private in his house as god or particular lord, say that they be their intercessor. to this great ticciviracocha, this manner of worship: open the hand and, as it be, kiss. have something like to that which job have in horror, as fit for idolater. say, if i have, kiss my hand with my mouth, job 31.. behold the sun when it shine or the moon when it be light, the which be a great iniquity and to deny the most great god of the idolatry, the indian use to particular thing chap 5.. the devil have not be content to make these blind indian to worship the sun, moon, star, earth and sea and many other general thing in nature, but he have pass on further. give they for god and make they subject to base and abject thing and for the most part filthy and infamous. no man needs to wonder at this barbarous blindness if he remember what the apostle speak of: wise man and philosopher that have know god, r^m 1.. they do not glorify he nor give he thanks as to their god, but they be lose in their own imagination and conceit and their heart be harden in their folly, and they have change the glory and deity of the eternal god into show and figure of vain and corruptible thing as man, bird, beast and serpent. we know well that the egyptian do worship the dog of osiris, the cow of isis and the sheep of ammon, the. roman do worship the goddess februa of fever and the goose and athenes. the wise do worship the cock and the raven and such other, like vanity and mockery, whoreof the ancient history of the gentile be full man, fall into this great misery for that they will not subject themselves to the law of the true god and creator, as saint athanasius do learned, handle, write against idolatry. but it be wonderful, strange, to see the excess which have be at the indies, especial in peru, for they worship river fountain, the mouth of river, entry of mountain rock or great stone hill and the top of mountain which they call apachitas, and they hold they for matter of great devotion. to conclude, they do worship all. thing in nature which seem to they remarkable and different from the rest, as acknowledge some particular deity. they show, i, in caxamalca of nasca, a little hill or great mount of sand which be the chief idol or guaca of the ancient. i demand of they what divinity they find in it. they answer that they do worship it, for the wonder be a very high mount of sand in the midst of very thick mountain of stone. we have need in the city of king, of great store, of great wood, for the melt of a bell, and therefore they cut down a great, deform tree which, for the greatness and antiquity thereof, have be a long time. the oratory and guaca of the indian- and they believe there be a certain divinity in any thing that be extraordinary and strange in his kind- attribute the like unto small stone and metal, yea unto root and fruit of the earth. as the root they call papas. there be a strange kind which they call lallahuas, which they kiss and worship. they do likewise worship bear, lion, tiger and snake to the end. they shall not hurt they and such as their god be such be. the thing they offer unto they in their worship. they have use, as they go by the way, to cast in the cross way on the hill and top of mountain which they call apachitta, old shoe feather and coca chew be a herb they use much and when they have nothing leave, they cast a stone as a offering that they may pass free and have great force, the which they say increase by this mean, as it be report in a provincial counsel of peru, and therefore they find in the high way great heap of stone offer and such other thing, condil limen^^ 2. p 2. cap 99, the like folly ^id the ancient use of who it be speak in the proverb like unto. he that offer stone unto mercury, prou 27.. such a one, be he that honour. fool mean that a man shall reap no more fruit nor profit of the second than the first. for that their god, mercury make of stone, do not acknowledge any offering. neither do a fool any honour that, be do he. they use another offering, no less pleasant and ridiculous: pull the hair from the eyebrow to offer it to the sun, hill, apachitta, to the wind or to any other thing they fear, such be the misery that many indian have live in and do to this day. who the devil do abuse like very babe with any foolish illusion whatsoever? so do saint chrysostom in one of his homily, compare they but the servant of god which labour to draw they to salvation, ought not to contemn these folly and childishness be sufficient to plunge these poor abuse creature into eternall^perdition, but they ought, with good and clear reason, to draw they from so great ignorance, for, in truth, it be a matter worthy of consideration to see how they subject themselves to such as instruct they in the true way of life. there be nothing among all the creature more beautiful than the sun, which all the gentile do common worship. a discreet captain and good christian tell i that he have, with a good reason, persuade the indian that the sun be no god he require. the ca^ique, or chief lord, to give he a indian that be light to carry he a letter. which do he say to the cacique? tell i who be lord and chief, either this indian that carry the letter or thou that do. send he the cacique. answer, without doubt i be, for he do, but what i command he even so, reply. the captain, be it of the sun we see and the creator of all thing, for that the sun be but a servant to the most high lord which, by his commandment, run swift, give light to all nation. thus thou see, it be against reason to yield that honour to the sun, which be due to the creator and lord of all. the captain reason, please they all. and the cacique with his indian. say it be truth and they be much please to understand it. they report of one of the king, a man of a subtle spirit, who see that all his predecessor have worship the sun. say that he do not take the sun to be god, neither can it be for that god be a great lord who, with great quiet and leisure, perform his work and that the sun do never cease his course. say that the thing which labour so much can not seem to be god, wherein he speak truth. even so, when they show the indian their blind error by lively and plain reason, they be present, persuade and yield admirable to. the truth of another kind of idolatry upon the dead, chap 6.. there be a other kind of idolatry, very different from the rest, which the gentile have use for the dead sake who they love and esteem. and it seem that the wise man will give we to understand that the begin of idolatry proceed. thence say thus: the seek of idol be the beginning of fornication, and the bring up of they be the destruction of life, wisd 14.. for they be not from the beginning, neither shall they continue for ever, but the vanity and idleness of man have find out this invention. therefore, shall they short come to a end. for when a father mourn heavy for the death of his miserable son, he make for his consolation a image of the dead man and begin to worship he as a god who a little before have end his day like a mortal man, command his servant to make ceremony and sacrifice in remembrance of he. thus, in process of time, this ungracious custom wax strong, be hold for a law and image, be worship by the commandment of king and tyrant. then they begin to do the like to they that be absent and such as they can not honour in presence, be far off, they do worship in this sort. cause the image of king to be bring who they will worship. supply by this invention. their absence who they desire to flatter. the curiositic of excellent workman increase this idolatry for these image be make so excellent by their art that the ignorant be provoke to worship they so as, by the perfection of their art, pretend to content they that give they to make they draw, picture and image far more excellent and the common people lead with the show and grace of the work. do hold and esteem he for a god who before they have honour as a man- and this be the miserable error of man- who sometime yield to their affection and sense, sometime to the flattery of their king. do attribute unto stone the incommunicable name of god. worship they for god. all this be in the book of wisdom, worthy to be note and such as be curious in the search of antiquity, shall find that the begin of idolatry be these image of the dead. i say idolatry which be proper, the worship of idol and image for that. it be not certain that this other idolatry, to worship the creature as the sun and the host of heaven, or the number of planet and star whereof mention be make in the prophet, have be after the idolatry of image jer 10.. although without doubt they have make idol in honour of the sun, s^ph ^, the moon and the earth return to our indian. they come to the height of idolatry by the same mean, the scripture. make mention of. first, they have a care to keep the body of their king and nobleman whole from any ill scent or corruption above two hundred year. in this sort, be their king in cusco, every one in his chapel and oratory, so as the marquis of canette be viceroy to root out idolatry. cause three or four of their god to be draw out and carry to the city of king, which breed a great admiration to see these body, dead so many year before, remain so fair and also whole. every one of these king leave all his treasure and revenue to entertain the place of worship where his body be lay and there be many minister with all his family dedicate to his service. for no king successor do usurp the treasure and plate of his predecessor, but he do gather all new for himself and his palace. they be not content with this idolatry to dead body, but also thev make their figure and representation, and every king in his life time cause a figure to be make wherein he be represent, which they call, which signify brother. for that they shall do to this image, during his life and death, as much honour and reverence as to himself. they carry this image to the war and, in procession for rain or fair weather, make sundry feast and sacrifice unto they. there have be many of these idol in cusco and in that territory, but now they say that this superstition of worship of stone have altogether cease or for the most part, after they have be discover by the diligence of the licentiate polo, and the first be that of the rocha, chief of the faction or race of hanam cusco. and we find that, among other nation, they have in great estimation and reverence the body of their predecessor and do likewise worship their image of superstition they use to the dead, chap 7.. the indian of peru believe common that the soul live after this life and that the good be in glory and the bad in pain, so as there be little difficulty to persuade. they to these article, but they be not yet come to the knowledge of that point that the body shall rise with the soul, and therefore they do use a wonderful care, as it be say, to preserve the body which they honour after death. to this end, their successor give they garment and make sacrifice unto. they especial the king, be accompany at their funeral with a great number of servant and woman for his service in the other life. and therefore on the day of his decease they do put to death the woman he have love best, his servant and officer that they may serve, he in the other life, whenas guanacapa die, who be father to atagualpa, at what time the spaniard enter, they? put to death above a thousand person of all age and condition for his service to accompany he in the other life. after many song and drunkenness they slay, they and these that be appoint to death hold themselves happy. they do sacrifice many thing unto they, especial young child, and with the blood they make a stroke on the dead man face from one ear to the other. this superstition and inhumanity to kill both man and woman, to accompany and serve the dead in the other life, have be follow by other and be at this day use among some other barbarous nation and, as polo write it, have be in a manner general throughout all the indies. the reverent beda report that before the englishman be convert to the gospel, they have the same custom to kill man to accompany and serve the dead. it be write of a portugal who be captive among the barbarian, have be hurt with a dart so as he lose one eye and as they will have sacrifice he to accompany a nobleman that be dead. he say unto they that those that be in the other life will make small account of the dead if they give he a blind man for a companion and that it be better to give he a attendant that have both his eye. this reason be find good by the barbarian. they let he go. beside this superstition of sacrifice man to the dead be use, but to great personage, there be another, far more general and common in all the indies, which be to set meat and drink upon the grave of the dead. imagine they do feed thereon the, which have likewise be a error among the ancient, as saint augustine write, and therefore they give they meat and drink. at this day, many indian infidel do secret, draw their dead out of the churchyard and bury they on hill or upon passage of mountain, or else in their own house. they have also use to put gold and silver in their mouth, hand and bosom and to apparel they with new garment, durable and well line. under the hearse. they believe that the soul of the dead wander up and down and endure cold, thirst, hunger and travel, and for this cause they make their anniverssary, carry they clothes, meat and drink. so as the prelate, neither synod above all thing give charge to their priest to let the indian understand that the offering that be set upon the sepulchre be not to feed the dead but for the poor and minister, and that god alone do feed the soul in the other life. see they neither eat nor drink any corporal thing. be very needful, they shall understand it, lest they shall convert this religious use into a superstition of the gentile, as many do, of the manner of bury the dead among. the mexicaine and sundry other nation, chap 8. have report what many nation of peru have do with their dead. it shall not be from the purpose to make particular mention of the mexicaines in this point, who mortuary be much solemnize and full of notable folly. it be the office of the priest and religious of mexico who live there with a strange observance, as shall be say hereafter, to inter the dead and do their obsequy. the place where they bury they be in their garden and in the court of their own house. other carry they to the place of sacrifice which be do in the mountain. other burn they and after bury the ash in they^ temple and they bury they all with whatsoever. they have of apparel, stone and jewel. they do put the ash of such as be burn into pot and with they the jewel, stone and earring of the dead, how rich and precious soever. they do sing the funeral office, like to answer and do often lift up the dead body, do many ceremony at these mortuary. they do eat and drink and if it be a person of quality they give apparel to all such as come to the interrement. when any one die they lay he open in a chamber until that all his kinsfolk and friend be come who bring present unto the dead and salute he as if he be live and if he be a king or lord of some town. they offer he slave to be put to death with he to the end. they may serve he in the other world. they likewise put to death his priest or chaplain, for every noble man have a priest which administer these ceremony within his house and then they kill he that he may execute his office with the dead. they likewise kill his cook, his butler, his dwarf and deform man by who he be most serve. neither do they spare the very brother of the dead who have most serve they. for it be a greatness amongst the noble man to be serve by their brother and the rest final. they put to death all of his train for the entertain of his house in the other. world and lest poverty shall oppress they. they bury with they much wealth as gold, silver, stone, curtain of exquisite work, bracelet of gold and other rich piece. and if they burn the dead they use the like with all his servant and ornament. they give he for the other world. then take they all the ash, they bury with very great solemnity. the obsequy continue ten day with song of plaint and lamentation, and the priest carry away the dead with so many ceremony and in so great number as they can scarce account. they to the captain and nobleman they give trophy and mark of honour according to their enterprise and valour employ in the war and governement. for this effect they have arm and particular. blason. they carry these mark or blazon to the place where he desire to be bury or burn, march before the body and accompany it as it be in procession where the priest and officer of the temple go with diverse furniture and ornament, some cast incense, other sing and some sound of mournful flute and drum which do much increase the sorrow of his kinsfolk. and subject: the priest who do the office be deck with the mark of the idol which the noble man have represent. for all noble man do represent idol and carry the name of some one, and for this occasion they be esteem and honour the order of knighthood. do common carry these foresay mark. he that shall be burn be bring. to the place, appoint they environ he with wood of pine tree and all his baggage, than set they fire unto it, increase it still with goomie wood until that all be convert into ash. than come there forth a priest, attire like a devil, have mouth upon every joint of he and many eye of glass, hold a great staff with the which he do, mingle all the ash very bold and with so terrible a gesture as he terrify all the assistant. sometime this minister have other different habit according to the quality of the dead. i have make this digression of obsequy and funeral upon the idolatry and superstition they have to the dead. it be reason to return now to our chief subject and to finish this matter: the four and last kind of idolatry. the indian use, especial the mexicaines, to image and idol. chap 9, although in truth, god be great, offend with these above name. idolatry where they worship the creature. yet the holy-ghost do much more reprove and condemn another kind of idolatry, and that be of those that worship, image and figure make by the hand of man, which have nothing else in they but to be of wood, stone or mettle and of such form as god have give they, and therefore the wiseman speak thus of such people: they be miserable. who hope may be count among the dead that have call the work. of man hand, god as gold, silver and the invention of the likeness of beast or a fruitless stone which have nothing more in it than antiquity. esa 44.. i^re 10.. baruch 6.. psal 113.. and he do divine, follow this proposition against this error and folly of the gentile, as also the prophet isaiah, jeremy, baruc and king david do treat thereof ample. it be convenient and necessary that the minister of christ, which do reprove the error of idolatry, shall have a good sight and consider well these reason, which the holy-ghost do so lively set down, be all reduce into a short sentence by the prophet osee. osee ^, he that have make they be a workman and therefore can they be no god. therefore, the calf of samaria shall be like the spider web, return to our purpose. there have be great curiosity at the indies in make of idol and picture of diverse form and matter which they worship for god, and in peru they call they guacas, be common of foul and deform beast, at the least such as i have see be. so. i believe very that the devil, in who honour they make these idol, be please to cause himself to be worship in these deformity and in ^rneth it be find, so that the devil speak and answer. many of these guaca or idol, and his priest and minister come to these oracle of the father of lie and such as he be, such be his. counsel and prophecy. in the province of new spain, mexico, tescuco, tlascalla, cholula, and in the neighbour country to this realm, this kind of idolatry have be more pactise than in any other realm of the world, and it be a prodigious thing to hear the superstition rehearse that they have use in that point, of the which it shall not be unpleasant to speak something. the chief idol of m^xic^ be, as i have say, vitziliputzli. it be a image of wood, like to a man, set upon a stool of the colour of ^ sure, in a brankard or litter. at ^very corner be a pie^^ of wood in form of a serpent head. the stool signify that he be set in heaven. this idol have all the forehead azure and have a band of azure under the nose, from one ear to another. upon his head he have a rich plume of feather, like to the beak of a small bird, the which be cover on the top with gold, burnish, very brown. he have in his left hand a white target with the figure of five pineapples make of white feather, set in a cross and from above issue forth a crest of gold, and at his side he have four dart which the mexicaines say have be send from heaven to do those act and prowess which shall be speak of. in his right hand he have a azured staff cut in fashion of a wave snake, all. these ornament. with the rest he have carry his sense, as the mexicaines do show the name of vitziliputzli, signify the left hand of a shine feather. i will speak hereafter of the proud temple. the sacrifice, feast and ceremony of this great idol be very notable thing, but at this present we will only show that this idol, thus rich apparel and deck, be set upon a high altar in a small piece or box, well cover with linen clothes, jewel feather and ornament of gold with many rundle of feather, the fair and most exquisite that can be find. he have always a curtain before he, for the great veneration, join to the chamber or chapel of this idol. there be a piece of less work. and not so well beautify. where there be another idol, they call t. these two idol be always together. for that they hold they as companion and of equal power. there be another idol in mexico, much esteem, which be the god of repentance and of jubily and pardon for their sin. they call this idol tezcallipuca. he be make of a black, shine stone, like to jayel, be attire with some gentile devise after their manner. it have earring of gold and silver and through the neither lip a small canon of crystal in length half a foot, in the which they sometime put a green feather and sometime a azured, which make it resemble sometime a emerald and sometime a turquois. it have the hair braid. and bind up with a hairlace of gold, burnish at the end, whereof do hang a ^are of gold with two firebrand of smoke paint therein, which do signify the prayer of the afflict and sinner that he hear when they recommend themselves unto he betwixt the two ear hang a number of small heron. he have a jewel hang at his neck so great that it cover all his stomach. upon his arm bracelet of gold, at his navilla rich green stone and in his left hand a fan of precious feather of green, azure and yellow which come forth of a look glass of gold shine and well burnish and that signify that within this look glass he see whatsoever be do in the world. they. call this glass or chaston of gold irlacheaya, which signify his glass for to look in. in his right hand he hold four dart, which signify the chastisement he give unto the wicked for their sin, and therefore they fear this idol most, lest he shall discover their fault and offence. at his feast they have pardon of their sin, which be make every four year, as shall be declare hereafter. they hold this idol, tescatlipuca, for the god of drought, of famine, barrenness and pestilence, and therefore they paint he in another form be set in great malesty upon a stool, compass in with a red curtin paint and wrought with the head and bone of dead man in the least hand it have a target with. five pine, like unto pine apple of cotton, and in the right a little dart with a threaten countenance and the arm stretch out as if he will cast it. and from the target come four dart- it have the countenance of a angry man and in choler, the body all paint black and the head full of quail feather. they use great superstition to this idol for the fear they have of it. in cholula, which be a commonwealth of mexico, they worship a famous idol which be the god of merchandise, be to this day great give to traffic. they call it qnetzaalcoalt. this idol be in a great place, in a temple, very high. it have about it gold, silver, jewel, very rich feather and habit of diverse colour. it have the form of a man but the visage of a little bird, with a red bill and above a comb full of wart have rank of tooth and the tongue hang out. it carry upon the head a point mitre of paint paper, a scythe in the hand and many toy of gold on the leg, with a thousand other foolish invention, whereof all have their signification and they worship it for that. he enrich who he please, as memnon and plutus. in truth, this name which the choluanos give to their god be very fi^te. although they understand it not, they call it quetzaalcoalt, signify colour of a rich feather. for such be the devil of covetousness. these barbarous people content not themselves to have god only, but they have goddess also, as the fable of poet have bring in, and the blind gentility of the greek and roman worship. they, the chief goddess they worship, be call tozi, which be to say our grandmother who, as the history of mexico report, be daughter to the king of culhuacan, who be the first they s^eaed by the commandment of vitzliputzli, who they sacrifice in this so^t be his sister. and then they begin to slay man in their sacrifice and to clothe the live with the skin of the sacrifice, have learned that their god be please therewith, as also to pull the heart out of they. they. sacrifice which they learn of their god, who pull out the heart of such as he punish. in tulla, as shall be say, in his place, one of these goddess they worship have a son who be a great hunter, who they of tl^scalla afterwards take for a god and those be enemy to the mexicaines by who aid the spaniard, win mexico, the province of tlascalla be very fit for hunt and the people be much give thereunto. they therefore make a great feast unto this idol, who they paint of such a form as it be not now needful to lose any time in the description thereof. the feast they make be pleasant, and in this sort they sound a trumpet at the break of day. at the sound whereof they all assemble with thei^ bow, arrow, net and other instrument for hunt. then they go in procession with their idol, be follow by a great number of people, to a high mountain, upon the top whereof they have make a bower of leaf and in the midst thereof a altar, rich deck whereupon they place the idol. they march with a great bruit of trumpet, cornet, flute and drum and be come unto the place, they environ this mountain on all side, put fire to it on all part by mean whereof many beast fly forth as stags, coney, hare, fox and woolve, which go to the top, fly from the fire. these hunter follow after, with great cry and noise of diverse. instrument, hunt they to the top before the idol, whither flee such a number of beast in so great a press that they leap one upon another upon the people and upon the altar wherein they take great delight. then take they a great number of these beast and sacrifice they before the idol as stags and other great beast pull out their heart, as they use in the sacrifice of man. and with the like ceremony which do, they take all their prey upon their shoulder and retire with their idol. in the same manner as they come and enter the city, lade, with all these thing very joyful, with great store of music, trumpet and drum, until they come to the temple where they place their idol, with great reverence and solemnity, they present, go to prepare their venison wherewith they make a banquet to all the people, and after dinner they make their play representation and dance before the idol. they have a great number of other idol of god and goddess, but the chief be of the mexicaine nation and the neighbour people, as be say, of a strange manner of idolatry practise among the mexicaines: chap 10. as we have say that the king of peru cause image to be make to their likeness, which they call their guaco or brother. cause they for to be honour like themselves. even so, the mexicains have do of their god which be in this sort. they take a captive such as they think good and afore they do sacrifice he unto their idol. they give he the name of the idol to who he shall be sacrifice and apparel he with the same ornament like their idol, say that he do represent the same idol and during the time that this representation last, which be for a year in some feast, in other six month and in other less, they reverence and worship he in the same manner as the proper idol. and in the mean time he do eat, drink and be merry. when he go through the street the people come forth to worship he and every one bring he a alm with child and sick folk that he may cure they and bless they. suffer he to do all thing at his pleasure. only he be accompany with ten or twelve man, lest he shall fly and he, to the end, he may be reverence as he pass, sometime sound upon a small flute that the people may prepare to worship he. the feast be come and he grow fat. they kill he, open he and eat. he make a solemn sacrifice of he. in truth, it be a pitiful thing to consider in what sort satan hold this people in his subjection and do many to this day, which commit the like cruelty and abomination with the loss of the miserable soul and body of such as they offer to he and he laugh and mock at the folly of these poor, miserable creature who deserve well for their offence. to be forsake of the most high god to the power of their adversary, who they have choose for their god and support. but see, we have speak sufficient of the indian idolatry. it follow that we treat of their religion, or rather superstition which they use in their sacrifice, temple ceremony and the rest, how the devil have labour to make himself equal unto god and to imitate he in his sacrifice, religion and sacrament, chap 11. before we come to this point, we ought to consider one thing which be worthy of special regard, the which be how the devil, by his pride, have oppose himself to god and that which god, by his wisdom, have decree for his honour and service and for the good. and health of man. the devil st^ives to imitate and to pervert to be honour and to cause man to be dam. for, as we see, the great god have sacrifice, priest, sacrament, religious prophet and minister dedicate to his divine service and holy ceremony. so the devil have his sacrifice priest, his kind of sacrament, his minister, appoint his seclude and feign holiness with a thousand sort of false prophet, all which will be pleasant to understand, be declare in particular, and of no s^^ll shuite for he that shall remember how the devil be the father of lie, ^^hn. 5. as the truth say in the gospel, and therefore he seek to usurp to himself the glory of god, ex^^ 7. and to counterfeit the light. by his darkness, the sooth-saiers of egypt teach by their master, sa^^^^, labour to do wonder, like unto those of ^^s^s and aron, to be equal unto they. we read in the book of jud^es, of that priest of the vain idol, which use the same ornament which be use in the tabernacle of the true god as the ephod, the seraphin and other thing there be scarce any thing institute by jesus christ, our saviour, in his law of his gospel, the which the devil have not counterfeit in some sort and carry to his gentile, as may be see in read that which we hold for certain by the report of man worthy of credit, of the custom and ceremony of the indian, whereof we will. treat in this book, of the temple that be find at the indies, chap 12.. begin, then, with their temple. even as the great god will have a house dedicate where his holy name may be honour and that it shall be particular vow to his service, even so the devil, by his wicked practice, persuade infidel to build he proud temple and particular oratory and sanctuary. in every province of peru there be one principal guaca or house of adoration, and beside it there be one general throughout all the kingdom of the, among the which there have be two famous and notable: the one which they call pachamana be four, league from lima, whereat this day they see the ruin of a most ancient and great building, out of the which francis pizarre and his people draw infinite treasure of vessel and pot of gold and silver which they bring when they take the ingua a^tagu^l^^. there be certain memory and discourse which say that in this temple the devil do speak visibl^ and gruman ^ivers by his oracle, and that sometime they do seea spot snake, and it be a thing very. come ^n and approve at the indies that the devil speak and answer in these false sanctuary, deceive this miserable people, but where the gospel be enter and the cross of christ plant, the father of lie be become mute, as plutark write of his time, plu lib tract just in apol cl^ris^ and justine martyr treat ample of the silence which christ impose to devil, which speak by idol, as it have be before much prophesy of in the holy scripture, the manner which the infidel minister and enchanter have to consult with their god be as the devil have, teach they it be. commonlyin the night they enter backward to their idol, and so go, bend their body and head after a ugly manner, and so they consult with he. the answer he make be common like unto a fearful hiss or to a gnash which do terrify they and all that he do advertise or command they be but the way to their perdition and ruin. there be few of these oracle find now, through the mercy of god and great power of jesus christ. there have be in peru another temple and oratory most esteem, which be in the city of cusco, where at this day be the monastery of s dominicke. we may see it have be a goodly and a stately work by the pavement and stone. of the building which remain to this day. this temple be like to the pantheon of the roman. for that it be the house and dwell of all the god for the king do there. behold the god of all the nation and province they have conquer. every idol have his private place whither they, of that province come to worship it with a excessive charge of thing which they bring for his service and thereby they suppose to keep safe in obedience those province which they have conquer. hold their god as it be in hostage in this same house. be the pinchao which be a idol of the sun, of most fine gold wrought with great riches of stone, the which be place to the east. with so great art as the sun at his rise do cast his beam thereon, and as it be of most fine mettle, his beam do reflect with such a brightness that it seem another sun. the do worship this for their god and the pachayacha, which signify the creator of heaven. they say that at the spoil of this so rich a temple, a soldier have for his part this goodly plate of gold of the sun and as play be then in request, he lose it all in one night at play. whence come the proverb they have in peru for great gamester say that they play the sun before it. rise of the proud temple at mexico, chap 13.. the superstition of the mexicaines have, without comparison, be great than the rest, as well in their ceremony as in the greatness of their temple, the, which in old time the spaniard call by this word cuckoe, which word may be take from the islander of s dominique or of cuba, as many other word that be in use, the which be neither from spain nor from any other language now usual among the indian, as be. may chico, vaquiano, chapeton and other like there be in mexico, this cuckoe, the famous temple of vitziliputzli. it have a very great circuit and within a fair court. it be build of great stone in fashion of snake, tie one to another and the circuit be call coatepantli, which be a circuit of snake upon the top of every chamber and oratory, where the idol be be a fine pillar, twit h^small stone, black as icate, set in goodly order, the ground raise up with white and red which below give a great light. upon the top of the pillar be battlement very artificial make, wrought like snail support by two indian of stone sit, hold candlestick in their hand, the which be like croisant garnish and enrich at the end with yellow and green feather and long fringe of the same within the circuit. of this court there be many chamber of religious man and other that be appoint for the service of the priest and pope, for so they call the sovereign priest, which serve the idol. this court be so great and spacious as eight or ten thousand person do, dance easy in round, hold hand the which be a usual custom in that realm. although it seem to many incredible, there be four gate or en^^ies, at the east, west, north and south. at every one of these gate begin a f^ire causeway of two or three league long. there be in the midst of the lake where the city of mexico be, build four large cawsey in cross which do much beautify it, upon every portal or entry. be a god or idol, have the visage turn to the causey ^ight, against the temple gate of vitziliputzli there be thirty step of thirty fathom long, and they divide from the circuit of the court by a street that go betwixt they. upon the top of these step, there be a walk of thirty foot broad, all plastered with chalk, in the midst of which walk be a palisado, artificial make of very high tree plant in order a fathom one from another. these tree be very big and all pierce, with small hole from the foot to the top, and there be rod do run from one tree to another to the which be chain or tie many dead man head upon. every rod be twenty. skull, and these rank of skull continue from the foot to the top of the tree. this pallissado be full of dead man scull from one end to the other, the which be a wonderful, mournful sight and full of horror. these be the head of such as have be sacrifice for, after they be dead and have eat the flesh, the head be deliver to the minister of the temple which tie they in this sort until they fall off by morsel, and then have they a care to set other in their place. upon the top of the temple be two stone or chapel, and in they be the two idol which i have speak of, vitziliputzli and his companion tlalot. these chapel be carve and grave, very artificial and so high that to ascend up to it there be a stair of stone of sixscore step. before these chamber or chapel, there be a court of forty foot square, in the midst, whereof be a high stone of five hand breadth point, in fashion of a pyramid. it be place there for the sacrifice of man, for be lay on their back, it make their body to bend, and so they do open they and pull out their heart. as i shall show hereafter, there be in the city of mexico eight or nine other temple, the which be join one to another within one great circuit and have their private stairs, their court, their chamber and their dortoire, the entry of some be to the east, some to the west, other to the south and some to the north. all these temple be curious, wrought and compass in with diverse sort of battlement and picture, with many figure of stone be accompany and fortify with great and large spur or platform. they be dedicate to diverse god, but next to the temple of vitziliputzli be that of tescalipuca, which be the god of penance and of punishment, very high and well build, there be four step. to ascend on the top. be a flat or table of six score foot broad and join unto it. be a hall, hang with tapestry and curtain of diverse colour and work. the door thereof be low and large. be always cover with a veil and none but the priest may enter in all this temple. be beautify with diverse image and picture. most curious for that these two temple be as the cathedral church and the rest in respect of they, as parish and she mitages. they be so spacious and have so many chamber that there be in they place for the ministry, college, school and house for priest, whereof we will entreat hereafter. this may suffice to conceive the devil pride and the misery of this wretched nation who, with so great expense of their good, their labour and their life, do thus serve their capital enemy, who pretend nothing more than the destruction of their soul and consumption of their body. but yet they be well, please have a opinion in their so great a error that they be great and mighty. god to who they do these. service of the priest and their office, chap 14.. we find, among all the nation of the world, man special, dedicate to the service of the true god or to the false, which serve in sacrifice and declare unto the people what their god command. they there be in mexico a strange curiosity upon this point. and the devil counterfeit the use of the church of god. have place in the order of his priest some great or superior and some less, the one as acolites, the other as levite. and that which have make i most to wonder, be that the devil will usurp to himself the service of god, yea, and use the same name, for the mexicaines in their ancient tongue call their high priest papas, as they shall say, sovereign bishop. as it appear now by their history, the priest of vitzliputzli succeed by lineage of certain quarter of the city, depute for that purpose, and those of other idol come by election or be offer to the temple. in their infancy. the daily exercise of the priest be to cast incense on the idol, which be do four time in the space of a natural day: the first at break of day, the second at noon, the three at sun set and the four at midnight. at midnight all the chief officer of the temple do rise and in stead of bell they sound a long time upon trumpet, cornets and flute very heavy. which be end he that do the office that week, step forth, attire in a white robe, after the dalmatic manner, with a censor in his hand, full of coal which he take from the hearth burn continual before the altar. in the other hand he have a purse full of incense. which he cast into the censor, and as he enter the place where the idol be, he incense it with great reverence. than take he a cloth with the which he wipe the altar and the curtain. this do they go all into a chapel and there do a certain kind of rigorous and austere penance, beat themselves and draw of blood, as i shall show in the treatise of penance which the devil have teach to his creature, and hereof they never fail. at these ma^tins, at midnight, none other but the priest may intermeddle with their sacrifice, and every one do employ himself according to his dignity and degree. they do likewise preach to the people at some feast, as i will show when we treat. thereof they have revenue, and great offering be make unto they. i will speak hereafter of their unction in consecrate their priest in peru. the priest be entertain of the revenue and inheritance of their god, which they call chacaras, which be many and also very rich, of the monastery of virgin which the devil have invent for his service, chap 15.. as the religious life whereof many servant of god have make profession in the holy church imitate jesus christ and his holy apostle, be very please, in the sight of his divine majesty, by the which his holy name be so honour and his church beautify, so the father of lie have labour to imitate and counterfeit. he herein, yea as it be, have strive with. god in the observance and austere life of his minister. there be in peru many monastery of virgin, for there be no other, admit at the least one in every province. in these monastery there be two sort of woman, one ancient, which they call mamacom^^, for the instruction of the young, and the other be of young maiden. place there for a certain time and after they be draw forth, either for their god or for the. they call this house or monastery acl^guagi, which be to say the house of the choose. every monastery have his vicar or governor, call appopanaca, who have liberty and power to choose who he please, of what quality soever, be under eight year of age, if they seem to be. of a good stature and constitution. these virgin, thus shut up into these monastery, be instruct by the momacomas in diverse thing needful for the life of man and in the custom and ceremony of their god. and afterwards they take they from thence, be above fourteen, send they to the court with suregard, whereof some be appoint to serve the guaca and sanctuary, keep their virginity for ever, some other be for the ordinary sacrifice that be make of maiden and other extraordinary sacrifice they make for the health, death or war of the ingua, and the rest serve for wife and concubine to the ingua and unto other, his kinsfolk and captain, unto who he give they, which be a great and honourable, recompense this distribution. be use every year. these monastery possess rent and revenue for the maintenance of these virgin, which be in great number. it be not lawful for any father to refuse his daughter when the appopanaca require they for the service of these monastery. yea, many father do willing offer their daughter, suppose it be a great merit to be sacrifice for the. if any of these momacomas or acllas be find to have trespass against their honour, it be a inevitable chastisement to bury they alive or to put they to death by some other kind of cruel torment. the devil have, even in mexico, have some kind of religious woman, although their possession be but ^^^ one year, and it be in this sort, within this gre^^. circuit whereof we have speak, which be in the principal temple, there be two house like cloister, the one opposite to the other, one of man, the other of woman. in that of woman, they be virgin only of twelve or thirteen year of age, which they call the maid of penance. they, whereas many as the man and live chaste and regular as virgin, dedicate to the service of their god. their charge be to sweep and make clean the temple and every morning, to prepare meat for the idol and his minister of the alm, the religious gather. the food they prepare for the idol be small loaf in the form of hand and foot, as of marchpane, and with this bread they prepare certain sauce. which they cast daily before the idol and his priest do eat it as those of baal that daniel speak of, dan 14.. these virgin have their hair cut and then they let they grow for a certain time. they rise at midnight to the idol. matin, which they daily celebrate, perform the same exercise. the religious do they have their, who employ they to make cloth of diverse fashion for the ornament of their idol and temple. their ordinary habit: be all white, without any work or colour. they do their penance at midnight, sacrifice and wound themselves and pierce the top of their ear. they lay the blood which issue forth upon their cheek and after to wash off the blood, they bathe themselves in a pool which be within their monastery. they live very honest and discreet and if any be find ^o have offend. although but light present, they be put to death without remission, say she have pollute the house of their god. they hold it for a augur and advertisement that some one of the religious man or woman have commit a fault when they see a rat or a mouse pass or a bat in the chapel of their idol, or that they have gnaw any of the veil for that. they say a cat or a bat will not adventure to commit such a indignity if. some offence have not go before, and then they begin to make search of the fact and have discover the offendor or offender, of what quality soever they present, put they to death. none be receive into this monastery but the daughter of one of the six quarter name. for that purpose and this profession continue, as i have say, the space of one whole year, during the which time their father and they themselves have make a vow to serve the idol in this manner and from thence they go to be marry. these virgin of mexico, especial they of peru, have some resemblance to the vestal virgin of rome, as the history show to the end, we may understand how the devil have desire to be. serve by they that observe virginity, not that chastity be please unto he, for he be a unclean spirit, but for the desire he have to take from the great god, as much as in he lie, this glory to be serve with cleanness and integrity of the monastery of religious man that the devil have invent for superstition, chap 16.. it be well know by letter write by the father of our company from jappon, the number and multitude of religious man that be in those province, who they call, and also their superstition custom and lie. some father that have be in those country report of these and religious man of china say that there be many order and of diverse sort. some come unto they. clad in white bear hood and other all in black, without hair or hood, and these be common little esteem for the mandarin or minister of justice, whip they, as they do the rest of the people. they make profession not to eat any flesh, fish, nor any thing that have life, but only rice and herb. but in secret they do eat any thing and be worse than the common people. they say the religious man which be at the court, which be at paquin, be very much esteem the mandarin, go common to recreate themselves at the narell or monastery of these monk and return in a manner always drink these monastery common, be without the town and have temple within their close. yet in china they be not great curious of idol or of temple for the mandarin, little esteem idol and do hold it for a vain thing and worthy to be laugh at. yea, they believe there be no other life nor paradise but to be in the office of the mandarin, nor any other hell than the prison they have for offender. as for the common sort, they say it be necessary to entertain they with idolatry, as the philosopher himself reach his governor, arist 12. (@), and in the scripture it be a excuse which aaron give for the idol of the calf that he cause to be make. yet the chinois use to tarry in the poop of their ship. 32. in little chapel, a. virgin, emboss, set in a chair, with two chinois before her kneel, in manner of angel, have a light burn there both day and night, and when they be to set sail, they do many sacrifice and ceremony with a great noise of drum and bell, cast paper, burn at the poop. come to our religious man. i do not know that in peru there be any proper house for man, but for the priest and sorcerer, whereof there be a infinite number. but it seem that in mexico the devil have set a due observation, for within the circuit of the great temple there be two monastery, as before have be say, one of virgin, whereof i have speak, the other of young man, seclude, of eighteen. or twenty year of age, which they call religious. they wear shave crown as the friar in these part their hair little long, which fall to the midst of their care, except the hinder part of the head which they let grow the breadth of four finger down to their shoulder and which they tie up in tress. these young man that serve in the temple of vitzliputzli live poor and chaste and do the office of levite minister to the priest and chief of the temple, their incense, light and garment. they sweep and make clean the holy place, bring wood for a continual fire to the hearth of their god, which be like a lamp that still burn before the altar of their idol. beside these young man there be other little boy as novice that serve for manual use as to deck the temple with bough, rose and reed, give the priest water to wash with, give they their razor to sacrifice and go with such as beg alm to carry it. all these have their superior who have the government over they. they live so honest as when they come in public where there be any woman, they carry their head very low, with their eye to the ground, not dare to behold they. they have linen garment and it be lawful for they to go into the city four or six together to ask alm in all quarter, and when they give they none, it be lawful to go. into the corn field and gather the care of corn or cluster of may which they most need. the master not dare to speak, nor hinder they. they have this liberty because they live poor and have no other revenue. but alm there may not be above fifty. live in penance. rise at midnight to sound the cornet and trumpet to awake the people. every one watch the idol in his turn. leave the fire before the altar shall die. they give the censor with the which the priest at midnight incense the idol, and also in the morning, at noon and at night. they be very subject and obedient to their superior and pass not any one point that be command they. and at midnight, after the priesthad end his cense, they retire themselves into a secret place apart sacrifice and draw blood from the calf of their leg with sharp bodkin. with this blood they rub their temple and under their care and this sacrifice finish, they present, wash themselves in a little pool appoint to that end. these young man do not anoint their head and body with any petum, as the priest do, their garment be of a course white linen cloth they do make there. these exercise and strictness of penance continue a whole year, during which time they live with great austerity and solitariness. in truth, it be very strange to see that this false opinion of religion have so great force among these young. man and maiden of mexico that they will serve the devil with so great rigour and austerity- which many of we do not- in the service of the most high god, the which be a great shame and confusion for those among we that glory to have do a small penance, although this exercise of the mexicaines be not continual but for a year only, which make it the more tolerable of penance and the strictness the indian have use at the devil: persuasion, chap 17.. see, we be come to this point. it shall be good both to discover the curse pride of satan and to confound it, and somewhat to quicken our coldness and sl^th, in the service of the great god, to speak some thing. of the rigour and strange penance this miserable people use at the devil persuasion, like to the false prophet of baal 3, r^g 28.. who do, beat and wound themselves with lancet, draw forth blood or, like those that sacrifice their son and daughter unto loathsome belphegor, pass they through the fire. psal 105.. 4. reg ^^, as holy writ testify for, satan have always desire to be serve to the great hurt and spoil of man. it have be say that the priest and religious of mexico rise at midnight and have cast incense before the idol. they retire themselves into a large place where there be many light and sit down. every one take a point of manguay, which be like unto a awl or sharp. bodkin, with the which or with some other kind of lancet or razor, they pierce the calf of their leg near to the bone, draw forth much blood with the which they anoint their temple and dip these bodkin or lancet in the rest of the blood. then set they they upon the battlement of the court, stick in gloabe or bowl of straw that all may see and know the penance they do for the people. they do wash off the blood in a lake, appoint for that purpose which they call ezapangue, which be to say water of blood. there be in the temple a great number of bodkin or lancet for that. they may not use one twice. moreover, these priest and religious man use great fast of five or ten day together before any of their great feast, and they be unto they as our four ember week. they be so strict in continence that some of they, not to fall into any sensuality, slit their member in the midst and do a thousand thing to make themselves unable lest they shall offend their god. they drink no wine and sleep little for that the great part of their exercise be by night, commit great cruelty and martire themselves for the devil and all to be repute great, faster and penitent, they do use to discipline themselves with cord full of knot, and not they only, but the people also use this punishment and whip. in the procession and feast they make to the idol tezcalipuca, the which, as i have say before, be the god of penance, for than they all carry in their hand new cord of the thread of manguey a fathom long, with a knot at the end, and therewith they whip themselves, give great lash over their shoulder. the priest do fast five day together before this feast, eat but once a day and they live, apart from their wife, not go out of the temple during those five day. they do whip themselves rigorous, in the manner aforesaid. the jesuit, which have write from the indies, treat ample of the penance and exceed rigour, the use, all which be but counterfeit, and more in show then in. truth. in peru, to solemnize the feast of the yta, which be great, all the people fast two day, during the which they do not accompany with their wife. neither do they eat any meat with salt or garlic, nor drink chica. they do much use this kind of fast for some sin and do penance, whip themselves with sharp, sting, nettle, and often they strike themselves over the shoulder with certain stone. this blind nation, by the persuasion of the devil, do transport themselves into craggy mountain where sometime they sacrifice themselves, cast themselves down from some high rock. all which be but snare and deceit of he that desire nothing more than the loss and ruin of man, of the sacrifice the indian make to the devil, and whereof chap 18.. it have be in the abundance and diversity of offering and sacrifice, teach unto the infidel, for their idolatry, that the enemy of god and man have most show his subtlety and wickedness. and as it be a fit thing and proper to religion to consume the substance of the creature for the service and honour of the creator, the which be by sacrifice, even so, the father of lie have invent the mean to cause the creature of god to be offer unto he as to the author and lord thereof, the first kind. of sacrifice which man use be very simple, for cain offer the fruit of the earth, and abel the best of his cattle, the which likewise noah and abraham do afterwards, and the other patriarch, gen 15.. until that, this ample ceremony of levi be give by moses, wherein there be so many sort and difference of sacrifice of diverse thing for diverse affair and with diverse ceremony in like sort. among some nation he have be content to teach they to sacrifice of what they have, but among other he have pass far. give they a multitude of custom and ceremony upon sacrifice and so many observance as they be wonderful, and thereby it appear plain that he mean to contend and equal himself to the ancient. law and in many thing usurp the same ceremony. we may draw all the sacrifice the infidel use into three kind: one of insensible thing, another of beast and the three of man they do use in peru to sacrifice coca, which be a herb they esteem much of, may, which be their wheat, of colour feather and of chaquira, which otherwise they call mollo, of shell or oyster and sometime gold and silver be in figure of little beast. also of the fine stuff of cumbi, of carve and sweet wood and most common tallow burn. they make these offering or sacrifice for a prosperous wind and fair weather or for their health and to be deliver from some danger and mishap. of the second kind. their ordinary sacrifice be of cuye, which be small beast like rabbit, the, which the indian eat common and in matter of importance, or when they be rich man, they do offer pacos, or indian sheep, bare or with wool. observe curious, the number, colour and time, the manner of kill their sacrifice, great or small, which the indian do use according to their ancient ceremony, be the same. the moor use at this day, the, which they call alquible, hang the beast by the right before leg, turn his eye towards the sun, speak certain word according to the quality of the sacrifice they fly for. if it be of colour, their word be direct to chuquilla and to the thunder that they may want no water. if it be white and smooth, they do offer it to the sun with certain word. if it have a fleece, they do likewise offer it he with some other, that he may shine upon they and favour their generation. if it be a guanaco, which be gray, they direct their sacrifice to viracocha, in cusco. they do every year kill and sacrifice with this ceremony a shear sheep to the sun, and do burn it clad in a red waistcoat, and when they do burn it, they cast certain small basket of coca into the fire, which they call vilcaronca, for which sacrifice they have both. man and beast appoint which serve to no other use. they do likewise sacrifice small bird. although it be not so usual in peru as in mexico, where the sacrifice of quail be very ordinary, those of peru do sacrifice the bird of puna, for so they call the desert when they shall go to the war. for to weaken the force of their adversary, guaca, they call these sacrifice cuzcovicca or contevicca, or huallavicca or sophavicca, and they do it in this manner: they take many kind of small bird of the desert and gather a great deal of a thorny wood which they call ya^lli, the which be kindle. they gather together these small bird, this assembly they call qui^o. than do they cast they into? the fire, about the which the officer of the sacrifice go, with certain round stone carve whereon be paint many snake, lion, toad and tiger utter this word which signify: let the victory be give unto we, with other word, whereby they say the force of their enemy, guacas, be confound, and they draw forth certain black sheep which have be keep close some day without meat, the which they call vrca and in kill they. they speak these word as the heart of these beast be weaken, so let our enemy be weaken, and if they find in these sheep that a certain piece of flesh behind the heart be not consume by fast and close keep, they then hold it for a ill augur they bring. certain black dog which they call appuros and slay. they cast they into a plain, with certain ceremony, cause some kind of man to eat this flesh, the which sacrifice they do, lest the ingua shall be hurt by poison. and for this cause they fast from morning until the star be up, and then they do glut and defile themselves like to the moor. this sacrifice be most fit for they to withstand their enemy god. and although at this day a great part of these custom have cease, the war be end, yet remain there some relic by reason of the private or general quarrel of the indian or the cacique, or in their city. they do likewise offer and sacrifice shell of the sea, which they call mollo, and they offer they to the fountain and spring say that these shell be daughter of the sea, the mother of all water. they give unto these shell sundry name, according to the colour, and also they use they to diverse end. they use they in a manner in all kind of sacrifice, and yet to this day they put beat shell in their chica for a superstition final. they think it convenient to offer sacrifice of every thing they do sow or raise up. there be indian appoint to do these sacrifice to the fountain spring and river which pass through the town or by their chacras, which be their farm, which they do after seed ^ime that they may not cease run but always water their ground. the sorcerer do conjure to know what time the sacrifice shall be make which be end. they do gather of the contribution of the people what shall be sacrifice and deliver they to such as have the charge of these sacrifice. they make, they in the begin of winter, at such time as the fountain, spring and river do increase by the moisture of the weather, which they do attribute to their sacrifice. they do not sacrifice to the fountain and spring of the desert. to this day continue the respect they have to fountain, spring, pool, brook or river which pass by their city or chacras. even unto the fountain and river of the desert, they have a special regard and reverence to the meeting of two river and there they wash themselves for their health, anoint themselves first with the flower of may or some other thing, add thereunto diverse ceremony, the which they do likewise in their bath, of the sacrifice they make of man chap. 19, the most pitiful disaster of this poor people be their slavery unto the devil. sacrifice man unto he, which be the image of god. in many nation they have use to kill, to accompany the dead as have be, declare such person as have be agreeable unto he and who they imagine may best serve he in the other world. beside this, they use in peru to sacrifice young child of four or six year old unto ten, and the great part of these sacrifice be for the affair that do import the ingua as in sickness for his health, and when he go to the war, for victory, or when they give the wreath to their new ingua, which be the mark of a king, as here the sceptre and the crown be in this solemnity they sacrifice the number of two hundred child from four to ten year of age, which be a cruel and inhuman spectacle. the manner of the sacrifice be to drown they and bury they with certain representation and ceremony. sometime they cut off their head, anoint themselves with the blood from one ear to a other. they do likewise sacrifice virgin, some of they that be bring to the ingua from the monastery. as have be say, in this case there be a very great and general abuse. if any indian qualify, or of the common sort, be sick and that the divine tell he, confident that he shall die, they do then sacrifice his own son to the sun or to virachoca, desire they to be satisfy with he and that they will not deprive the father of life this cruelty. be like to that the holy scripture speak, of which king moab use in sacrifice his first bear son, upon the wall in the sight. of all israel, to who this act seem so mournful as they will not press he any further but return to their house. the holy scripture also show that the like kind of sacrifice have be in use among the barbarous nation of the cananean and jebuseans and other whereof the book of wisdom speak. they call it peace to live in so great misery and vexation as to sacrifice their own child or to do other hide sacrifice as to watch whole night, do the act of fool, and so they keep no cleanness in their life nor in their marriage, but one, through envy, take away the life of a other, a other take away his wife and his contentment, and all be in confusion blood. murder, theft, deceit, corruption, infidelity, sedition, perjury, mutiny, forgetfulness of god, pollution of soul, change of sex and birth, inconstancy of marriage and the disorder of adultery and filthiness for idolatry be the sink of all misery. the wise man speak this of those people of who david complain, psal 105.. that the people of israel have learn those custom, even to sacrifice their son and daughter to the devil, the which be never please nor agreeable unto god, for as he be the author of life and have make all these thing for the commodity and good of man, so be he not please that man shall take the live one from another, although the lord do approve and accept the willingness of the faithful patriarch abraham. yet do he not consent to the deed which be to cut off the head of his son, wherein we see the malice and tyranny of the devil, who will be herein as god take pleasure to be worship with the effusion of man blood, procure by this mean the ruin of soul and body together, for the deadly hatred he bear to man as his cruel enemy of the horrible sacrifice of man which the mexicaines use. chap 20. although they of peru have surpass the mexicaines in the slaughter and sacrifice of their child- for i have not read nor understand that the mexicaines use any such sacrifice- yet they of mexico have exceed, they yea, all the nation of the world in the great number. of man which they have sacrifice, and in the horrible manner thereof. and to the end we may see the great misery wherein the devil hold this blind nation. i will relate particular the custom and inhuman manner which they have observe. first, the man they do sacrifice be take in the war. neither do they use these solemn sacrifice, but of captive. so, as it seem therein, they have follow the custom of the ancient, for, as some author say, they call the sacrifice for this reason because it be of a conquer thing. they also call it for that it be a offer make of their enemy, although they have apply this word to all kind of sacrifice. in truth, the mexicaines do not sacrifice any. to their idol, but captive, and the ordinary war they make be only to have captive for their sacrifice. and therefore, when they do fight, they labour to take their enemy alive and not to kill. they to enjoy their sacrifice. and this be the reason which motecuma give to the marquis du val. when he ask of he why be so mighty and have conquer so many kingdom- he have not subdue the province of tlascalla, which be so near motecuma- answer he that for two reason he have not conquer that province, although it have be easy if he will have undertake it. the one be for the exercise of the youth of mexico, leave they shall fall into idleness and delight. the other, and the chief cause why he have reserve this province, be to have captive for the sacrifice of their god. the manner they use in these sacrifice, be they assemble within the palissadoe of dead man skull, as have be say, such as shall be sacrifice, use a certain ceremony at the foot of the palisado place, a great guard about. they present. there sleep forth a priest, attire with a short full of tenril beneath, who come from the top of the temple, with a idol make of paste of wheat and maize, mingle with honey, which have the eye make of the grain of green glass and the tooth of the grain of maize. he descend the step of the temple with all the speed he can and mount on a great stone plant upon a high terrace in the midst of the court. this stone be call quauxicalli, which be to say the stone of eagle, whereon he mount by a little ladder, which be in the before part of the terrase, and descend by a other stair on the other side, still embrace his idol. then do he mount to the place where those be that shall be sacrifice, show this idol to every one in particular, say unto they this be your god and have end his show. he descend by the other side of the stair and all such as shall die go in procession unto the place. where they shall be sacrifice, where they sound the minister ready for that office. the ordinary manner of sacrifice be to open the stomach of he that be sacrifice and have pull out his heart half alive. they tumble the man down the stair of the temple, which be all embrue and defile with blood and, to make it the more plain, six sacrificer be appoint to this dignity, come into the place of sacrifice. four to hold the hand and foot of he that shall be sacrifice, the five to hold his head and the six to open his stomach and to pull out the heart of the sacrifice. they call they chachalmua, which in our tongue be as much as the minister of holy thing it. be a high dignity and much esteem amongst they, wherein they do inherit and succeed, as in a (@) simple, the minister who have the office to kill, which be the six amongst they. be esteem and honour as the sovereign priest and bishop, who name be different according to the difference of time and solemnity. their habit be likewise diverse when they come forth to the sacrifice, according to the diversity of time. the name of their chief dignity be papa and topilzin. their habit and robe be a red curtin, after the dalmatic fashion, with tenril, below a crown of rich feather, green, white and yellow upon his head and at his ear, like pendant of gold, wherein be set green stone and under the lip. upon the midst of the beard he have a piece, like unto a small canon, of a azured stone. these sacrifice come with their face and hand colour with a shine black. the other five have their hair much curl and tie up with lace of leather bind about the midst of the head. upon their forehead they carry small roundelet of paper paint with diverse colour and they be attire in a dalmatic robe of white wrought with black. with this attire they represent the very figure of the devil. so as it do strike fear and terro^ into all the people to see, they come forth with so horrible a representation. the sovereign priest carry a great knife in his hand of a large and sharp. flint, another priest carry a collar of wood wrought in form of a snake. all six put themselves in order, join to this piramidall stone whereof i have speak, be direct against the door of the chapel of their idol. this stone be so point as the man which be to be sacrifice be lay there on upon his back, do bend in such sort as let the knife but fall upon his stomach. it open very easy in the midst. when the sacrificer be thus in order, they draw forth, such as have be take in war, which be to be sacrifice at that feast and be accompany with a guard of man, all naked, they cause they to mount up these large stair in rank to the place where the minister be prepare. and as every one of they come in their order, the six sacrificer take the prisoner one by one foot, another by the other, and one by one hand, another by the other, cast he on his back upon this point stone where the five of these minister put the collar of wood about his neck and the high priest open his stomach with the knife, with a strange dexterity and nimbleness, pull out. his heart, with his hand, the which he show smoke unto the sun. to who he do offer this heat and fume of the heart and present? he turn towards the idol and do cast the heart at his face. than do they cast away the body of the sacrifice, tumble it down the stair of the temple- the stone be set so near the stair as there be not two foot space betwixt the stone and the first step, so as, with one spurn with their foot, they cast the body from the top to the bottom. in this sort, one after one, they do sacrifice all those that be appoint be thus slay and their body cast down, their master or such as have take they. go to take they up and carry they away, then have divide they amongst they. they do eat. they celebrate their feast and solemnity. there be ever forty or fifty at the least. thus sacrifice, for that they have man very expert in. take they, the neighbour nation, do the like, imitate the mexicaines in the custom and ceremony of the service of their god, of another kind of sacrifice of man which the mexicaines use, chap 21.. there be a other kind of sacrifice which they make in diverse feast, which they call racaxipe velitzli, which be as much as the blea of man. they call it so for that in some feast they take one or more slave as they please, and after they have flay. he, they with that skin apparel, a man. appoint to that end this man, go dance and leap through all the house and market place of the city. every one be force to offer something unto he, and if any one fail, he will strike he over the face with a corner of the skin, defile he with the congeal blood. this invention continue until the skin do stink, during which time, such as go gather together much alm which they employ in necessary thing for the service of their god. in many of these feast, they make a challenge betwixt: he that do sacrifice and he that shall be sacrifice. thus they tie the slave by one foot to a wheel of stone, give he a sword. and target in his hand to defend himself, then present, step forth he that sacrifice. he, arm with an^ther sword and target. if he, that shall be sacrifice, defend himself valiant against the other and resist he, he then remain free from the sacrifice, win the name of a famous captain and so be repute. but if he be vanquish, they then sacrifice he on the stone, whereunto he be tie, it be a other kind of sacrifice. whenas they appoint any slave to be the representation of the idol, say that it be his picture, they every year give one slave to the priest that they may never want the lively image of their idol at his first entry into the office, after he have be well. wash they attire he with all the ornament of the idol. give he the same name. he be that whole year reverence and honour as the idol itself and have always with he twelve man for his guard, lest he shall fly with which guard they suffer. he to go free and where he will, and if by chance he flee, the chief of the guard be put in his place to represent the idol and after to be sacrifice this indian have the most honourable lodging in all, the temple where he do eat and drink and whither all the chief minister come to serve and honour. he carry he meat after the manner of great personage. when he go through the street of the city he be well accompany with noble man. he carry a little flute in his hand which sometime he sound to give they knowledge. when he pass, then present the woman come forth with their little child in their arm, which they present unto. he salute he as god. all the rest of the people do the like. at night they put he in a strong prison or cage. leave he shall fly, and when the feast come they sacrifice he. as have be say by these and many other mean, have the devil abuse and entertain these poor wretch, and such be the multitude of those that have be sacrifice by this infernal cruelty, as it seem a matter. incredible, for they affirm there be some day five thousand or more and that there be above twenty thousand sacrifice in diverse place. the devil, to entertain this murder of man use a pleasant and strange invention, which be, when it please the priest of satan, they go to their king, tell they how their god die for hunger and that they shall remember, they present, they prepare themselves and advertise one another that their god require meat and therefore they shall command their people to be ready to go to the war. and thus the people assemble and the company appoint go to field where they muster their force and all their quarrel and fight be to take one a other for sacrifice, strive on either side. to take what captive they can. so as in these battle they labour more to take then to kill. for that, all their intention be to take man alive to give they to their idol to eat. for after that manner bring they their sacrifice unto their god. and we must understand that never king be crown until he have subdue some province from the which he bring a great number of captive for the sacrifice of their god. so as it be a infinite thing to see what blood be spill in the honour of the devil, how the indian grow weary and can not endure the cruelty of satan, chap 22.. many of these barbarian be now weary and tire with such a excessive cruelty in shed so much blood and with so tedious a tribute to be always trouble to get captive for the feed of their god seem unto they a matter supportable, yet leave they not to follow and execute their rigorous law for the great awe. the minister of these idol keep they in and the cunning wherewith they abuse this poor people. but inward, they desire to be free from so heavy a yoke. and it be a great providence of god that the first which give they knowledge of the law of christ find they in this disposition, for without doubt it seem to they a good law and a good god to be serve in this sort hereupon. a grave religious man in new spain tell i that when he be in that country he have demand of a ancient indian, a man of quality. for what reason the indian have so soon receive the law of je^us christ and leave their own without make any other proof, trial or dispute thereon, for it seem they have change their religion without any sufficient reason to move they the indian answer: he believe not, father, that we have. embrace the law. of christ, so rash as they say. for i will tell you that we be already weary and discontent with such thing as the idol command we and be determine to leave it and to take a other law. but whenas we find that the religion that you preach have no cruelty in it and that it be fit for we, and both just and good, we understand and believe that it be the true law and so we receive it willing. which answer of this indian agree well with that? we read in the first discourse that fernand cortes send to the emperor, charles the five, wherein he report that after he have conquer the city of mexico, be in cuyoacan. there come ambassador to he from. the province and commonwealth of mechoacan, require he to send they his law and that he will teach they to understand it, because they intend to leave their own, which seem not good unto they, which cortes grant, and at this day they be the best indian and the true christian that be. in new spain, the spaniard that see these cruel sacrifice, resolve with all their power to abolish so detestable and curse a butcher of man and the rather for that. in one night before their eye they see threescore or threescore and ten spaniard sacrifice which have be take in a battle, give at the conquest of mexico. and another time they find write with a coal in a chamber in tezcusco, these word hecre. such a miserable man be prisoner with his companion, who they of tezcusco do sacrifice. there happen a very strange thing upon this subject, and yet true be report by man worthy of credit, which, be that the spaniard behold these sacrifice have open and draw out the heart of the ^ustie young man and cast he from the top of the stair, as their custom be. when he come at the bottom, he say to the spaniard in his language: knight, they have slay i the which do great move our man to horror and pity. it be no incredible thing that have his heart pull out, he may speak. see that galen report that it have often chance in the sacrifice of beast after the heart. have be: draw out g^te^, lib 2.. hip and platon (@), cap 4. and cast upon the altar. the beast have breathe, yea, they do bray and cry out aloud and sometime do run. leave this question. how this may be in nature, i will follow my purpose, which be to show how much these barbarous people do now abhor this insuportable slavery they have to that infernal murderer, and how great the mercy of the lord have be, unto they impart his most sweet and agreeable law. how the devil have labour to imitate and counterfeit the sacrament of the holy church, chap 25.. that which be most admirable in the hatred and presumption of satan, be that he have not only counterfeit in idolatry and sacrifice. but also, in certain ceremony, our sacrament, which jesus christ, our lord, have institute and the holy church do use, have especial, pretend to imitate in some sort the sacrament of the communion, which be the most high and divine of all other, for the great error of infidel which proceed in this manner. in the first month which in peru they call rayme and answer to our december, they make a most solemn feast, call capacrayme, wherein they make many sacrifice and ceremony which continue many day, during the which no stranger be suffer to be at the court which be in cusco, these day be past. they then give liberty to stranger to enter that they may be partaker of the feast and sacrifice, minister to. they in this manner, the mamacomas of the sun, which be a kind of nun of the sun, make little loaf of the ^lower of may die and mingle with the blood of white sheep, which they do sacrifice that day. then present, they command that all stranger shall enter who set themselves in order, and the priest, which be of a certain lineage, descend from liuquiyupangui, give to every one a morsel of these small loaf, say unto they that they give these piece to the end they shall be unite and confederate with the ingua, and that they advise they not to speak nor think any ill against the ingua, but always to bear he good affection. for that this piece shall be a witness of. their intention and will, and if they do not as they ought, he will discover they and be against they. they carry these small loaf in great platter of gold and silver, appoint for that use, and all do receive and eat these piece. thank the sun infinite for so great a favour which he have. do they speak word and make sign of great contentment and devotion, protest that during their life they will neither do nor think any thing against the sun nor the ingua. and with this condition they receive this food of the sun, the which shall remain in their body for a witness of their fidelity which they observe to the sun and to the jugua, their king, this manner of devilish communicate. they likewise use in the ten month call coyarayme, which be september, in the solemn feast which they call cytua, do the like ceremony. and beside this communion, if it be lawful to use this word in so devilish a matter which they impart to all stranger that come, they do likewise send of these loaf to all their guaca sanctuary or idol of the whole realm, and at one instant they find people of all side which come express to receive they, to who they say in: deliver they that the sun have, send they that in sign that he will have they all to worship and honour he. and likewise do send they in honour of the cacique. some perhaps will hold this for a fable. and a fiction. yet be it most true that since the ingua yupangi, the which be he that have make most law, custom and ceremony, as numa do in rome, this manner of communion have continue until that the gospel of our lord jesus christ thrust out all these superstition. give they the right food of life which unite their soul to god. whoso will satisfy himself more ample, let he read the relation which the licentiate polo do write, don jeronimo de loaysa, archbishop of the city of king, where he shall find this and many other thing which he have discover and find out by his great diligence in what manner the devil have labour in mexico to counterfeit the feast of the holy sacrament and communion use in the holy church, chap 24.. it be a thing more worthy admiration to hear speak of the feast and solemnity of the communion which the devil himself, the prince of pride, ordain in mexico, the which, although it be somewhat long yet, shall it not be from the purpose to relate as it be, write by man of credit. the mexicaines, in the month of may, make their principal feast to their god, vitz^liputzli. and two day before this feast, the virgin whereof i have speak, the which be shut up and seclude in the same temple and be, as it be, religious woman, do mingle a quantity of the seed of beet with roast may, and then they do mould it with honey, make a idol of that paste in bigness like. to that of wood, put instead of eye grain of green, glass of blue or white and for tooth grain of m^^s. set forth with all the orn^ment and furniture that i have. say this: be finish all the nobleman, come and bring it a exquisite an^ rich garment, like unto that of the idol wherewith they do attire it be thus clad and deck. they do set it in a azured chair and in a litter to carry it on their shoulder. the morning of this feast be come, a hour before day, all the maiden come forth, attire in white, with new ornament, the which that day be call the sister of their god, vitzliputzli. they come crown with garland of may, roast and parch be. like unto azahar or the flower of orange, and about their neck they have great chain of the same which go bauldricke-wise. under their left arm, their cheek be die with vermilion. their arm, from the elbow to the wrist be cover with red parrot feather and thus attire. they. take the idol one their shoulder, carry it into the court where all the young man be attire in garment of a artificial re^ crown, after the same manner, like unto the woman, whenas the maiden come forth with the idol the young man draw near with much reverence, take the litter wherein the idol be upon their shoulder, carry it to the foot of the stair of the temple where all the people do humble themselves lay. earth upon their head, which be a ordinary ceremony which they do observe at the chief feast of their god. this ceremony be end. all the people go in procession with all the diligence and speed. they can go to a mountain which be a league from the city of mexico, call chapulteper, and there they make sacrifice present. they go from thence with like diligence to go to a place near unto it which they call atlacuyavaya, where they make their second station, and from thence they go to another burgh or village, a league beyond cuyoacan, from whence they part, return to the city of mexico, not make any other station. they go in this sort above four league in three or four hour, call this. procession ypayna vitzliputzli be. come to the foot of the stair, they set down the brancard, or litter, with the idol, tie great cord to the arm of the brancarde. then, with great observance and reverence, they do draw up the litter with the idol in it to the top of the temple. some draw above and other help below. in the mean time there be a great noise of flute, trumpet, cornets and drum. they do mount it in this manner for that the stair of the temple be very steep and narrow, so as they can not carry up the litter upon their shoulder. while they mount up the idol, all the people stand in the court with much reverence and fear. be mount to the. top and that they have place it in a little lodge of rose which they hold ready. present come the young man which straw many flower of sundry kind, wherewith they fill the temple both within and without this. do all the ^ come out of their convent, bring piece of paste, compound of beet and roast may, which be of the same paste whereof their idol be make and compound and they be of the fashion of great bone. they deliver they to the young man who carry they up and lay they up and lay they at the idol foot, wherewith they fill the whole place that it can receive no more. they call these morsel of paste. the flesh and bone of vitziliputzli have lay. abroad. these bone present come all the ancient of the temple, priest levite, and all the rest of the minister, according to their dignity and antiquity, for herein there be a strict order among they, one after another, with ^heir veil of diverse colour and work, every one according to his dignity and office, have garland upon their head and chain of ^lowers about their neck. after they come, their god and goddess, who they worship, of diverse figure, attire in the same livery, then put themselves in order about those morsel and piece of paste, they use certain ceremony, with sing and dance, by mean whereof they be bless and consecrate for the flesh and bone of this idol, this ceremony and blessing whereby they be take. for the flesh and bone of the idol be end. they honour those piece in the same sort as their god. then come forth the sacrificer, who begin the sacrifice of man in the manner as have be speak. and that day they do sacrifice a great number than at any other time, for that it be the most solemn feast. they observe the sacrifice be end. all the young man and maid come out of the temple, attire as before and be place in order and rank one direct against another. they dance by drum, the which sound in praise of the feast and of the idol which they do celebrate, to which song all the most ancient and great noble man do answer dance about. they. make a great circle as their use be, the young man and maid remain always in the midst. all the city. come to this goodly spectacle and there be a commandment very strict: observe throughout all the land that the day of the feast of the idol vitziliputzli, they shall ^a^e no other meat but this paste with honey whereof the idol be make, and this shall be eat at the point of day, and they shall drink no water nor any other thing till after no one. they hold it for a ill sign, yea for sacrilege to do the contrary. but after the ceremony end it be lawful for they to eat any thing. during the time of this ceremony they hide the water from their little child, admonish all such as have the use of reason not to drink any water, which if they do, the anger of god will come upon they and they shall die. which they do observe very careful and strict. the ceremony dance and sacrifice end, they go to unclothe themselves and the priest and superior of the temple take the idol of paste, which they spoil of all the ornament it have and make many piece, as well of the idol itself as of the tronchon which be consecrate, and then they give they to the communion, begin with the great and continue unto the rest, both man, woman and little child who receive it. with such tear, fear and reverence as it be a admirable thing, say that they do eat the flesh and bone of god wherewith they be grieve, such as have any sick folk demand thereof for they and carry it with great reverence and veneration. all such as do communicate be bind to give the ten of this seed whereof the idol be. make the solemnity of the idol be end a old man of great authority step up into a high place and, with aloud voice, preach their law and ceremony. who will not wonder to see the devil, so curious to seek to be? worship and reverence in the same manner that jesus christ, our god, have appoint and also teach, and as the holy church. have accustom. hereby, it be plain, verify what be propound in the beginning, that satan strive all he can to usurp and challenge unto himself the honour and service that be due to god alone, although he do still intermix with it his cruelty and filthiness, be the spirit of murder and uncleanness, and the father of lie, of consessor and confession which the indian use- chap 25.. the father of lie will likewise counterfeit the sacrament of confession and, in his idolatry, seek to be honour with ceremony very like to the manner of christian in peru. they hold opinion that all disease and adversity come for the sin which they have commit, for remedy whereof they use sacrifice. moreover, they confess themselves, verbal almost in all. province and have confessor appoint by their superior to that end there be some sin reserve for the superior. they receive penance, yea some time very sharp, especial when the offendor be a poor man and have nothing to give his confessor. this office of confessor be likewise exercise by woman. the manner of these confessor forcerer, who they call ychuiri or have be most general in the province of collasuio. they hold opinion that it be a heinous sin to conceal any thing in confession. the ychuyri, or confessor, discover by lot or by the view of some beast, hide if any thing be conceal and punish they with many, blow with a stone upon the shoulder until they have reveal all then after they give he. penance and do sacrifice. they do likewise use this confession when their child, wife, husband or their cacique be sick or in any great exploit, and when their ingra be sick. all the province confess themselves chief, those of the province of collao. the confessor be bind to hold their confession secret, but in certain case limit. the sin that they chief confess be first to kill one another out of war, then to steal, to take another man, wife, to give poison or sorcery to do any harm. and they hold it to be a grievous sin to be forgetful in the reverence of their guaca or oratory, not to observe the feast or to speak ill of the ingua and to disobey he they accuse not. themselves of any secret act and sin. but according to the report of some priest, after the christian come into that country they accuse themselves of their thought. the ingua confess himself to no man but only to the sun, that he may tell they to virachoca and that he may forgive they. after the ingua have be confess, he make a certain bath to cleanse himself in a run river, say these word: i have tell my sin to the sun, receive they o thou river and carry they to the sea where they may never appear more. other that confess use likewise these bath with certain ceremony, very like to those the moor use at this day, which they call guadoy and the indian call they. opacuna, when it chance that any man, child die, he be hold for a great sinner. say that it be for his sin that the son die before the father. and therefore those to who this have chance, after they be confess they be bathe in this bath. call opacuna, as be say before. then some deform indian crookebackt and counterfeit by nature come to whip they with certain nettle. if the sorcerer or enchanter, by their lot and divination affirm that any sick body shall die, the sick man make no difficulty to kill his own son, though he have no other hope by that mean to escape death. say that in his place he offer his son in sacrifice. and this cruelty have be practise in. some place, even since the christian come into that country. in truth, it be strange that this custom of confess their secret sin have continue so long amongst they, and to do so strict penance as to fast, to give apparel, gold and silver, to remain in the mountain and to receive many stripe upon the shoulder. our man say that in the province of chiquito, even at this day, they meet with this plague of confessor or ychuris, whereas many sick person repair unto they. but now, by the grace of god, this people begin to see clear the effect and great benefit of our confession, whereunto they come with great devotion and partly this former custom have be suffer. by the providence of the lord, that confession may not seem tedious unto they. by this mean the lord be whole glorify and the devil, who be a deceiver, deceive, and for that it concern this matter. i will report the manner of a strange confession the devil have invent, at japp^^, as appear by a letter that come from thence, which faith thus there be in very great and high and stiep rock which have prick or point on they above two hundred fathom high. amongst these rock there be one of. these pike or point so terrible high that when the xamabusis, which be pilgrim, do but look up unto it, they tremble and their hair stare so fearful and horrible. be the place upon the top of this point, there be a great rod of iron of three fathom long. place there by a strange devise. at the end of this rod be a balance tie whereof the scale be so big as a man may sit in one of they and the goquis, which be devil in human shape, command these pilgrim to enter therein one after another, not leave one of they. then, with a engine or instrument which move by mean of a wheel, they make this rod of iron whereon the balance be hang. to hang in the air, one of these xamabuzisbeing, set in one of the scale of the balance and as that wherein the man be set have no counterpoise on the other side, it present, hang down and the other rise until it meet with and touch the rod. then the goqnis tell they from the rock that they must confess themselves of all the sin they have, commit to their remembrance, and that with a loud voice to the end that all the rest may hear. he then present, he begin to confess, while some of the stander by do laugh at the sin they do hear, and other sigh. and at every sin they confess, the other scale of the balance fall. little until that, have tell all his sin, it remain equal with the other wherein the sorrowful penitent sit. then the goquis turn the wheel and draw the rod and balance unto he and the pilgrim come forth then enter another until all have pass. a japponois report this after he be christen, say that he have be in this pilgrimage and enter the balance seven time where he have confess himself public. he say, moreover, that if any one do conceal any sin, the empty scale yield not. and if he grow obstinate, after instance, make to confess himself, refuse to open all his sin, the goquis cast he down from the top where, in a instant, he be break into a thousand piece. yet this christian, who be call john, tell we that common the fear and terror of this place be so great to all such as enter therein, and the danger they see with thei^^^^ to fall out of the balance and to be break in piece, that seldom there be any one but discover all his sin. this place be call by another name, sangenoto^^ro, that be to say the place of confession. we see plain by this discourse how the devil have pretend to ufurp unto himself the service of god, make confession of sin, which the lord have appoint for the remedy of man, a devilish superstition, to their great loss and perdition. he have do no less to the heathe^ of jappon than to those of the province of colla^ in peru, of the abominable unction which the mexicaine priester and other nation use and of their witchcraft, chap 26.. god appoint in the ancient law the manner how they shall consecrate aaron person and the other priest, and in the law of the gospel we have likewise the holy cream and unction which they use when they consecrate the priest of christ. there be likewise in the ancient law a sweet composition which god defend shall be employ in any other thing. then, in the divine service, the devil have seek to counterfeit all these thing after his manner, as he have accustom, have to this end invent thing. so foul and filthy whereby they discover we^, who be the author, the priest of the idol in mexico, be anoint in this sort. they anoint the body from the foot to the head and all the hair likewise, which hang like tress or a horse mane. for that they apply this unction wet and moist their hair grow so as in time it hang down to their ham so heavy that it be troublesome for they to bear it, for they do never cut it until they die, or that they be dispense with for their great age or be employ in government or some honourable charge in the commonwealth. they carry their hair in tress of six finger breadth which they die black with the fume. of sapine or fir tree or rosine, for in all antiquity it have be a offering they make unto their idol, and for this cause it be much esteem and reverence. they be always die with this tincture from the foot to the head, so as they be like unto shine negro and that be their ordinary unction. yet whenas they go to sacrifice and give incense in the mountain or on the top thereof or in any dark and obscure cave where their idol be, they use a other kind of un^tion, very different do certain ceremony to take away fear and to give they courage. this unction be make with diverse little venomous beast as spider, scorpion, palmer, salamander and viper, the which the boy in. the college, take and gather together, wherein they be so expert as they be, always furnish when the priest call for they. the chief care of these boy be to hunt after these beast. if they go any other way and by chance meet with any of these beast, they stay to take they with as great pain as if their life depend thereon. by the reason whereof the indian common fear not, these venomous beast make no more account than if they be not. so have be all breed in this exercise. to make a ointment of these beast, they take they all together and burn they upon the h^rt^ of the temple, which be before the altar, until they be consume to ash. then do they? put they in mortar with much tobacco or petum be a herb that nation use much to benumb the flesh that they may not feel ^heir travel. with the which they mingle the ash make they lose their force. they do likewise mingle with these ash, scorpion, spider and palmer alive mingle all together. then do they put to it a certain seed be ground which they call ololuchqui, whereof the indian make a drink to see vision for that. the virtue of this herb be to deprive man of sense. they do likewise grind with these ash black and hairy worm who hair only be venomous, all which they mingle together with black or the fume of rosine, put it in small po^ which they set before. their god, say it be his mea^e and therefore they call it a divine meat. by mea^^ of this ointment, they become witch and do see and speak with the devil. the priest be slubber with this ointment, lose all fear, put on a spirit of cruelty by reason, whereof they do, very bold, kill man in their sacrifice, go all alone in the night to the mountain and into obscure cave, contemn all wild beast and hold it for certain and approve that both lion, tiger, serpent and other furious beast which breed in the mountain and forest flee from they by the virtue of this petum of their god. and in truth, though, this petum have no power to make they fly, yet be the picture. sufficient whereinto they be transform. this petum do also serve to cure the sick and for child, and therefore (@) call it the divine physic. and so they come fro^ all part to the superior and priest as to their savior, that they may apply this divine physic wherewith they anoint those part that be grieve. they say that they feel hereby a notable case, which may be for that tobacco and ololuchqui have this property of themselves to benumb the flesh, be apply in manner of a emplaster which must be by a strong reason, be mingle with poison, and for that it do appease and benumb the pain. they hold it for a effect of health and a divine virtue and therefore rann^ they to these. priest as to holy man, who keep the blind and ignorant in this error, persuade they what they please and make they run after their invention and devilish ceremony. their authority be such as their word be sufficient to induce belief as a article of their faith, and thus make they a thousand superstition among the vulgar people. in their manner of offer incense in, cut their hair, tie small flower about their neck and string with small bone of snake, command they to bathe at a certain time and that they shall watch all night at the hearth lest the fire shall die. that they shall eat no other bread but that which have be offer to their god. that they shall, upon any occasion, repair unto. their witch who, with certain grain, tell fortune and divine, look into keeler and pail full of water. the sorcerer and minister of the devil use much to besmere themselves. there be a infinite number of these witch, divine enchanter and other false prophet. there remain yet at this day of this infection, although they be secret, not dare public to exercise their sacrilege, devilish ceremony and superstition, but their abuse and wickedness be discover more at large and particular in the confession make by the prelate of peru. there be a kind of sorcerer among the indian, allow by the king which, be as it be, sooth-saiers they take upon they, what form and figure they please, fly far through the air in a short time, behold. all that be? do they talk with the devil, who answer they? in certain stone or other thing which they reverence much, they serve as conjurer to tell what have pass in the far part, before any news can come. as it have chance, since the spaniard arrive there, that in the distance of two or three hundred league they have know the mutiny, battle, rebellion and death, both of tyrant and of those of the king party and of private man, the which have be know the same day they chance or the day after, a thing impossible by the course of nature to work this divination. they shut themselves into a house and become drink, until they lose their sense a day after they answer to. that which be demand. some affirm they use certain unction. the indian say that the old woman do common use this office of witchcraft and special those of one province which they call coaillo, and of another town call manchey, and of the province of guarochiri. they likewise show what be become of thing, steal and lose. there be of these kind of sorcerer in all part. to who common do come the anacona^^ and cyva which serve the spaniard, and when they have lose any thing of their master or wh^n, they desire to know the success of thing past or to come, as when they go to the spaniard city for their private affair or for the public, they demand if their voyage shall be prosperous. if they shall be sick, if they shall die or return safe, if they shall obtain that which they pretend and the witch or conjurer answer yea or no, have first speak with the devil in a obscure place, so as these anaconas do well hear the sound of the voice, but they see not to who these conjurer speak, neither do they understand what they say. they make a thousand ceremony and sacrifice to this effect, with the which they mock the devil and grow, exceed drink for the do, whereof they particular use a herb call villea the juice whereof they mingle with their chica or take it in some other sort, whereby we may see how miserable they be, that have for their master, the minister of he who office be to deceive. it be manifest that nothing do so much. let the indian from receive the faith of the holy gospel and to persevere therein as the conference with these witch, whereof there have be and be still great number, although by the grace of the lord and diligence of the prelate and priest they decrease and be not so hurtful. some of they have be convert and preach public, discover and blame themselves their error and deceit and manifest their devise and lie, whereof we have see great effect, as also we understand by letter from jappon that the like have arrive in those part, all to the glory and honour of our lord god, of other ceremony and custom of the indian which be like unto we chap 27.. the indian have a infinite number of other ceremony and custom which resemble to the ancient law of moses and some to those which the moor use and some approach near to the law of the gospel as their bath, or opacuna as they call they. they do wash themselves in water to cleanse they from their sin. the mexicaines have also among they a kind of baptism, the, which they do with ceremony, cut the ear and member of young child, new bear, counterfeit in some sort, the circumcision of the jew. this ceremony be do principal to the son of king and nobleman, present upon their birth, the priest, do wash they and do put a little sword in the right hand and in the leave, a target, and to the child, of the vulgar sort, they put the mark of their office, and to their daughter, instrument to spin, knit and labour. this ceremony continue four day be make before some idol. they contract marriage after their manner, whereof the licentiate polo have write a whole treatise and i will speak somewhat thereon. hereafter, in other thing, their custom and ceremony have some show of reason. the mexicaines be marry by the hand of their priest. in this sort: the bridegroom and the bride stand together before the priest, who take they by the hand, ask they if they will marry, then have understand their will. he take a corner of the veil wherewith the woman have her head cover, and a corner of the man gown the which he tie together on a knot and so lead they thus tie to the bridegroom house where there be a hearth kindle, and then he cause the wife to go seven time about the hearth, and so the marry couple sit down together and thus be the marriage contract the mexicaines be. very jealous of the integrity of their wife so as if they find they be not as they ought to be, the which they know either by sign or dishonest word, they present, give notice thereof to their father and kinsfolk of their wife, to their great shame and dishonour for that they have not keep good guard over they. but they do much honour and respect, such as live chaste, make they great banqutte and give great present both to she and to her kinsfolk. for this occasion they make great offering to their god and a solemn banquet in the house of the wife and another in the husband. when they go to house they make a inventory of all the man and wife bring together. of provision for the house, of land, of jewel and ornament, which inventory every father keep for if it chance they make any devorce, as it be common amongst they. when they agree not, they divide their good according to the portion that every one bring. every one have liberty in such a case to marry whom they please, and they give the daughter to the wife and the son to the husband. it be defend upon pain of death not to marry again together, the which they observe very strict. and although it seem that many of their ceremony agree with we yet differ they much for the great abomination they mingle therewithal. it be common and general to have usual one of these three thing either. cruelty, filthiness or sloth for all their ceremony, be cruel and hurtful as to kill man and to spill blood, be filthy and beastly as to eat and drink to the name of their idol and also to piss in the honour of they, carry they upon their shoulder, to anoint and besmear themselves filthy and to do a thousand sort of villainy which be at the least vain, ridiculous and idle and more like the action of child, then of man. the cause thereof be the very condition of this wicked spirit who intention be always to do ill, provoke man still to murder and filthiness, or at the least to vanity and fruitless action, the which every man may well know if he due consider the. behaviour and action of the devil towards those he set to deceive for in all his illusion we find a mixture of these three, or at least of one of they. the indian themselves, since they come to the knowledge of our faith, laugh and mock at these foolery and toy in the which their god hold they busy, who they serve more for fear lest they shall hurt they in not obey they in all thing, then, for any love they bear, they, although some, yea very many, live, abuse and deceive with the vain hope of temporal good, for of the eternal they have no knowledge. and whereas the temporal power be great, there superstition have most increase, as we see in the realm of mexico. and cusco where it be incredible to see the number of idol they have, for within the city of mexico there be above three hundred mango ingua yupangu^ among the king of cusco. be he that most augment the service of their idol, invent a thousand kind of sacrifice, feast and ceremony the like do king iscoalt in mexico, who be the four king. there be also a great number of superstition and sacrifice in other nation of the indian, as in the province of guatimala, at the land in the new kingdom, in the province of chille, and other that be like commonwealth and commonalty, but it be nothing (@) respect of mexico and cusco where satan be in ^ome or in his jerusalem until he be. cast out against his will and the holy cross plant in his place and the kingdom of christ, our god, occupy, the which the tyrant do usurp of some feast celebrate by they of cusco, and how the devil will imitate the mystery of the holy trinity, chap 28.. to conclude, that which concern religion, there rest something to speak of the feast and solemnity which the indian do celebrate, the which, for that they be diverse and many can be all specify. the ingnas, lord of peru, have two kind of feast: some be ordinary, which fall out in certain month of the year, and other extraordinary, which be for certain cause of importance, as when they do crown a new king, when they begin some war. of importance when they have any great need of water or drought or other like thing for the ordinary feast. we must understand that every month of the year they make feast and diverse sacrifice, and although all of they have this alike, that they offer a hundred sheep, yet in colour and in form they be very diverse. in the first month, which they call rayme, which be the month of december, they make their first feast, which be the principal of all other, and for that cause they call it capacrayme, which be to say a rich and principal feast. in this feast they offer a great number of sheep and lamb in sacrifice and they burn they with sweet wood than they cause gold and silver to be bring upon certain sheep. set upon they three, image of the sun and three of the thunder: the father, the son and the brother. in these feast they dedicate the child, put the guaras or ensign upon they and they pierce their ear. then some old man do whip they with sling and anoint their face with blood, all in sign that they shall be true knight to the ingua. no stranger may remain in cusco during this month and this feast, but at the end thereof they enter and they give unto they piece of the paste of maize with the blood of the sacrifice, which they do eat, in sign of confederation with the ingua. as have be say before, it be strange that the devil, after his manner, have bring a trinity into idolatry for the three image of the sun, call apomti and intiquaoqui, which signify father and lord sun, the son sun and the brother sun. in the like manner, they name the three image of chuquilla, which be the god that rule in the region of the air where it thunder, rain and snow. i remember that be in cuquisaca, a honourable. priest show i a information which i have long in my hand, where it be prove that there be a certain guaca or oratory, whereas the indian do worship a idol call tangatanga, which they say be one in three and three in one. and as this priest stand, amaze the- i say that the devil, by his infernal and obstinate pride whereby he always pretend to make himself god, do steal all that he can from the truth to employ it in his lie and deceit. come then to the feast of the second month, which they call camey. beside the sacrifice which they make, they do cast the ash into the river, follow five or six league after pray it to carry they into the sea. for that, the virochoca, shall there receive this present. in the three, four and five month, they offer a hundred black sheep, speckled and grey, with many other thing which i omit for be too tedious. the ^ixt month be call hat^^cuz aymorey, which answer to may, in the which they sacrifice a hundred sheep, more of all colour. in this moon and month, which be when they bring may from the field into the house, they make a feast which be yet very usual among the indian, and they do call it aymorey. this feast be make come from the chacra or farm unto the house, say certain song and pray that the may may long continue, the which they call mamacora. they take a certain portion. of the most fruitful of the may that grow in their farm, the which they put in a certain grenier, which they do call pirua. with certain ceremony, watch three night, they put this may in the rich garment they have and be thus wrap and dress. they worship this pirua and hold it in great veneration, say it be the mother of the maize of their inheritance, and that by this mean the maize augment and be preserve in this month. they make a particular sacrifice and the witch demand of this pirua, if it have strength sufficient to continue until the next year, and if it answer no, than they carry this may to the farm to burn, whence they bring it, according to every man. power, then make they another pirua with the same ceremony, say that they renew it to the end. the seed of may may not perish and if it answer that it have force sufficient to last long, they leave it until the next year. this foolish vanity continue to this day and it be very common amongst the indian to have these and to make the feast of aymorey, the seven month answer to june, and be call a^caycuz intiraymi. in it they make the feast that be call intiraymi, in the which they sacrifice a hundred sheep, call guanaco and say it be the feast of the sun. in this month. they make many image of wood carve, all attire with rich garment, and they make their dance, which they do call cayo. at this feast they cast flower in the high way and thither the indian come paint and their nobleman have small plate of gold upon their beard and all do sing. we must understand that this feast fall almost at the same time, whenas the christian observe the solemnity of the holy sacrament, which do resemble it in some sort, as in dance, sing and representation. and for this cause there have be and be yet among the indian, which celebrate a feast somewhat like to we of the holy sacrament, many superstition in celebrate this ancient feast of inti^aymi, the eight month. be call chahua huarqui, in the which they do burn a hundred sheep more, all grey, of the colour of viscacha, according to the former order, which month do answer to our july. the nine month be call, in the which they burn a hundred sheep more of a chestnut colour, and they do likewise kill and burn a thousand cuye to the end. the frost, the air, the water nor the sun shall not hurt their farm, and this month do answer unto august. the ten month be call coyarami, in the which they burn a hundred white sheep that have fleece. in this month, which answer to september, they make the feast call situa. in this manner, they assemble together the first day of the moon. before the rise thereof and in see it, they cry aloud, carry torch in their hand and say: let all harm go away, strike one a other with their torch. they that do this be call which be do. they go to the common bath, to the river and fountain, and, every one to his own bath, set themselves to drink. four day together in this month, the mamacomas of the sun make a great number of small loaf with the blood of the sacrifice and give a piece to every stranger. yea, they send to every guaca throughout the realm and to many curaca in sign of confederation and loyalty to the sun and the ingua, as have be say the bathe, drunkenness and some relic of. this feast situa remain even unto this day in some place, with the ceremony a little different but yet very secret. for that these chief and principal feast have cease the eleven month, homaraymi, wherein they sacrifice a hundred sheep more and if they want water to procure rain, they set a black sheep tie in the midst of a plain pour, much chica about it, and give it nothing to eat until it rain, which be practise at this day in many place in the time of our october, the twelve and last month be call aymara, wherein they do likewise sacrifice a hundred sheep, and make the feast call raymicantara. in this month, which answer to our november, they prepare what be necessary for the child. that shall be make novice the month, follow the child with the old man, make a certain show with round and turn, and this feast be call ituraymi, which common they make when it rain too much or too little or when there be a plague. among the extraordinary feast which be verymany, the most famous be that which they call (@). this feast, ytu have no prefix, time nor season, but in time of necessity to prepare themselves thereunto, all the people fast two day, during the which they do neither company with their wife, nor eat any meat with salt or garlic, nor drink any chica. all do assemble together in one place where no stranger be admit, nor any beast. they have garment and ornament. which serve only for this feast. they march very quiet, in procession, their head cover with their veil, sound of drum, without speak one to another. this continue a day and a night. then the day follow. they dance and make good cheer for two day and two night together, say that their prayer be accept, and although that this feast be not use, at this day, with all this ancient ceremony yet common, they make another, which be very like, which they call ayma, with garment that serve only to that end, and they make this kind of procession with their drum, have fast before, then after they make good cheer, which they usual do in their urgent necessity, and although the indian forbear to sacrifice beast or other thing public which can be hide from the spaniard, yet do they still use many ceremony that have their beginning from these feast and ancient superstition? for at this day they do covert make this. feast of ytu, at the dance of the feast of the sacrament, in make the dance of lyamallama and of guacon and of other, according to their ancient ceremony, whereuntowe aught to take good regard. they have make more large discourse of that which concern this matte^ for the necessary observation of the abuse and superstition the indian have in the time of their gentility. to the end, the priest and curate may the better take heed. let this suffice now to have treat of the exercise wherewith the devil hold those superstitious nation occupy to the end that, against his will, we may see the difference there be betwixt light and darkness, betwixt the truth of christ and the lie of the gentile, although the enemy of god and man have labour with all his devise to counterfeit those thing which be of god. of the feast of jubilee which the mexicaines celebrate, chap 29.. the mexicaines have be no less curious in their feast and solemnity, which be of small charge but of great effusion of man blood. we have before speak of the principal feast of vitziliputzli, after the which the feast of tezcalipuca be most solemnize. this feast fall in may. and in their calendar they call it tozcolt. it fall every four year with the feast of penance. where there be give full indulgence and remission of sin. in this day they do sacrifice a captive which resemble the idol, tezcalipuca. it be the nineteen day of may. upon the even of this feast, the nobleman come to the temple, bring a new garment, like unto that of the idol, the which the priest put upon he have first take off his other garment, which they keep with as much or more reverence than we do, our ornament. there be in the coffer of the idol many ornament, jewel, earring and other riches as bracelet and precious feather which serve to no otheruse but to be there and be worship as their god itself. beside the garment wherewith they worship the idol, that day they put upon he certain ensign of feather with fan, shadow and other thing, be thus attire and furnish, they draw the curtain or veil from before the door to the end. he may be see of all man. then come forth one of the chief of the temple, attire like to the idol, carry flower in his hand and a flute of earth, have a very sharp sound and turn towards the east. he found it and then look to the. west, north and south. he do the like and after he have thus sound towards the four part of the world, show that both they that be present and absent do hear he. he put his finger into the air and then gather up earth, which he put in his mouth and do eat it in sign of adoration. the like do all they that be present and weep. they fall flat to the ground, invocate the darkness of the night and the wind, entreat they not to leave they, nor to forget they, or else to take away their life and free they from the labour they endure therein. thief, adulterer and murderer and all other offender have great fear and heaviness while this flute sound. so as some can not dissemble nor hide their offence by this mean they all demand no other thing of their god but to have their offence conceal. pour forth many tear with great repentance and sorrow, offer great store of incense to appease their god. the courageous and valiant man and all the old soldier that follow the art of war hear this flute. demand with great devotion of god, the creator, of the lord for who we live, of the sun and of other, their god, that they will give they victory against their enemy and strength to take many captive therewith to honour their sacrifice. this ceremony be do ten day before the feast, during which ten day the priest do sound this flute to. the end that all may do this, worship in, eat of earth and demand of their idol what they please. they every day make their prayer, with their eye lift up to heaven and with sigh and groan, as man that be, grieve for their sin and offence, although this contrition be only for fear of the corporal punishment that be give they and not for any fear of the eternal, for they certain believe there be no such severe punishment in the other life and therefore they offer themselves voluntary to death, hold opinion that it be to all man a assure rest. the first day of the feast of this idol, tezcalipuca, be come. all they of the city assemble together in a court to celebrate. likewise, the feast of the calendar whereof we have already speak, which be call toxcoalth, which signify a dry thing, which feast be not make to any other end but to demand rain in the same manner that we solemnize the rogation, and this feast be always in may, which be the time that they have most need of rain in those country. they begin to celebrate it the nine of may, end the nineteen, the last day of the feast, the priest draw forth a litter well furnish with curtain and pendant of diverse fashion. this litter have so many arm to hold by as there be minister to carry it. all which come forth, besmear, with black and long hair, half in tress with white string. and attire in the livery of the idol. upon this litter they set the personage of the idol appoint for this feast, which they call the resemblance of their god tezcalip^^^, and take it upon their shoulder. they bring it open to the foot of the stair. then come forth the young man and maiden of the temple carry a great cord, wreathe of chain of roast maize with the which they environ the litter, put a chain of the same about the idol neck and a garland upon his head. they call the cord toxcalt, signify the drought and barrenness of the time. the young man come wrap in red curtine with garland and chain of roast maize. the maid be clothe in new garment, wear chain. about their neck of roast maize and upon their head mitre make of rod cover with this maize. they have their foot cover with feather and their arm and cheek paint. they bring much of this roast maize and the chief man put it upon their head and about their neck, take flower in their hand. the idol be place in his litter. they strew round about a great quantity of the bough of manguey, the leaf whereof be large and prick this litter be set upon the religious mens-shoulder. they carry it in procession within the circuit of the court. two priest march before with censor, give often incense to the idol and every time they give incense they lift up their arm as high as they. can to the idol and to the sun say that they lift up their prayer to heaven, even as the smoke ascend on high. then all the people in the court turn round to the place whither the idol go. every one carry in his hand new cord of the thread of manguey, a fathom long, with a knot at the end, and with they they whip themselves upon the shoulder even as they do here. upon holy thursday, all the wall of the court and battlement be full of bough and flower, so fresh and pleasant as it do give a great contentment. this procession be end. they bring the idol to his usual place of abode. then come a great multitude of people with flower dress. in diverse sort, wherewith they fill the temple and all the court so as it seem, the ornament of a oratory. all this be put in order by the priest. the young man administer these thing unto they from without. the chapel or chamber where the idol remain be all this day open without any veil. this do every one. come and offer curtine and pendant of sandally, precious stone, jewel, incense, sweet wood, grape or ear of may quail and final, all they be accustom to offer in such solemnity. whenas they offer quail, which be the poor man offering, they use this ceremony, they deliver they to the priest, who take, they, pull off their head and cast they at the foot of the altar where. they lose their blood, and so they do. of all other thing which be offer, every one do offer meat and fruit according to their power, the which be lay at the foot of the altar and the minister gather they up and carry they to their chamber. this solemn offering do the people go to dinner, every one to his village or house, leave the feast suspend until after dinner. in the mean time, the young man and maiden of the temple, with their ornament, be busy to serve the idol with all that be appoint for he to eat, which meat be prepare by other woman who have make a vow that day to serve the idol and therefore such as have make this vow come. by the point of day, offer themselves to the deputy of the temple that they may command they what they will have do the which they do careful perform. they do prepare such variety of meat as it be admirable. this meat be ready, and the hour of dinner come. all these virgin go out of the temple in procession. every one carry a little basket of bread in her hand and in the other a dish of these meat before they march. a old man like to a steward, with a pleasant habit, he be clothe in a white surplice down to the calf of his leg, upon a doublet without sleeve of red leather like to a jacket. he carry wing instead of sleeve, from the which hang broad ribbon, at the which do hang a small calibasse or pumpion, which be cover with flower by little hole that be make in it and within it be many superstitious thing. this old man thus attire, march, very humble and heavy, before the preparation, with his head decline and come near the foot of the stair. he make a great obeisance and reverence. then go on the one side, the virgin draw near with the meat, present it in order, one after another, with great reverence, this service present the old man, return as before, lead the virgin into their convent. this do the young man and minister of the temple come forth and gather up this. meat, the which they carry to the chamber of the chief priest of the temple, who have fast five day, eat only once a day, and they have also abstain from their wife not once go out of the temple in these five day, during the which they do whip themselves rigorous with cord, they do eat of this divine meat, for so they call it what they can, neither be it lawful for any other to eat thereof. all the people have dine. they assemble again in the court to see the end of the feast, whither they bring a captive which, by the space of a whole year, have represent the idol, be, attire, deck and honour as the idol itself and do all reverence unto. he. they deliver he into the hand of the sacrificer who at that instant present themselves. take he by the foot and hand the pope, do open his stomach and pull out his heart, than do he lift up his hand as high as he can, show it to the sun and to the idol, as have be say. have thus sacrifice he that represent the idol. they go into a holy place appoint for this purpose. whither come the young man and virgin of the temple with their ornament, the which be put in order. they dance and sing with drum and other instrument on the which the chief priest do play and sound. then come all the nobleman with ensign and ornament, like to the young. man who dance round about they. they do not usual kill any other man that day, but he that be sacrifice. yet every four year they have other with he which be in the year of jubilee and full pardon. after sun set, every one be satisfy with sound, eat and drink. the virgin go all to their convent. they take great dish of earth full of bread, mix with honey, cover with small pannier wrought and fashion with dead man headsand bone and they carry the collation to the idol, mount up to the court which be before the door of the oratory and have set they down. they retire in the same order as they come. the steward go still before present. come forth, all the young man in order, with cane or reed in their hand, who begin to run as fast as they can to the top of the stair of the temple. who shall come first to the dish of the collation? the elder or chief priest, observe he that come first, second, three and four, without regard the rest. this collation be likewise all carry away by the young man as great relic. this do the four that arrive first be place in the midst of the ancient of the temple, bring they to their chamber with much honour, praise they and give they ornament, and from thence forth they be respect and reverence as man of mark. the take of this collation be end and the feast celebrate with much joy and noise, they dismiss all the young man and maid which have serve the idol by mean, whereof they go one after another. as they come forth, all the small child of the college and school be at the gate of the court with bottom of rush and herb in their hand, which they cast at. they mock and laugh as of they that come from the service of the idol. they have liberty, then, to dispose of themselves at their pleasure, and thus the feast end of the feast of merchant, which those of cholutecas do celebrate. chap 30.. although i have speak sufficient of the service the mexicaines do unto their god, yet will i speak something of the feast they call quetzacoaalt, which be the god of riches, the which be solemnize in this manner: forty day before the merchant buy a slave, well proportion, without any fault or blemish, either of sickness or of hurt, who they do attire with the ornament of the idol that he may represent it. forty day before his clothing they do cleanse he, wash he twice in a lake which they call the lake of the god, and be purify, they attire he like the idol during these forty day. he be much respect for his sake, who he represent. by night they do imprison he as have be say, leave he shall fly. and in the morning they take he out of prison, set he upon a eminent place where they serve. he give he exquisite meat to eat. after he have eat, they put a chain of flower about his neck and many nosegay in his hand. he have a well appoint guard with much people toaccompany he when he go through the city. he go dance and sing through all the street that he may be know for the resemblance of their god. and when he begin to sing, the woman and little child come forth of their house to salute he and to offer unto he as to their god. two old man of the ancient of the temple come unto he nine day before the feast and humble themselves before he. they say with a low and submiss voice: sir, you must understand that nine day hence the exercise of dance and sing do end and thou must then die. and then he must answer in a good hour. they call this ceremony neyolo maxiltleztli, which be to say the advertisement. and when they do thus advertise he, they take very careful heed. whether he be sad, or if he dance as joyful as he be, accustom the which, if he do not as cheerful as they desire, they make a foolish superstition. in this manner they present. take the sacrifice razor, the which they wash and cleanse from the blood of man which remain of the former sacrifice. of this wash, they make a drink, mingle with another liquor, make of cacao, give it he to drink. they say that this will make he forget what have be say unto he and will make he, in a manner insensible, return to his former dance and mirth. they say, moreover, that he will offer himself cheerful to death, be enchant with this drink. the cause why they seek to take from he this heaviness, be for that. they hold it for a ill augur and afore tell of some great harm. the day of the feast be come after they have. do he much honour, sing and give he incense the sacrificer. take he about midnight and do sacrifice he as have be say, offer his heart unto the moon, the which they do afterwards cast against the idol. let the body fall to the bottom of the stair of the temple where such as have offer he. take he up, which be the merchant who feast it. be then have carry he into the chief man house among they the body be dress with diverse sauce to celebrate, at the break of day, the banquet and dinner of the feast. have first bid the idol good morrow with a small dance which they make whilst the day do break, and that they prepare the sacrifice. then do all. the merchant assemble at this banquet especial, those which make it a traffic to buy and sell slave, who be bind every year to offer one for the resemblance of their god. this idol be one of the most honour in all the land and therefore the temple where he be be of great authority. there be threescore stair to ascend up unto it and on the top be a court of a indifferent largeness, very fine dress and plaster, in the midst, whereof be a great round thing like unto a oven. have the entry low and narrow so as they must stoop very low that shall enter into it. this temple have chamber and chapel as the rest, where there be convent of priest, young man. maid and child, as have be say, and there be one priest alone, resident continual, the, which they change weekly. for although there be in every one of these temple three or four curate or ancient, yet do every one serve his week without part, his charge that week after he have instruct the child be to strike up a drum every day at the sun set, to the same end that we be accustom to ring, to evensong this drum be such as they may hear the house sound thereof throughout all the part of the city, than every man shut up his merchandise and retire unto his house and there be so great a silence as there seem to be no live creature in the town. in the morning, whenas the day begin to break, they begin to sound the drum, which be a sign of the day beginning. so as traveller and stranger attend this signal to begin their journey, for till that time it be not lawful to go out of the city. there be in this temple a court of a reasonable greatness in the which they make great dance and pastime with game or comedy. the day of the idol feast, for which purpose there be in the midst of this court a theatre of thirty foot square, very fine deck and trim, the which they deck with flower that day, with all the art and invention that may be, be environ round with arch of diverse flower and feather. and in some place there be tie many small bird, coney and other tame beast. after dinner all the people assemble in this place and the player present themselves and play comedy. some counterfeit the deaf and the rheumatic, other the lame, some the blind and without hand which come to seek for cure of the idol. the deaf answer confuse, the rheumatic do cough, the lame halt, tell their misery and grief, wherewith they make the people to laugh. other come forth in the form of little beast, some be attire like snail, other like toad and some like lizardes, then meet together, they tell their office and every one retire to his place they found on small flute, which be pleasant to hear. they likewise counterfeit. butterfly and small bird of diverse colour and the child of the temple represent these form, than they go into a little forest plant there for the nonce, where the priest of the temple draw, they forth with instrument of music. in the mean time they use many pleasant speech, some in propound, other in defend, wherewith the assistant, be pleasant, entertain this. do they make a mask or mummery with all these personage, and so the feast end, the which be usual do in their principal feast. what profit may be draw out of this discourse of the indian superstition, chap 31.. this may suffice to understand the care and pain the indian take to serve and honour their idol, or rather the devil, for it be. a infinite matter and of small profit to report every thing that have pass for, that it may seem to some needless to have speak ^hus much and that it be a loss of time, as in read the fable that be feign by the roman of knighthood. but if such as hold this opinion will look well into it, they shall find great difference betwixt the one and the other, and that it may be profitable for many consideration to have the knowledge of the custom and ceremony the indian use first. this knowledge be not only profitable but also necessary in those country where these superstition have be practise to the end that christian and the master of the law of christ may know the error. and superstition of the ancient and observe if the indian use they not at this day, either secret or open. for this cause, many learned and worthy man have write large discourse of what they have find. yea, the provincial counsel have command they to write and print they, as they have do in lima, where have be make a more ample discourse than this, and therefore it import for the good of the indian that the spaniard be in those part of the indies shall have the knowledge of all these thing. this discourse may likewise serve the spaniard there and all other wheresoever, to give infinite thanks to god, our lord, who have impart so great a benefit unto we. give they his holy law, which be most just, pure and altogether profitable, the which we may well know. compare it with the law of satan, where so many wretched people have live so miserable. it may likewise serve to discover the pride, envy, deceit and ambush of the devil which he practise against those he hold captive. see, on the one side he seek to imitate god and make comparison with he and his holy law, and on the other side, he do mingle with his action so many vanity, filthiness and cruelty. as he that have no other practice but to sophisticate and corrupt all that be good. final, he that shall see the darkness and blindness wherein so many province and kingdom have live so. long time, yea, and wherein many nation and a great part of the world live, yet deceive with the like trumpery. he can not, if he have a christian heart, but give thanks to the high god for such as he have call out of so great darkness to the admirable light of his gospel, beseech the unspeakable charity of the creator to preserve and increase they in his knowledge and obedience, and likewise be grieve for those that follow still the way of perdition, and that, in the end, he beseech the father of pity to open unto they the treasure and riches of jesus christ who, with the father and holyghost, reign in all age. amen. the six book of the natural and moral history of. the indies that they err in their opinion which hold the indian to want judgement, chap 1. have treat before of the religion the indian use. i pretend to discourse in this book of their custom, policy and government for two consideration. the one be to confu^e that false opinion many do common hold of they that they be a gross and brutish people or that they have so little understanding as they scarce deserve the name of any. so as many excess and outrage be commit upon they use they like bruit beast and repute they unworthy of any respect which be so common and so dangerous a error, as they know well who, with any zeale and consideration, have travel among they and that have see. and observe their secret and counsel. and moreover, for the small regard, many m^^e of these indian, who presume to know much and yet be common, the most ignorant and presumptuous, i find no better- mean to confound this pernicious opinion then, in relate their order and manner, whenas they live under their own law in which, although they have many barbarous thing and without ground, yet have they many other worthy of great admiration, whereby we may understand that they be by nature capable to receive any good instruction, and beside they do in some thing pass many of our commonweal. it be no matter of marvel if there be so great and gross fault among they. see there have be likewise among the most famous law. giver and philosopher yea, without exception, lycurgus and plato, and amongst the wise commonwealth as the roman and athenian, where we may find thing so full of ignorance and so worthy of laughter, as, in truth, if the commonweal of the mexicaines or of the have be know in those time of the roman and the greek, their law and governement have be much esteem by they, but we, at this day, little regard this, enter by the sword without hear or understand, persuade ourselves that the indian affair deserve no other respect but as of venison that be take in the forest and bring for our use and delight the most grave and diligent which have search and attain to the knowledge of their secret custom and ancient government, hold another opinion and admire the order and discourse that have be betwixt, they of which number be polo ondeguardo, who i usual follow in the discourse of matter of peru, and for these of mexico, john de touar, who have a prebend in the church of mexico, and be now of our company of jesuit, who, by the commandment of the viceroy, don martin enriques, have make a diligent and a large collection of the history of that nation, and many other grave and notable personage who, both by word and writing, have sufficient inform i of all those thing. i shall here set down the other end and the good which may follow by the knowledge of the law, custom and government of the indian. be that we may help and govern they with the same law and custom, for that they ought to be rule according to their own law and privilege, so far forth as they do not contradict the law of christ and his holy church, which ought to be maintain and keep as their fundamental law. for the ignorance of law and custom have breed many error of great importance. for that the governor and judge know not well how to give sentence nor rule their subject, and beside the wrong which be do unto they against reason, it be prejudicial and hurtful. unto ourselves, for thereby they take occasion to abhor we as man, both in good and in evil, always contrary unto they. of the supputation of time and the calendar, the mexicaines use chap 2.. and to begin then by the division and supputation of time which the indian make, wherein true we may well perceive the great sign of their vivacity and good understanding, i will first show in what sort the mexica^nes count and divide their year, their month, their calendar, their computation, their world and age. they divide the year into eighteen month, to which they give twenty day, wherein the three hundred and three score day be accomplish, not comprehend, in any of these month, the five day that remain, and make the year. perfect, but they do reckon they apart and call they the day of nothing, during the which the people do not any thing. neither go they to their temple, but occupy themselves only in visit one another, and so spend the time the sacrificer of the temple do likewise cease their sacrifice. these five day be past. they begin the computation of the year, whereof the first month and the beginning be in march, when the leaf begin to grow green, although they take three day of the month of february for the first day of their year, be as it be the six and twenty day of february, as appear by their calendar, within the which we be likewise comprehend and contain with a very ingenious art. which be make by the ancient indian that know the first spaniard. i have see this calendar and have it yet in my custody, which well deserve the sight to understand the discourse and industry the mexicaine indian have, every one of these eighteen month, have his proper name and his proper picture, the which be common take of the principal feast that be make in that month or from the diversity of time which the year cause in that month. they have in this calendar certain day mark and distinguish for their feast, and they account their week by thirteen day, ma^king the day with a or cipher which they multiply unto thirteen and then begin to count one, two, etc. they do likewise mark the year. of these wheel with four sign or figure, attribute to every year a peculiar sign, whereof one be of a house, a other of a coney, the three of a reed and the four of a flint they paint, they in this sort note, by those figure, the year that do run, say, of so many house, of so many flint of such a wheel. happen such a thing, for we must understand that their wheel, which be a age, contain four week of year, every week contain thirteen year, which in all make fifty two year. in the midst of this wheel they paint a sun from the which go four beam or line in cross to the circumference of the wheel and they make their course. even as the circumference be divide into four equal part, every one with his line, have a distinct colour from the rest, and the four colour be green, blue, red and yellow. every portion of these four have thirteen separation, which have all their sign or particular figure of a house, a coney, a reed or a flint. note by every sign a year and upon the head of this sign they paint what have happen that year and therefore i do see in the calendar mention the year when the spaniard enter mexico, mark by the picture of a man clad in red, after our manner, for such be the habit of the first spaniard who fernand cortes send at the end of the two and fifty. year which finish the wheel, they use a pleasant ceremony which be the last night. they do break all their vessel and stuff and put out their fire and all the light, say that the world shall end at the finish of one of these wheel. and it may be at that time for, say they see, the world must then end what need be there to provide meat to eat and therefore they have no further need of vessel nor fire. upon this conceit they pass the night in great fear, say it may happen, there will be no more day, and they watch very careful for the day. but when they see the day begin to break they present beat many drum and sound cornet flute. and other instrument of joy and gladness, say that god do yet prolong the time with another age, which be fifty two year, and then begin a other wheel, the first day and beginning of this age. they take new fire and buy new vessel to dress their meat and all go to the high priest for this new fire, have first make a solemn sacrifice and give thanks for the come of the day and prolongation of a other age. this be their manner of account their year, month, week and age. how the king account the year and month, chap 3.. although this supputation of time practise amongst the mexicaines be ingenious enough and certain for man that have no learning yet, in my opinion, they want discourse and consideration, have not ground their computation according unto the course of the moon, nor distribute their month according, wherein those of peru have far surpass they, for they divide their year into as many day- perfect accomplish, as we do here- and into twelve month or moon, in the which they employ and consume the eleven day that remain of the moon, as polo write, to make the computation of their year sure and certain. they use this industry, upon the mountain which be about the city of cusco, where the king hold their court, be the great sanctuary of. those realm and, as we shall say, a other rome, there be twelve pillar, set in order and in such distance the one from the other, as every month one of these pillar do note the rise and set of the sun. they call they suceanga by mean, whereof they teach and show the feast and the season fit to sow and reap and to do other thing. they do certain sacrifice to these pillar of the sun, every month have his proper name and peculiar feast. they begin the year by january, as we do, but since a king ingua, call pachacuto, which signify a reformer of the temple, begin their year by december, by reason, as i conjecture, that then the sun return from the last. point of capricorn, which be the tropic near unto they. i know not whether the one or the other have observe any bisexte, although some hold the contrary. the week which the mexicaines do reckon be not proper week be not of seven day, the likewise make no mention thereof, which be no wonder. see the account of the week be not ground upon the course of the sun as that of the year, nor of the moon as that of the month, but among the hebrew i^ be ground upon the creation of the world, as moses report, and amongst the greek and latin upon the number of the seven planet. of who name the day of the week have take their denomination. yet be it much. for those indian be man without book and learning to have a year, season and feast, so well appoint, as i have say that no nation of the indies have be find to have have the use of letter, chap 4.. letter be invent to signify proper the word we do pronounce, even as word, according to the philosopher, be the sign and demonstration of man, thought and conception. and both the one and the other i say. the letter and word be ordain to make thing know the voice for such as be present and letter for the absent and such as be to come. sign and mark which be not proper to signify word but thing can be call. neither in truth be they letter, although they be write, for we can not say that the picture of the sun be a writing of the sun, but only a picture. the like may be, say, of other sign and character which have no resemblance to the thing but serve only for memory for he that invent they, do not ordain they to signify word, but only to note the thing. neither do they call those character letter or writing, as indeed they be not, but rather cipher or remembrance, as those be which the spherist or astronomer do use to signify diverse sign or planet of mars, venus, jupiter, etc. such character be cipher and no letter for what name soever mars may have. in italian, french or spanish, this character do always signify it, the which be not find in letter, for although they siguify the thing, yet be it by mean of word. so as they which know not the tongue, understand they not, as for example the greek nor the hebrew, can conceive what this word sol do signify although they see it write, for that they understand not the latin word. so as writing and letter be only practise by they which signify word therewith. for if they signify thing, mediate, they be no more letter nor writing but cipher and picture whereby we may observe two notable thing: the one that the memory of history and antiquity may be preserve by one of these three mean either by letter and writing, as have be use among the latin, greek, hebrew and many other nation, or by paint, as have be use almost throughout all the world, for it be say in the second nicene counsel, paint be a book for fool which can read. or by cipher and character, as the cipher signify the number of a hundred, a thousand and other, without note the word of a hundred or a thousand. the other thing we may observe thereby be that which be propound in this chapter, which be that no nation of the indies discover in our time have have the use of letter and writing, but of the other two sort, image and figure, the which i observe not only of the indies of peru and new spain but also of jappon and china, and although this may seem false to some, see it be testify by the discourse that have be write that there be so great library and university in china and jappon and that mention be make of their chapas, letter and expedition. yet that which i say, be true as you may understand by the discourse, follow of the fashion of letter and book. the chinois use, chap 5.. there be many which think, and it be the most common opinion, that the writing which the chinois use be letter, as those we use in europe, and that by they we may write word and discourse, and that they only differ from our letter and writing in the diversity of character, as the greek differ from the latin and the hebrew from the chaldee. but it be not so, for they have no alphabet, neither write they any letter, but all their writing be nothing else but paint and cipher, and their letter signify no part of distinction, as we do, but be figure and representation of thing as of the sun, of fire, of a man, of the sea and of other thing, the which appear plain. for that their writing and chapas be understand of they all, although the language the chinois speak be many and very different, in like sort as our number of cipher be equal, understooode in the spanish, french and arabian tongue for this figure 8.. wheresoever it be, signify eight, although the french call this number of one sort and the spaniard of another. so as thing be of themselves innumerable. the letter likewise, or figure, which the chinois use to signify they by be in a manner infinite, so as he that shall read or write at china, as the mandarin do, must know and keep in memory, at the least fourscore and five thousand character or letter, and those which be perfect herein know above sixscore thousand, astrange and prodigious thing. yea, incredible if it be not testify by man worthy of credit as the father of our company, who be there, continual learn their language and writing, wherein they have study day and night, above ten year, with a continual labour, for the charity of christ and the desire of salvation of soul prevail in they, above all this. labour and difficulty. for this reason learned man be so much esteem in china for the difficulty there be to conceive. they and those only have the office of mandarin, governor, judge and captain. for this cause, the father take great pain to instruct their child to read and write. there be many of these school where the child be teach, where the master teach they by day and the father at home by night, so as they hurt their eye much and they whip they often with reed, although not so severe as they do offender, they call it the mandarin tongue, which require a man age to be conceive. and you must understand that although the tongue which the mandarin speak be peculiar and different from the vulgar, which be many, and that they study it as they do latin and greek here, and that the learned only throughout all china do understand it. so it be notwithstanding that all that be write in it be understand in all tongue, and although all the province do not understand one another by speak, yet by writing they do, for there be but one sort of figure and character for they all, which signify one thing, but not the same word and prolation. see, as i have say, they be only to denote the thing and not the word, as we may easy understand by the example of number. in cipher, and they of jappon. and the chinois do read and understand well the writing one of another, although they be diverse nation and different in tongue and language. if they speak what they read or write they shall not be understand, such be the letter and book the chinois use. be so famous in the world, to make their impression, they grave a board or plank with the figure they will print. then do they stamp as many leaf of paper as they list of the same sort as they have, make their picture, the which be grave in copper or wood. but a man of judgement may ask how they can signify their conception by figure which approach, near or resemble the thing they will. represent, as to say the sun heat, or that he have behold the sun or the day be of the sun, final, how it be possible to denote by the same figure the case, the conjunction and the article which be in many tongue and writing. i answer thereunto that they distinguish and signify this variety by certain point, strike and disposition of the figure, but it be difficult to understand how they can write proper name in their tongue, especial of stranger be thing they have never see and notable to invent figure proper unto they. i have make trial thereof. be in mexico with the chinois. will they to write this proposition in their language. joseph acosta be come from peru and such like, whereupon the chinois be long pensive, but in the end he do write it, the which other chinois do after read, although they do vary a little in the pronountiation of the proper name, for they use this devise to write a proper name. they seek out something in their tongue that have resemblance to that name and set down the figure of this thing. and as it be difficult among so many proper name to find thing to resemble, they in the prolation, so be it very difficult and troublesome to write such name. upon this purpose. father allonso sanchez tell we that when he be in china, be lead into diverse tribunal seat, from manderin to manderin, they be long in put his name in write in their chapas. yet in the end they do write it after their manner, and so ridiculous that they scarce come never to the name. and this be the fashion of letter and writing which the chinois use, that of the japponois approach very near, although they affirm that the nobleman of jappon that come into europe do write all thing very easy in their language, be they of our proper name. yea, i have have some of their writing, show i, whereby it seem they shall have some kind of letter, although the great part of their writing be by the character and figure, as have be say, of the chinois of the school and university of china, chap 6. the father of our company, say that they have not see in china any great school or university of philosophy and other natural science, believe there be not any, but that all their study be in the mandarin tongue, which be very ample and hard, as i have say, and what they study be thing write in their own tongue, which be history of sect and opinion, of civil law, of moral proverb, of fable and many other such composition that depend thereon. of divine science, they have no knowledge, neither of natural thing, but some small remainder of stray proposition, without art or method, according to every man, wit and study. as for the mathematics, they have experience of the celestial motion and of the star, and for physic they have knowledge of herb by mean, whereof they cure many disease and use it much. they write with pencil and have many book, write with the hand and other print, but in a bad order. they be great player of come die, the which they perform with great preparation of theatre apparel, bell, drum and voice. some father report to have see comedy which last ten or twelve day and night, without any want of comedian nor company to behold. they. they do make many different scene and whilst some act, the other feed and sleep. in these comedy they do common treat of moral thing and of good. example, intermingle with pleasant devise, this be the sum of that which our man report, of the letter and exercise of they of china, wherein we must confess to be much wit and industry, but all this be of small substance. for, in effect, all the knowledge of the chinois tend only to read and write, and no far, for they attain to no high knowledge and their writing and read be not proper. read and write see their letter be no letter that can represent word, but figure of innumerable thing, the which can be learn, but in a long time and with infinite labour, but in the end with all their knowledge. a indian of peru or mexico that have learned to read and write know more than the wise mandarin that be among they. for that, the indian with four and twenty letter, which he have learned, will write all the word in the world, and a mandarin with his hundred thousand letter will be trouble to write some proper name, as of martin or alonso, and with great reason he shall be less able to write the name of thing he know. not so as the write in china be no other thing but a manner of paint or ciphr of the fashion of letter and writing which the mexicaines use. chap 7. we find amongst the nation of new spain a great knowledge and memory of antiquity. and therefore search by what mean the indian have preserve their history and so many particularity. i learn that, although they be not so subtle and curious as the chinois and those of jappon, yet have they some kind of letter and book amongst they whereby they preserve, after their manner, the deed of their predecessor. in the province of yu-lata^, where the bishopric be which they call honduras, there be book of the leaf of tree, fold and square after their manner, in the which the wise indian contain the distribution of their time, the knowledge of the planet, of beast and other natural thing with their antiquity, a thing full of great curiosity and diligence. it seem to some pedant that all this be a enchantment. and magic art who do, obstinate, maintain that they ought to be burn so as they be, commit to the fire, which, since not only the indian find to be ill, do, but also the curious spaniard who desire to know the secret of the country. the like have happen in other thing for our man. think that all be but superstition, have lose many memorial of a ancient and holy thing which may have profit much. this proceed of a foolish and ignorant zeal who not know nor seek to know what concern the indian say, preiudicate that they be all but witchcraft and that all the indian be but drunkard, incapable to know or learn any thing, for such as will be curious inform of they. have find many thing worthy of consideration. one of our company of jesuit, a man very witty and well experience, do assemble in the province of mexico, the ancient of tescuco of and of mexico, confer at large, with they who show unto he their book, history and calendar, thing very worthy the sight because they have their figure and hieroglyphic whereby they represent thing in this manner, such as have form or figure be represent by their proper image and such as have not any be represent by character that signify they, and by this mean they figure and write what they will, and to observe the time when any thing do happen. they have those paint wheel. for every one of they contain a age, which be two and fifty year, as have be say, and of the side of those wheel they do paint, with figure and character, right against the year, the memorable thing that happen therein, as they note the year whenas the spaniard enter their country. they paint a man with a hat and a red jerkin upon the sign of the reed which do rule then and so of other accident. but for that their writing and character be not sufficient, as our letter and writing be, they can not so plain express the word but only the substance of their conception, and forasmuch as they be accustom to rehearse discourse and dialogue by heart. compound by their orator and ancient rhethoritian and many chapas make by their poet which be impossible to learn by their hieroglyphic and character. the mexicaines be very curious to have their child learn those dialogue and composition by heart, for the which cause they have school and as it be college or seminary where the ancient teach child these oration and many other thing which they preserve among they by tradition from one to another as perfect as if they have be write especial, the most famous nation, have a care to have their child which have any inclination to be rhetorician and to practice the office of orator, to learn these oration by heart, so as when the spaniard come into their country and have teach they read and write our letter. many of the indian than write these oration as some grave man do, witness that have read they. which i say. for that some which shall haply read these long and eloquent discourse in the mexicaine history will easy believe they have be invent by the spaniard and not real take and report from the indian. but have know the certain truth they will give credit as reason be to their history. they do also write these discourse after their manner, by character and image, and i have see for my better satisfaction the and simboll or general confession of our faith, write in this manner by the indian. and in truth whosoever shall see they will wonder thereat. for to signify these word, i a sinner do confess myself- they paint a indian upon his knee at a religious man foot, as one that confess. himself and for this to god most mighty. they paint three face with their crown, like to the trinity and to the glorious virgin marie, they paint the face of our lady and half the body of a little child and for s peter and s paul, head with crown and a key with a sword. and whereas image fail, they do set character as wherein i have sin, etc. whereby we may conceive the quickness of spirit of these indian. see this manner of write of our prayer and matter of faith. have not be teach they by the spaniard, neither can they have do it if they have not have a excellent conception of that. be teach they, and i have see in peru a confession. of sin bring by a indian, write in the same fort with picture and character, paint every one of the ten commandment after a certain manner, where there be certain mark, like cipher, which be the sin he have commit against the commandment. i nothing doubt. but if any of the most sufficient spaniard be employ to make memorial of the like thing by their image and mark, they will not attain unto it in a whole year, no, not in ten of register and the manner of reckon which the indian of peru use, chap 8.. before the spaniard come to the indies, they of peru have no kind of writing, either letter, character, cipher or figure, like to those of china and mexico, yet preserve they. the memory of their antiquity and maintain a order in all their affair of peace, war and policy. for that they be careful, observer of tradition from one to another and the young one learn and careful, keep as a holy thing what their superior have tell they and teach it with the like care to their posterity. beside this diligence, they supply the want of letter and writing, partly by paint, as those of mexico, although they of peru be very gross and blockish, and partly, and most common, by quippos. these quippos be memorial or register, make of bow, in the which there be diverse knot and colour which do signify diverse thing and it be strange to see what they have express and represent by this mean. for their quippos, serve they instead of book of history, of law, ceremony and account of their affair. there be officer appoint to keep these quippos, the which at this day they call quipocamayos, the which be bind to give a account of every thing, as notary and register do here, therefore, they full believe they in all thing, for according to the variety of business, as war, policy, tribute, ceremony and land, there be sundry quippos or branch, in every one of the which there be so many knot. little and great, and string, tie unto they some red, some green, some blue, some white and final. such diversity that even as we derive a infinite number of word from the four and twenty letter, apply they in diverse sort, so do they draw innumerable word from their knot. and diversity of colour, which thing they do? in such a manner that if at this day in peru any commissary come at the end of two or three year to take information upon the life of any officer, the indian come with their small reckon verify, say that in such a village they have give he so many egg which he have not pay for. in such a house, a hen in a other, two burden of grass for his horse and that he have pay, but so much money and remain debtor. so much the proof be present. make with these number of knot and handful of cord it remain for a certain testimony and register. i do see a handful of these string wherein a indian woman carry write a general confession of all her life and thereby confess herself as well as i can have do it in write paper. i ask she what those string mean that differ from the rest, she answer i they be certain circumstance which the sin require to be full confess. beside these quippos of thread they have a other, as it be a. kind of write with small stone by mean, whereof they learn: punctual, the word they desire to know by heart. it be a pleasant thing to see the old and the impotent with a wheel make of small stone, learn the with another, the maria with another, the creed, and to remember what stone signify, which be conceive by the holy-ghost and which suffer under pontius pilate. it be a pleasant thing to see they correct themselves when they do err, for all their correction consist only in behold of their small stone. one of these wheel be sufficient to make i forget all that i do know by heart. there be a great number of these wheel in the churchyard for this purpose. but it seem a kind of witchcraft to see a other kind of quippos which they make of grain of may. for to cast up a hard account wherein a good arithmetitian will be trouble with his pen to make a division, to see how much every one must contribute, they do draw so many grain from one side and add so many to another. with a thousand other invention. these indian will take their grain and place five of one side, three of another and eight of another, and will change one grain of one side and three of another, so as they finish a certain account without err in any point, and they soon submit themselves to reason by these quippos, what every one ought to pay than we can do with the pen. hereby we may judge if they have any understanding or be brutish. for my part, i think they pass we in those thing, whereunto they do apply themselves of the order the indian hold in their writing, chap 9. it shall be good to add hereunto what we have observe touch the indian writing for their manner. be not to write with a continue line, but from the top to the bottom or in circlewise. the latin and greek do write from the left hand unto the right, which be the vulgar and common manner we do use. the hebrew, contrariwise, begin at the right to the left, and therefore their book begin where we do end. the chinois write neither like the greek nor like the hebrew, but from the top to the bottom, for, as they be no letter but whole word, and that every figure and character signify a thing, they have no need to assemble the part one with a other, and therefore they may well write from the top to the bottom. those of mexico, for the same cause, do not write in line from one side to another but, contrary to the chinois, begin below, they mount upward. they use this manner of writing in the account of their day and other thing which they observe. yet when they do write in their wheel or sign, they begin from the midst, where the sun be figure, and so mount by their year unto the round and circumference of the wheel. to conclude, we find four different kind of writing. some write from the right to the left, other from the left to the right, some from the top to the bottom and other from the foot to the top, wherein we may discover the diversity of man, judgement how the indian dispatch their messenger, chap 10.. to finish the manner they have of writing, some may, with reason, doubt how the king of mexico and peru have intelligence from all those realm that be so great, or by what mean they can dispatch their affair in court. see, they have no use of any letter, nor to write packet. wherein we may be satisfy of this doubt when we understand that by word, picture and these memorial they be often advertise of that which pass for this. cause there be man of great agility which serve as currier to go and come, who they do nourish in this exercise of run from their youth labour to have they well breathe, that they may run to the top of a high hill without weariness. and therefore in mexico they give the prize to three or four that first mount up the stair of the temple, as have be say in the former book. and in cusco, when they make their solemn feast of capacrayme, the novice do run. who can fast up the rock of ynacauri. and the exercise of run be general much use among the indian. whenas there chance any matter of importance, they send unto the lord of mexico the thing paint whereof they will advertise they as they do when the first spanish ship appear to their ^ight and when they take topanchan in peru, they be very curious. of footman and the ingua have they in all part of the realm as ordinary post call, whereof shall be speak in his place, of the manner of government and of the king which the indian have, chap 11.. it be apparent that the thing wherein these barbarous people show their barbarism be in their government and manner of command, for the more that man approach to reason, the more mild be their government and less insolent the king and lord be more. tractable, agree better with their subject, acknowledge they equal in nature, though inferior in duty and care of the commonwealth, but among the barbarian, all be contrary. for that, their government be tyrannous, use their subject like beast and seek to be reverence like god. for this occasion, many nation of the indies have not endure any king or absolute and sovereign lord, but live in commonalty, create and appoint captain and prince for certain occasion only, to who they obey during the time of their charge. then, after they return to their former estate, the great part of this new world, where there be no settle kingdom nor establish commonweal, neither prince nor succeed king. they govern themselves in this manner, although there be some lord and principal man raise above the common sort. in this sort, the whole country of chille be govern, where the auracanes, those of teucapell and other have so many year resist the spaniard, and in like sort, all the new kingdom of grenad^, that of guatimalla, the island, all florida, bresil, l^s^^ and other country of great circuit, but that in some place they be yet more barbarous, scarce, acknowledge any head, but all command and govern in common, have no other thing but will violence, industry and disorder. so as he that most may most command. at the east indies, there be great kingdom, well order and govern, as that of sian bisnaga and other, which may bring to field when they please a hundred or two hundred thousand man, as likewise the kingdom of china, the which in greatness and power surpass all the rest, who, king, as they report, have continue above two thousand year by mean of their good order and government. but at the west indies, they have only find two kingdom or settle empire, that of the mexicaines in new spain and of the in peru. it be not easy to be say which of the two be the mighty kingdom, for that. motecuma exceed they of peru in building and in the greatness of his court, but the do likewise exceed the mexicaines in treasure, riches and greatness of province. in regard of antiquity, the monarchy of the have the advantage, although it be not much, and in my opinion they have be equal in feat of arm and victory. it be most certain that these two kingdom have much exceed all the indian province discover in this new world as well in good order and government as in power and wealth, and much more in superstition and service of their idol. have many thing like one to a other, but in one. thing they differ much for: among the mexicaines the succession of the kingdom be by election, as the empire of the roman, and that of peru be hereditary and they succeed in blood, as the kingdom of france and spain. i will therefore hereafter treat of these two government as the chief subject and best know among the indian be fit for this discourse. leave many and tedious thing which be not of importance of the government of the king and of peru, chap 12.. the ingua which rule in peru be dead. his lawful son succeed he, and so they hold he that be bear of his chief wife, who they call coya, the which they have always observe, since the time of a ingua call yupangui. who marry his sister. for these king hold it a honour to marry their sister and although they have other wife and concubine, yet the succession of the kingdom appertain to the son of the coya. it be true that when the king have a legitimate brother he succeed before the son and after he, his nephew and son to the first. the curaca and nobleman hold the same order of succession. in their good and office and after their manner they make excessive ceremony and obsequy for the dead. they observe one custom, very great and full of state, that a king which enter new into his kingdom shall not inherit any thing of the movable implement and treasure of his predecessor, but he must furnish his. house new and gather together gold, silver and other thing necessary, not touch any thing of the decease, the which be whole dedicate for his oratory or guaca and for the entertainment of the family. he leave the which, with his offspring, be always busy at the sacrifice ceremony and service of the decease king for be dead they present. hold he for a god, make sacrifice unto he image and such like. by this mean there be infinite treasure in peru for every one of the have labour to have his oratory and treasure surpass that of his predecessor. the mark or ensign whereby they take possession of the realm be a red roll of wool more fine than silk, the which hang in the midst of. his forehead and none but the ingua alone may wear it. for that it be as a crown and royal diadem. yet they may lawful wear a roll hang on the one side near unto the ear, as some nobleman do, but only the ingua may carry it in the midst of his forehead. at such time as they take this roll or wreath, they make solemn feast and many sacrifice with a great quantity of vessel of gold and silver, a great number of small form or image of sheep make of gold and silver, great abundance of the stuff of cumby, well wrought, both fine and courser, many shell of the sea of all sort, many feather and a thousand sheep, which must be of diverse. colour. then the chief priest take a young child in his hand of the age of six or eight year. pronounce these word with the other minister. speak to the image of viracocha. lord, we offer this unto thou that thou may maintain we in quiet and help we in our war. maintain our lord the ingua in his greatness and estate that he may always increase. give he much knowledge to govern we there be present at this ceremony and oath man of all part of the realm and of all guaca and sanctuary, and without doubt the affection and reverence this people bare to their king be very great, for it be never find that any one of his subject commit treason against he for that. they proceed in their government not only with a absolute power but also with good order and justice, suffer no man to be. oppress, the ingua place governor in diverse province, among the which some be superior and do acknowledge none but himself, other be of less command and other more particular, with so goodly a order and such gravity as no man dare be drink nor take a ear of may from his neighbour. these hold it for a maxim that it be necessary to keep the indian always in action, and therefore we see it to this day, long cawsey and work of great labour, the which they say be make to exercise the indian lest they shall remain idle when he conquer any new province. he be accustom present to send the great part and the chief of that country into other province, or else to his court, and they call they at this day in peru, mitimas, and in their place he send other of the nation of cusco, especial the, which be as knight of a ancient house. they punish fault rigorous and therefore such as have any understanding hereof, hold opinion that there can be no better government for the indian. no more assure, then, that of the of the distribution, the make of their vessel, chap 13.. to relate more particular what i have speak before, you must understand that the distribution which the make of their vessel be so exact and distinct as he may govern they all. with great facility, although his realm be a thousand league, long for have, conquer a province he present, reduce the indian into town and commonalty the, which he divide into band. he appoint one to have the charge over every ten indian, over every hundred another, over every thousand another and over ten thousand another, who they call the, which be one of the great charge. yet, above all, in every province there be a governor of the house of the, who all the rest obey, give unto he every year, in particular, account of what have pass, that be of such as be bear, of those that be dead and of their troop and grain. the governor go every year out of cusco, where they remain, and return to the great feast of rayme, at the which they bring the tribute of the whole realm to the court. neither may they enter, but with this condition, all the kingdom be divide into four part, which they call tahuantinsuyo, that be chinchasuyo, collasuyo, andesuyo and condesuyo, according to the four way, which go from cusco, where the court be resident and where the general assembly of the realm be make these way and province be answerable unto. they be towards the four quarter of the wo^ld: collasuyo to the south, chinchasuyo to the north, condesuyo to the west and and^suyo to the east. in every town and village there be two sort of people. which be of hanansaya and vrinsaya, which be as much to say as those above and those below. when they command any work to be do or to furnish any thing to the ingua, the officer know present how much every province, town and family aught to furnish, so as the division be not make by equal portion but by cottization according to the quality and wealth of the country, so as, for example, if they be to gather a hundred thousand fan^gues of may, they know present how much every province be to contribute, be it a ten, a seven or a five part, the like be of town and village, aillo or lineage. the quipocamayos, which be the officer and intendant, keep the account of all. with their string and knot, without fail, set down what every one have pay, even to a hen or a burden of wood, and in a moment they do see, by diverse regis^ers, what every one ought to pay of the edifice and manner of building of the chap 14.. the edifice and building which the make in temple, fortress way, country house and such like, be many in number and of a excessive labour, as do appear at this day by their ruin and remainder, both in cusco, tyaguanaco, tambo and other place where there be stone of a unmeasurable greatness, so as man can conceive how they be cut, bring and set in their place. there come great number of people from all province to work. in these building and fortress which the ingua cause to be make in cusco or other part of the realm, as these work be strange and to amaze the beholder, wherein they use no mortar nor cement, neither any iron or steel to cut and set the stone in work. they have no engine or other instrument to carry they, and yet be they so artificial wrought that in many place they can not see the joint, and many of these stone be so big that it be a incredible thing if one shall not see they. at tiaguanaco i do measure a stone of thirty eight foot long, of eighteen broad and six thick, and in the wall of the fortress of cusco, which be of moallon. there be stone of a great bigness and, that which be most strange, these stone be not cut nor square to join, but contrariwise very unequal one with another in form and greatness. yet do they join they together, without cement, after a incredible manner. all this be do by the force of man who endure their labour with a invincible patience. for to join one stone with a other they be force to handle and try. many of they often be uneven. the ingua appoint every year. what number of people shall labour in these stone and building? and the indian make a division amongst they as of other thing, so as no man be oppress, although these building be great, yet be they common ill appoint. and unfit, almost like to the mosquite or building of the barbarian. they can make no arch in their edifice, no^ mortar or cement to build. they withal when they see arch of wood build upon the river of xaura. the bridge be finish and the wood break down, they all begin to run away, suppose that the bridge, which be of stone, shall present, fall. but when they find it to stand firm and that the spaniard go on it, the cacique say to his companion: it be reason. we shall serve these man who in truth seem to be the child of the sun. the bridge they make be of reed plait, which they tie to the bank with great stake, for that they can not. make any bridge ofstone or wood, the bridge which be at this day upon the current of the great lake chiquitto in collao, be admirable for the course of that water, be so deep as they can not settle any foundation and so broad that it be impossible to make a arch to pass it, so as it be altogether impossible to make a bridge either of wood or stone. but the wit and industry of the indian invent a mean to make a firm and assure bridge, be only of straw, which seem fabulous, yet be it very true. for, as we have say before, they do bind together certain bundle of reed and weed, which do grow in the lake that they call torora and be a light matter that sink not in the water. they cast it upon a great quantity of reed, then have tie those bundle of weed to either side of the river. both man and beast go over it with ease, pass over this bridge. i have wonder that of so common and easy a thing they have make a bridge better and more assure than the bridge of boat from. sevill to triane. i have measure the length of this bridge and as i remember it be above three hundred foot, and they say that the depth of this current be very great and it seem above that the water have no motion. yet they say that at the bottom it have a violent and very furious course and this shall suffice for building of the revenue and the order of tribute they impose upon the indian chap 15.. the riches be incomparable, for although no king do inherit the riches and treasure of his predecessor yet have he at command all the riches of his realm, aswell silver and gold as the stuff of cumbi and cattle wherein they abound, and their great riches of all be. their innumerable number of vassal, which be all employ as it please the king, they bring out of every province what he have choose for tribute: the chicas send he sweet and rich wood, the lucanas send brancar to carry his litter, the dancer, and so the other province send he what they have of abundance, beside their general tribute, whereunto every one contribute. the indian, that be note to that end, labour in the mine of gold and silver which do abound in peru, who the ingua entertain with all they need for their expense. and whatsoever they draw of gold and silver, be for he. by this mean, there be so great treasure in this kingdom, as it be the opinion of many, that what fall. in the hand of the spaniard, although it be very much, as we know, be it not the ten part of that which they hide and bury in the ground, the which they can never discover notwithstanding all the search, covetousness have, teach they but the great wealth of these barbarous people, be that their vassal be all slave who labour, they use at their pleasure, and that which be admirable, they employ they in such sort as it be no servitude unto they, but rather a please life. but to understand the order of tribute which the indian pay unto their lord, you must know that when the ingua conquer any city, he divide all the land into three part. the first be for religion and ceremony. so as the pachayachaqui, which be the creator and the sun, the chuquilla, which be the thunder, the pachamana and the dead, and other guaca and sanctuary have every one their proper land, the fruit whereof be spoil and consume in sacrifice and in the nourish of minister and priest. for there be indian appoint for every guaca and sanctuary, and the great part of this revenue be spend in cusco, where be the universal and general sanctuary, and the rest in that city where it be gather. for that, after the imitation of cusco, there be in every city guacas and oratory of the same order and with the same function, which be serve after the same manner and ceremony to that of cusco, which be a. admirable thing, and they have find it by proof in above a hundred town, some of they distant above two hundred league from cusco: that which they sow or reap upon their land be put into house as grenier or storehouse build for that effect, and this be a great part of the tribute which the indian pay. i can not say how much this part amount unto, for that it be great in some part than in other, and in some place it be in a manner: all and this part be the first they put to profit. the second part of these land and inheritance be for the jugua, wherewith he and his household be entertain with his kinsfolk, nobleman, garrison and soldier, and therefore it be the great portion of these tribute, as it appear by the quantity of gold, silver and other tribute which be in house appoint for that purpose, be long and large than those where they keep the revenue of the guaca. they bring this tribute very careful, to cusco or unto such place where it be needful for the soldier and when there be store that keep it ten or twelve year until a time of necessity, the indian till and put to profit the land next to those of the guaca, during which time they live and be. nourish at the charge of the ingua of the sun or of the guaca, according to the land they labour. but the old man, woman and sick folk be reserve and exempt from this tribute. and although whatsoever they gather upon those land, be for the ingua, the sun or the guac^s, yet the property appertain unto the indian and their successor. the three part of these land be give by the ingua for the commonalty, and they have not yet discover whether this portion be great or less than that of the ingua or guacas. it be most certain they have a care and regard it may be sufficient for the nourishment of the people. no particular man possess any thing proper to himself of this three. portion. neither do the indian ever possess any, if it be not by special grace from the. and yet may it not be engage nor divide amongst his heir. they every year divide these land of the commonalty in give to every one that which be needful for the nourishment of their person and family. and as the family increase or diminish, so do they increase or decrease his portion. for there be measure appoint for every person. the indian pay no tribute of that which be apportion unto they. for all, their tribute be to till and keep in good order the land of the ingua and the guaca and to lay the fruit thereof in their storehouse. when the year be barren, they give of these. fruit thus reserve to the needy, for that there be always superaboundance. the ingua do likewise make destribution of the cattle as of the land which be to number and divide. they then to appoint the pasture and limit for the cattle belong to the guaca and to the ingua and to every town, and therefore one portion of their revenue be for religion, another for the ingua and the three for the indian themselves. the like order be observe among the hunter, be forbid to take or kill any female. the troop of the and be in great number and very fruitful. for this cause. they call they capaellama, but those of the common and public be few in number and of small value and therefore they call they bacchallama. the ingua take great care for the preservation of cattle, for that it have be and be yet all the wealth of the country. and as it be say. they do neither sacrifice any female nor kill they, neither do they take they when they hunt. if the mangy or the scurvy, which they call, take any beast, they be present command to bury it quick, lest it shall infect other. they do shear their cattle in their season and distribute to every one to spin and weave stuff for the service of his family. they have searcher to examine. if they do employ themselves in these work, and to punish the negligent, they make stuff of the wool of the cattle for he and for his family, one sort very fine, which they call cumbi, and another grosser, which they likewise call abasca. there be no certain number of these stuff and garment appoint, but what be deliver to every one. the wool that remain be put into the storehouse, whereof the spaniard find they full, and with all other thing necessary for the life of man. there be few man of judgement, but do admire at so excellent and well settle a government. see the indian be neither religious nor christian, maintain after their manner this perfection, nor to hold any thing proper and to provide. for all their necessity, entertain with such abundance matter of religion and that which concern their king and lord, of art and office which the indian do exercise. chap 16. the indian of peru have one perfection, which be to teach their young child all art and occupation necessary for the life of man. for that there be no particular tradesman, as amongst we tailor, shoemaker, weaver and the rest, but every one learn what be needful for their person and house and provide for themselves. all can weave and make their garment and therefore the furnish they with wool give they clothes. every man can till the ground and put it to profit without hire of any labourer. all build their own house and the woman understand. most they be not breed up in delight but serve their husband careful. other art and trade which be not ordinary and common for the life of man have their proper company and workman as goldsmith, painter, potter, waterman and player of instrument. there be also weaver and workman for exquisite work which the nobleman use. but the common people, as have be say, have in their house all thing necessary, have no need to buy this continue to this day. so as they have no need one of another for thing necessary, touch his person and family as shoe and garment and for their house to sow and reap and to make iron work and necessary instrument. the indian herein do imitate the institution of the less. ancient whereof be entreat in the life of the father. in truth, it be a people not great, covetous nor curious, so as they be content to pass their time quiet. and, without doubt, if they make choice of this manner of life by election and not by custom or nature, we may say that it be a life of great perfection. be apt to receive the doctrine of the holy gospel, so contrary a enemy to pride, covetousness and delight. but the preacher give not always good example. according to the doctrine they preach to the indian, it be worthy observation. although the indian be simple in their manner and habit, yet do we see great diversity amongst the province, especial in the attire of their head? for in some place they carry a long piece of cloth which go often about in some place, a large piece of cloth which go but once about. in some part as it be little mortar or hat, in some other as it be high and round bonnet and some like the bottom of sack, with a thousand other difference. they have a straight and inviolable law that no man may change the fashion of the garment of his province although he go to live in another. this the ingua hold to be of great importance for the order and good government of his realm and they do observe it to this day, though not with so great a care as they be accustom of the post and the indian do use chap 17.. there be many post and courier which the ingua maintain throughout his realm, who they call and they carry commandment to the governor and return their advice and advertisement to the court. these be place at every course, which be a league and a half, one fro a other, in two small house where be four indian of every country and they be change monthly, have receive the packet or message. they run with all their force until they have deliver. it to the other, such as be to run, be ready and watchful. they run fifty league in a day and night, although the great part of that country be very rough. they serve also to carry such thing as the ingua desire to have with speed. therefore, they have always sea-fish in cusco of two day old or little more, although it be above a hundred league off since the spaniard enter. they have use of these in time of sedition, whereof there be great need. don martin, the viceroy, appoint ordinary post at every four league to carry and recarry dispatch, which be very necessary in this realm. though they run not so swift as the ancient do, neither be there so many, yet they be. well pay and serve as the ordinary of spain, to who they give letter which they carry, four or five league of the justice law and punishment which the have establish and of their marriage, chap 18.. even as such as have do any good service in war or in the government of the commonweal, be honour and recompense with public charge with land, give they in proper with arm and title of honour and in marry wife of the lineage. even so, they give severe punishment to such as be disobedient and offender. they punish murder these and adultery with death and such as commit incest with ascendant or descendant in direct line be likewise punish with death, but they hold it no adultery to have many. wife or concubine. neither be the woman subject to the punishment of death be find with any other, but only she that be the true and lawful wife with who they contract marriage, for they have but one, who they do wed and receive with a particular solemnity and ceremony, which be in this manner: the bridegroom go to the bride house and lead she from thence with he have first put a ottoya upon her foot. they call the shoe which they use in those part ottoya be open, like to the franciscan friar. if the bride be a maid, her ottoya be of wool, but if she be not, it be of reed. all his other wife and concubine do honour and serve this as the. lawful wife who, alone, after the decease of her husband, carry a mourn weed of black for the space of a year. neither do she marry until that time be pass and common she be young than her husband. the ingua, himself, with his own hand, give this woman to his governor and captain, and the governor, or cacique, assemble all the youngman and maid in one place of the city where they give to every one his wife, with the aforesaid ceremony in, put on the ottoya, and in this manner they contract their marriage. if this woman be find with any other than her husband, she be punish with death, and the adulterer likewise, and although the husband pardon they yet be they punish although dispense. withal from death. they inflict the like punishment on he that do commit with his mother, grandmother, daughter or grandchild, for it be not prohibit for they to ma^^^ together or to have of their other kinsfolk for concubine. only the first degree be defend. neither do they allow the brother to have the company of his sister, wherein they of peru be very much deceive, believe that their and noble man may lawful contract marriage with their sister yea by father and mother- for in truth it have be always hold unlawful among the indian- and defend to contract in the first degree, which continue until the time of topa ingua yupangui, father to guaynacapa and grandfather to atahualpa, at such time as the spaniard enter peru. for that be the first that break this custom. marry with mamaoello, his sister by the father side. decree that the may marry with their sister by the father side and no other. this he do, and by that marriage he have guaynacapa and a daughter call coya. cussillimay find himself at the point of death. he command his child by father and mother to marry together and give permission to the noble man of his country to marry with their sister by the father side. and for that this marriage be unlawful and against the law of nature. god will bring to a end this kingdom of the during the reign of guascar ingua and atalmalpa ingua, which be the fruit that spring from this marriage. whoso? will more exact understand the manner of marriage among the indian of peru, let he read the treatise polo have write at the request of don jeronimo loaisa, archbishop of king, which p^^^ make a very curious search, as he have do, of di^ers other thing at the indies, the which import much to be know. to avoid the error and inconvenience whereinto many fall, which know not which be the lawful wife or the concubine among the indian, cause, the indian that be baptize to marry with his concubine, leave the lawful wife. thereby also we may see the small reason some have have that pretend to say that we ought to ratify the marriage of those that be baptize, although they be brother and sister. the contrary have be determine by the provincial synod of lyma. with much reason see among the indian themselves this kind of marriage be unlawful of the original of the lord of peru. with their conquest and victory, chap 19, by the commandment of don philip the catholic king, they have make the most diligent and exact search that can be of the beginning custom and privilege of the, the, which be not so perfect do as be desire for that. the indian have no write record yet. they have recover that which i shall write by mean of their quippos and register first. there be not in peru in old time any king or lord to who all obey, but they be commonalty, as at this day. there be in the realm of chille and, in a manner, in all the province which the spaniard have conquer in those western indies, except the realm of mexico. you must therefore understand that they have find three manner of government at the indies. the first and best be a monarchy, as that of the and of motecuma, although for the most part they be tyrannous. the second be of commonalty, where they be govern by the advice and authority of many which be, as it be, counsellor. these, in time of war, make choice of a captain to who a whole nation or province do obey, and in time of peace, every town or commonalty do rule and govern themselves, have some chief man who the vulgar do respect, and sometime, though not often, some of they assemble together about matter of importance to consult what they shall think necessary. the three kind of government be altogether barbarous, compose of indian, without law, without king and without any certain place of abode, but go in troop like savage beast. as far as i can conceive, the first inhabitant of the indies be of this kind, as at this day a great part of the bresillians, chiraguanas, chunchos, and the great part of the floridians and all the in new spain of this kind. the other sort of government by commonalty be frame by the industry and wisdom of some among they in which there be some more order, hold a more stay place, as at this day those of auracano and of te^^pell in chille and in the new kingdom of grenado, the moscas and the ottomitte in new spain, and in all these there be less fierceness and incivility and much more quiet than in the rest. of this kind by the valour and knowledge of. some excellent man grow the other government, more mighty and potent, which do institute a kingdom and monarchy. it appear by their register that their government have continue above three hundred year, but not full four, although their signiory for a long time be not above five or (@) league. compass about the city of cusco, their original and beginning be in the valley of cusco, where, by little and little, they conquer the land which we call peru, pass beyond quitto unto the river of pasto, towards the north stretch, even unto chille, towards the south, which be almost a thousand league in length. it extend in breadth unto the south sea, towards the west and unto the great champain, which be on the other side of. the andes, where at this day be to be see the castle which be call the pucara of the ingua, the which be a fortress build for the defence of the frontier towards the east, the advance no far on that side, for the abundance of water, marsh, lake and river which run in those part. these pass all the other nation of in policy and government, and much more in valour and arm, although the canary, which be their mortal enemy and favour the spaniard, will never confess it, nor yield they this advantage, so as, even at this day, if they fall into any discourse or comparison, and that they be a little chase and incense, they kill one another by thousand. upon this quarrel which be the most valiant as it have happen in cusco, the practice and mean which the have to make themselves lord of all this country be in feign. that, since the general deluge whereof all the indian have knowledge, the world have be preserve, restore and people by these, and that seven of they come forth of the cave of pacaricambo by reason whereof all other man ought they tribute and vassalage, as their progenitor. beside they say and affirm that they alone hold the true religion and know how god shall be serve and honour, and for this cause they shall instruct all man. it be a strange thing the ground they give to their custom and ceremony there be in cusco above. four hundred oratory, as in a holy land, and all place be fill with their mystery as they continue in the conquest of province. so they bring in the like ceremony and custom in all this realm. the chief idol they do worship be viracocha, pach^yac^achic, which signify the creator of the world, and after he, the sun, and therefore they say that the sun receive his virtue and be from the creator, as the other idol do, and that they be intercessor to he of the first ingua and his successor, chap 20.. the first man which the indian report to be the beginning and first of the be mangocapa, who they imagine, after the deluge to have issue forth of the cave of tambo, which be from cusco, about five or six league. they say that he give beginning to two principal race or family of the: the one be call hanancusco and the other vrincusco. of the first come the lord which subdue and govern this province and the first, who they make the head and steam of this family, be call ingaroca, who found a family, or aillo as they call. they name vicaquiquirao. this, although he be no great lord, be serve notwithstanding, in vessel of gold and silver and die. he appoint that all his treasure. shall be employ for the service of his body and for the feed of his family. his successor do the like, and this grow to a general custom, as i have. say that no, may inherit the good and house of his predecessor, but do build a new palace. in the time of this inguar^ca, the indian have image of gold and to he succeed a very old man. they say he be call by this name, which signify tear of blood. for that be once vanquish and take by his enemy. for grief and sorrow he weep blood. he be bury in a village, call which be. upon the way to omasugo he found a family call aocuillidanaca. to. he succeed his son, viracocha ingua, who be very rich and make much vessel of gold and silver. he found the lineage or family of c^copanaca gonzales pizarre. seek out his body for the report of the great treasure. be bury with he who, after he have cruel torment many indian, in the end he find it in xaquixaquana, whereas they say pizarrewas afterward vanquish, take and execute by the precedent, guasca gonsales pizarre cause the body of viracocha ingua to be burn. the indian do afterwards take the ash, the which they preserve in a small vessel, make great sacrifice thereunto until polo do reform it, and other idolatry which they commit upon the body of their other, the which he suppress with a admirable diligence. and dexterity draw these body out of their hand, be whole and much embalm, whereby he extinguish a great number of idolatry which they commit. the indian take it ill that the ingua do entitle himself viracocha, which be the name of their god, and he to excuse himself, give they to understand that the same viracocha appear to he in his dream, command he to take this name to he succeed, who be a very valiant conqueror, a great politician and a inventor of a great part of the tradition and superstition of their idolatry, as i will present show of and what happen in his time unto guaynacapa, chap 21.. rain seventy year and conquer many country. the beginning of his conquest be by mean of. his elder brother, who have hold the government in his father time and make war by his consent, be overthrow in a battle against the, a nation which inhabit the valley of andaguayllas, thirty or forty league from cusco, upon the way to lima. this elder brother thus defeat, retire himself with few man the which ingua yupangui, his young brother, see devise and give forth that be one day alone and melancholy. viracocha, the creator, speak to. he complain that though he be universal lord and creator of all thing, and that he have make the heaven, the sun, the world and man, and that all be under his command, yet do they not yield, he, the obedience they ought, but contrariwise do equal honour and worship. the sun, thunder, earth and other thing, which have no virtue but what he impart unto. they give he to understand that, in heaven, where he be, they call he viracocha pachayachachic, which signify universal creator, and to the end, the indian may believe it to be true. he doubt not, although he be alone, to false man under this title, which shall give he victory against the, although they be then victorious and in great number, and make himself lord of those realm. for that he will send he man to his aid, invisible, whereby he prevail in such sort that, under this colour and conceit, he begin to assemble a great number of people, whereof he make a mighty army, with the which he obtain the. victory, make himself lord of the whole realm, take the government from his father and brother. then afterwards he conquer and overthrow the and from that time command that viracocha shall be hold for universal lord and that the image of the sun and thunder shall do he reverence and honour. and from that time they begin to set the image of viracocha above that of the sun and thunder and the rest of the guaca. and although this have, give farm land and cattle to the sun, thunder and other guaca. yet do he not dedicate any thing to viracocha, say that he have no need be universal lord and creator of all thing. he inform his soldier after this absolute victory of the, that it be. not they alone that have conquer they, but certain beard man who viracocha have send he, and that no man may see they but himself, which be since convert into stone. it be therefore necessary to seek they out, who he will know well. by this mean, he gather together a multitude of stone in the mountain, whereof he make choice, place they for guacas, or idol they worship and sacrifice unto. they call they p^ruraucas and carry they to the war with great devotion. believe for certain that they have get the victory by their help. the imagination and fiction of this ingua be of such force that by the mean thereof he obtain goodly victory. he found the family, call yuacapanaca and make a great image. of gold, which he call indijllapa, which he place in a brancard of gold very rich and of great price, of the which gold the indian take great store to carry to xaxamalca for the liberty and ransom of. when the marquis, francis pizarre, hold he prisoner, the licentiate polo, find in his house in cusco his servant and mamacomas which do service to his memory, and find that the body have be transport from patallacta to totocache where the spaniard have since found the parish of saint blaise. this body be so whole and preserve, with a certain rosin, that it seem alive. he have his eye make of a fine cloth of gold, so artificial, set as they seem very natural eye, he have a blow. with a stone on the head which he have receive in the war. he be all grey and hairy, have lose no more hair than if he have die. but the same day, although it be seventy and eight year since his decease, the foresay polo send this body with some other of the to the city of lima by the viceroy command, which be the marquis of canette and the which be very necessary to root out the idolatry of cusco. many spaniard have see this body with other in the hospital of saint andrew which the marquis build, but they be much decay. don philip, who be grandchild or great grandchild to this ingua, affirm that the treasure he leave to his family be great, which. shall be in the power of the yanaconas, amaro and other. to this ingua succeed, to who his son of the same name succeed, who found the family? call cupac aillo of the great and most famous ingua, call guaynacapa, chap 22.. to this latter ingua succeed guaynacapa, which be to say a young man, rich and valiant, and so be he in truth. more than any of his predecessor or successor, he be very wise, plant good order throughout his whole realm. he be a bold and resolute man, valiant and very happy in war. he therefore obtain great victory and extend his dominion much far than all his predecessor have do before he. he die in the realm of quitto, the which he have conquer four. hundred league distant from his court, the indian open. he, after his decease, leave his heart and entrails in quitto. the body be carry to cusco, the which be place in the renown temple of the sun. we see yet to this day, many cawsey building fortress and notable work of this king. he found the family of teme bamba, this guaynacapa, be worship of his subject for a god be yet alive, as the old man affirm, which be not do to any of his predecessour when he die, they slay a thousand person of his household to serve he in the other life, all which die willing for his service, insomuch that many of they offer themselves to death beside such as be appoint his riches. and treasure be admirable, and forasmuch as the spaniard enter, soon after his death, the indian labour. much to conceal all although a great part thereof be carry to xaxamalca for the ransom of his son. some, worthy of credit, affirm that he have above three hundred son and grandchild. in cusco, his mother, call mamaoella, be much esteem among they polo. send her body with that of guaynacapa very well embalm to lima. root out infinite idolatry to guaynacapa. succeed in cusco a son of his call titocussigualpa, who since be call guaspar ingua. his body be burn by the captain of who be likewise son to guaynacapa and rebel in quitto against his brother, march against he with a mighty army. it happen that quisquit and chilicuchi, captain to take guaspar ingua in the city of cusco, be receive for lord and king, for that he be the lawful successor, which cause great sorrow throughout all his kingdom, especial in his court. and as always, in their necessity they have recourse to sacrifice, find themselves unable to set their lord at liberty. as well for the great power the captain have that take he, as also for the great army that come with they resolve, some say, by the commandment of this ingua, to make a great and solemn sacrifice to viracocha pachayachachic, which signify universal creator. desire he that, since they can not deliver their lord, he will send man from heaven to deliver he from prison. and as they be in this great hope upon their sacrifice, news come to they that a certain people come by sea, be land and have take prisoner. hereupon they call the spaniard viracochas, believe they be man send from god, as well for the small number they be to take in xaxamalca as also for that it chance after their sacrifice do to viracocha. and thereby they begin to call the spaniard viracochas as they do at this day. and in truth, if we have give they good example and such as we ought, these indian have well apply it in say they be man send. from god, it be a thing very well worthy of consideration how the greatness and providence of god dispose of the entry of our man at peru, which have be impossible, be not the dissension of the two brother and their partisan and the great opinion they have of christian as of man. send from heaven bind by the take of the indian country to labour to win soul unto almighty god of the last successor, chap 23.. the rest of this subject be handle at large by the spanish writer in the history of the indies, and for that it be not my purpose, i will speak only of the succession of the be dead in xaxamalca and guascar in cusco, and francis pizarre with his people. have seize on the realm. mangocapa, son to guaynacapa, besiege they in cusco very straight, but in the end he abandon the whole country and retire himself to vilca bamba, where he keep himself in the mountain by reason of the rough and difficult access, and there the successor remain until amaro who be take and execute in the market place of cusco to the indian. incredible grief and sorrow see justice do upon he public who they hold for their lord, after which time they imprison other. of the lineage of these i have know, don charles, grandchild to guaynacapa and son to polo, who be baptize and always favour the spaniard against mangocapa, his brother, when the marquis of canette govern in this country, sarritopaingua go. from vilcabamba and come upon assurance to the city of king, where there be give to he the valley of yucay and other thing, to who succeed a daughter of he. behold, the succession which be know at this day, of that great and rich family of the who reign, continue above three hundred year, wherein they reckon eleven successor until it be whole extinguish, in the other lineage of vrincusco which, as we have say before, have his beginning. likewise, from the first mangocapa, they reckon eight successor in this sort: to mangocapa succeed cinchoraca, to he capac yupangui, to he, to he maytacapaest tarcogumam unto who succeed his son, who they name, not to this son succeed don jean tambo maytapanaca. this suffice for the original. and succession of the that govern the land of peru. with that that i have speak of their law, government and manner of life, of the manner of the mexicaines: commonweal, chap 24.. although you may see, by the history which shall be write of the kingdom, succession and beginning of the mexicaines, their manner of commonweal and government, yet will i speak brief what i shall think fit in general to be most observe, whereof i will discourse more ample in the history. the first point whereby we may judge the mexicaine government to be very politic be the order they have and keep inviolable in the election of their king, for since their first call acamapach, unto their last, which be motecuma. the second of that name. there come none to the crown by right of succession, but by a lawful nomination and election. this election, in the beginning, be by the voice of the commons, although the chief man manage it, since in the time of iscoalt, the four king, by the advice and order of a wise and valiant man call tlacael, there be four certain elector appoint which, with two lord or king subject to the mexicaine, the one of tescuco and the other of tucuba, have power to make this election. they do common, choose yoongman for their king because they go always to the war and this be, in a manner, the chief cause why they desire they. so they have a special regard that they shall be fit for the war and take delight and glory therein. after the election they make two kind of feast. the one in take possession of the royal estate, for the which they go to the temple, make great ceremony and sacrifice upon the hearth, call divine where there be a continual fire before the altar of the idol, and, after some rhethoritian practise therein, make many oration and speech. the other feast and the most solemn, be at his coronation, for the which he must first overcome in battle and bring a certain number of captive which they must sacrifice to their god. he enter in triumph with great pomp. make he a solemn reception aswell. they of the temple who go all in procession, sound on sundry sort of instrument, give incense and sing like secular man, as also the courtier who come forth with their devise to receive the victorious king. the crown or royal ensign be before like to a mitre and behind it be cut so as it be not round for the before part. be high and do rise like a point. the king of tescuco have the privilege to crown the king of mexico. the mexicaines have be very dutiful and loyal unto their king, and it have not be know that they have practise any treason against they. only their history report that they seek to poison their king, call ticocic be a coward and of small account, but it be not find that there have be any dissension or partiality amongst they for ambition, though it be a ordinary thing in commonalty. but contrariwise, they report, as you shall see hereafter, that a man, the best of the mexicaines, refuse this realm. seem unto he to be very expedient for the commonweal to have a other king in the beginning. when the mexicaines be but poor and weak, the king be very moderate in their expense and in their court. but as they increase in power they increase likewise in pomp and state, until they come to the greatness of motecuma who, if he have have no other thing but his house of beast and bird. it have be a proud thing the like whereof have not be see, for there be in this house all sort of fish, bird of xacamamas and beast, as in a other noah ark. for sea fish there be pool of salt-water and for river fish lake of freshwater bird that do prey be. feed and likewise wild beast in great abundance. there be very many indian employ for the keep of these beast, and when he find a impossibility to nourish any sort of fish, foul or wild beast, he cause the image or likeness to be make rich, cut in precious stone, silver or gold, in marble or in stone, and for all sort of entertainment he have his several house and palace, some of pleasure, other of sorrow and mourn, and other to treat of the affair of the realm. there be in this palace many chamber, according to the quality of noble man that serve. he with a strange order and distinction of the title and dignity the indian use, chap 25.. the mexicaines have be very curious. to divide the degree and dignity among the noble man and lord that they may distinguish they to who they be, to give the great honour. the dignity of these four elector be the great and most honourable next to the king and they be choose present after the king election. they be common brother or very near kinsman to the king and be call tlacohecalcalt, which signify prince of dart, the which they cast be a kind of arm they use much. the next dignity to this be those they do call which be to say circumciser or cutter of man. the three dignity be of those which they call ezuahuacalt, which signify a sheader of blood, all the which title and dignity be exercise by man. of war. there be another, a four, entitle tlilancalqui, which be as much to say as lord of the black house, or of darkness, by reason of certain ink, wherewith the priest anoint themselves and do serve in their idolatry. all these four dignity be of the great counsel, without who advice the king may not do any thing of importance and the king be dead. they be to choose another in his place out of one of those four dignity. beside these, there be other counsel and audience, and some say there be as many as in spain, and that there be diverse seat and jurisdiction, with their counsellor and judge of the court and o^hers that be under they as corrigidor, chief judge, captain of justice. lieutenant and other which be yet inferior to these, with a very goodly order, all which depend on the four first prince that assist the king. these four only have authority and power to condemn to death and the rest send they instruction of the sentence they have give by mean, whereof they give the king to understand what have pass in his realm. there be a good order and settle policy for the revenue of the crown, for there be officer divide throughout all the province as receiver and treasurer which receive the tribute and royal revenue and they carry the tribute to the court at the least every month. which tribute be of all thing that do grow or engender on the land or in the water, aswell of jewel and apparel as of mere. they be very careful for the well order of that which concern their religion, superstition and idolatry. and for this occasion there be a great number of minister to who charge be give to teach the people the custom and ceremony of their law hereupon. one day a christian priest make his complaint that the indian be no good christian and do not profit in the law of god. a old indian answer he very well to the purpose in these term, let the priest say he employ as much care and diligence to make the indian christian as the minister of. idol do to teach they their ceremony. for with half that care they will make we the best christian in the world. for that the law of jesus christ be much better. but the indian learn it, not for want of man to instruct they. wherein he speak the very truth, to our great shame and confusion, how the mexicaines make war and of their order of knighthood, chap 26.. the mexicaines give the first place of honour to the profession of arm and therefore the nobleman be their chief soldier and other that be not noble by their valour and reputation, get in war, come to dignity and honour so as they be hold for nobleman. they give goodly recompense to such as have do valiant, who enjoy priviledge^ that none else may have, the which do much, encourage they. their arm be of razor, of sharp cut flint which they set on either side of a staff, which be so furious a weapon as they affirm that with one blow they will cut off the neck of a horse. they have strange and heavy club lance fashion like pike and other manner of dart to cast wherein they be very expert, but the great part of their combat be perform with stone for defensive arm. they have little rondache or target and some kind of morion or headpiece environ with feather. they be clad in the skin of tiger, lion and other savage. beast. they come present to hand with the enemy and be great practise to run and wrestle, for their chief manner of combat, be not so much to kill as to take captive the which they use in their sacrifice. as have be say, motecuma set knighthood in his high splendour, ordain certain military order as commander with certain mark and ensign. the most honourable amongst the knight be those that carry the crown of their hair tie with a little red ribbon, have a rich plume of feather from the which do hang branch of feather upon their shoulder, and roll of the same. they carry so many of these roll as they have do worthy deed in war. the king himself be of this order as. may be see in chapultepec, where motecuma and his son be attire with those kind of feather cut in the rock, the which be worthy the sight. there be another order of knighthood, which they call the lion and the tiger, the which be common, the most valiant and most note in war they go always with their mark and armoury. there be other knight as the grey knight, the which be not so much respect as the rest. they have their hair cut round about the ear. they go to the war with mark, like to the other knight, yet they be not arm but to the girdle, and the most honourable be arm all over. all knight may carry gold and silver and wear rich cotton. use paint and gild vessel and carry shoe after their manner. but the common people may use none but earthen vessel. neither may they carry shoe nor attire themselves. but in nequen, the which be a gross stuff, every order of these knight have his lodging in the palace note with their mark: the first be call the prince lodging, the second of eagle, the three of lion and tiger and the four of the grey knight. the other common officer be lodge underneath in mean lodging. if any one lodge out of his place he suffer death of the great order and diligence the mexicaines use to instruct their youth, chap 27.. there be nothing that give i more cause to admire, nor that i find more. worthy of commendation and memory than the order and care the mexicaines have to nourish their youth, for they know well that all the good hope of a commonweal consist in the nurture and institution of youth, whereof plato treat ample in his book. and for this reason they labour and take pain to sequester their child from delight and liberty, which be the two plague of this age. employ they in honest and profitable exercise. for this cause, there be in their temple a private house for child, as school or college which be separate from that of the young man and maid of the temple whereof we have discourse at largee. there be in these school a great number of child who their father do willing. bring thither and which have teacher and master to instruct they in all commendable exercise to be of good behaviour, to respect their superior, to serve and obey. they give they to this end certain precept and instruction and to the end they may be please to nobleman. they teach they to sing and dance and do practice they in the exercise of war, some to shoot a arrow, to cast a dart or a staff burn at the end and to handle well a target and a sword. they suffer they not to sleep much to the end. they may accustom themselves to labour in their youth and be not man give to delight beside the ordinary number of these child there be in the same college. other child of lord and nobleman, the which be instruct more private. they bring they their meat and ordinary from their house and be recommend to ancient and old man to have care over. they who continual do advise they to be virtuous and to live chaste, to be sober in their diet, to fast and to march grave and with measure. they be accustom to exercise they to travel and in laborious exercise. and when they see they instruct in all these thing they do careful look into their inclination. if they find any one addict to the war be of sufficient year they seek all occasion to make trial of. they send they to the war under colour to carry victual and munition to the soldier. to the end. they may there see what pass and the labour they suffer, and that they may abandon all fear. they be lade with heavy burden that show their courage therein they may more easy be admit into the company of soldier by this mean. it happen that many go lade to the army and return captain with mark of honour. some of they be so desirous to be note as they be either take or slay, and they hold it less honourable to remain a prisoner and therefore they seek rather to be cut in piece then to fall captive into their enemy hand. see how nobleman child that be incline to the war be, employ the other that have their inclination to matter of the temple and to speak after our manner to be ecclesiastical man. have attain to sufficient year, they be, draw out of the college and place in the temple in the lodging appoint for religious man, and then they give they the order of ecclesiastical man. there have they prelate and master to teach they that which concern their profession, where they shall remain be destine thereunto. these mexicaines take great care to bring up their child. if, at this day they will follow this order in build of house and college for the instruction of youth, without doubt christianity shall flourish much among the indian some. godly person have begin and the king with his counsel have favour it, but for that it be a matter of no profit. they advance little and proceed cold. god open our eye that we may see it to our shame, see that we christian do not that which the child of darkness do to their perdition, wherein we forget our duty of the indian feast and dance, chap 28.. forasmuch as it be a thing which partly depend of the good government of the commonweal to have some play and recreation when time serve, it shall not be from the purpose to relate what the indian do herein, especial the mexicaines. we have not discover any nation at the indies that live in commonalty which have not their recreation in play, dance and exercise of pleasure. at peru i have see play in manner of combat where the man of both side be sometime so chafe that often their paella, which be the name of this exercise, fall out to be dangerous. i have also see diverse sort of dance wherein they do counterfeit and represent certain trade and office as shepherd, laborer, fisher and hunter and common. they make all those dance with a very grave sound and pace. there be other dance and mask which they call guacones, who action be pure representation of the devil. there be also man that dance on the shoulder one of another, as they do in portugal, the which they call paella. the great part of these dance be superstition and kind of idolatry. for that they honour their idol and guaca in that manner. for this reason the prelate have labour to take from they. these dance all they can, but yet they suffer. they, for that part of they, be but sport of recreation for always. they dance after their manner. in these dance they use sundry sort of instrument, whereof some be like flute or little canon, other like drum and other like cornet. but common they sing all with the voice, and first one or two sing the song than all the rest answer. they, some of these song be very witty, compose contain history, and other be full of superstition and some be mere folly. our man, that have converse among they have labour to reduce matter of our holy faith to their tune, the which have profit well for that. they employ whole day to rehearse and sing, they for the great pleasure and content they take in their tune. they have likewise put our composition of music into their language as octave song and rondell, the which they have very apt turn and in truth it be a goodly and very necessary mean to instruct the people. in peru they common call dance tagui, in other province areittos, and in mexico mittottes. there have not be in any other. place any such curiosity of play and dance as in new spain where at this day we see indian, so excellent dancer as it be admirable. some dance upon a cord, some upon a long and straight stake in a thousand sundry sort other, with the sole of their foot and their ham, do handle, cast up and receive again a very heavy block which seem incredible. but in see it, they do make many other show of their great agility in leap, vault and tumble, sometime bear a great and heavy burden, sometime endure blow, able to break a bar of iron. but the most usual exercise of recreation among the mexicaines be the solemn mittotte and that be a kind of dance they hold so brave. and so honourable that the king himself dance, but not ordinary as the king don pedro of arragon with the barber of valencia. this dance, or mittotte, be common make in the court of the temple and in those of the king house, which be more spacious. they do place in the midst of the court two instrument, one like to a drum and the other like a barrel, make of one piece and hollow within which they set upon the form of a man, a beast or upon a pillar. these two instrument be so well accord together that they make a good harmony, and with these instrument they make many kind of air and song. they do all sing and dance to the sound and measure. of these instrument with so goodly a order and accord both of their foot and voice, as it be a pleasant thing to behold in these dance. they make two circle or wheel. the one be in the midst, near to the instrument wherein the ancient and nobleman do sing and dance with a soft and slow motion, and the other be of the rest of the people round about they, but a good distance from the first wherein they dance. two and two more light make diverse kind of pace, with certain leap to the measure, all which together make a very great circle. they attire themselves for these dance with their most precious apparel and jewel, every one according to his ability, hold it for a very honourable thing, for this cause. they learn these dance from their infancy and although the great part of they be do in honour of their idol, yet be it not so institute, as have be say, but only as a recreation and pastime for the people. therefore, it be not convenient to take they quite from the indian, but they must take good heed. they mingle not their superstition amongst they. i have see this mittotte in the court of the church of topetzotlan, a village seven league from mexico, and in my opinion it be a good thing to busy the indian upon. festival day, see, they have need of some recreation and because it be public and without the prejudice of any other, there be less inconvenience than in other which may be do private by themselves if they take away these. we must therefore conclude, follow the counsel of pope gregory, that it be very convenient to leave unto the indian that which they have have usual of custom, so as they be not mingle nor corrupt with their ancient error, and that their feast and pastime may be to the honour of god and of the saint who feast they celebrate. this may suffice, in general of the manner and politic custom of the mexicaines and as for their beginning increase and empire, for that it be a ample matter and will be pleasant to understand from the beginning. we will entreat thereof in the book follow, the seven book of the natural and moral history of the indies. that it be profitable to understand the act and geast of the indian especial of the mexicaines, chap 1.. every history well write, be profitable to the reader. for, as the wise man say, that which have be be eccles ^ and that which shall be be that which have be humane thing have much resemblance in themselves and some grow wi^e by that which happen to other there be. no nation, how barbarous soever, that have not something in they good and worthy of commendation, nor commonweal, so well order, that have not something blameworthy and to be ^^n^roll^d. if, therefore, there be no other fruit in the historic and narration of the deed and gest of the indian, but this common utility, to be a relation or histori^ of thing, the which, in the effect of truth, have happen, it deserve to be receive as a profitable thing, neither ought it to be reject for that it concern the indian, as we see that those author that treat of natural thing write not only of generous beast, notable and rare plant and of precious stone, but also of wild beast, common herb and base and vulgar. stone, for that there be always in they some property worthy observation. if, therefore, there be nothing else in this discourse but that it be a history and no fable nor fiction, it be no unwoorthy subject to be write or read, there be yet a other, more particular reason, which be that we ought herein to esteem that which be worthy of memory, both for that it be a nation little esteem and also a subject different from that of our europe as these nation be, wherein we shall take most pleasure and content to understand the ground of their beginning, their manner of life, with their happy and unhappy adventure, and this subject be not only pleasant and agreeable but also profitable, especial to such as. have the charge to rule and govern. they, for the knowledge of their act, invite we to give credit and do partly teach how they ought to be. entreat, yea, it take away much of that common and foolish contempt wherein they of europe hold. they suppose that those nation have no feel of reason. for, in truth, we can not clear this error better than by the true report of the act and deed of this people. i will therefore, as brief as i can, entreat of the beginning proceed and notable deed of the mexicaines, whereby we may know the time and the disposition that the high god will choose to send unto these nation the light of the gospel of jesus christ, his only son. our lord, who i beseech to second our small labour, that it may be to the glory of his divine greatness and some profit to these people to who he have impart the law of his holy gospel of the ancient inhabitant of new spain. and how the navatlacas come thither, chap 2.. the ancient and first inhabitant of those province which we call new spain be man very barbarous and savage which live only by hunt. for this reason they be call chichimecas. they do neither sow nor till the ground, neither live they together, for all their exercise be to hunt, wherein they be very expert. they live in the rough part of the mountain, beastlike, without any policy, and they go all naked. they hunt. wild beast, hare, coney, weezle, mole, wild cat and bird, yea, unclean beast as snake, lizard, locust and worm, whereon they feed with some herb and root. they sleep in the mountain, in cave and in. bush and the wife likewise go a hunt with their husband, leave their young child in a little of reed, tie to the bough of a tree which desire not to suck ^ntill they be return from hunt. they have no superior, nor do acknowledge or worship any god, neither have any manner of ceremony or religion. there be yet to this day in new spain of this kind of people which live by their bow and arrow, the which be very hurtful. for that they gather together in troop to do. mischief and to rob. neither can the spaniard by force or cunning reduce they to any policy or obedience, for have no town nor place of residence to sight, with they be proper to hunt after savage beast which scatter and hide themselves in the most rough and cover place of the mountain. such be their manner of live eve^ to this day in many province of the indies. in the book salute they discourse: chief of this sort of indian, where it be say that they be to be constrain and subject by some honest force, and that it be necessary first to teach they that they be man and then to be christian. some will say that those in new spain which they call ottomy be of this sort, be common poor indian, inhabit a rough and barren land and yet they be in good number and live together with some order and such as do know they find they no less apt and capable of matter of christian religion than other which be hold to be more rich and better govern. come therefore to our subject, the chichimecas and ottomy, which be the first inhabitant of new spain, for that they do neither till nor sow the land. they leave the best and most fertile of the country, unpeople, which nation that come from far do possess who they call navatalcas, for that it be a more civil and politic. nation. this word signify a people that speak well in respect of other barbarous nation, without reason. these s^cond peopler, navatalcas, come from other ^arre country which lie towards the north, where now they have discover a kingdom they call new mexico. there be two province in this country. the one call aztlan, which be to say a place of heron, the other tuculhuacan, which signify a land of such who. grandfather be divine. the inhabitant of these province have their house, their land till god, custom and ceremony, with like order and government to the navatalcas, and be divide into seven tribe or nation, and for that they have a custom in this province that every one of these lineage have his place and private territory. the navatalcas paint their beginning and first territory in figure of a cave and say that they come forth of seven cave to come and people the land of mexico, whereof they make mention in their history, where they paint seven cave and man come forth of they. by the supputation of their book, it be above eight hundred year since these navatalcas come forth of their country reduce, which to our account be about the year of our lord 720. when they leave their country to come to mexico, they stay four score year upon the way, and the cause of this, their long stay in their voyage, be that their god, which without doubt be devil and speak visible unto they, have, persuade they to seek new land that have certain sign, and therefore they come, discover the whole land to search for these token which their idol have give they. and in place where they find any good dwelling, they people it and labour the land, and as they discover better country, they leave those which they have first. people leave still some especial, the age, sick folk and the weary yea. they do plant and build there, whereof we see the remainder at this day. in the way where they pass. they spend fourscore year in this manner of leisurely travel, the which they may have do in a month. by this mean they enter the land of mexico in the year nine hundred and two after our computation. how the six lineage of navatlacas people the land of mexico, chap 3.. these seven lineage i have speak of come not forth all together. the first be the suchimilcos, which signify a nation of the seed of flower, those people the bank of the great lake of mexico, towards the south, and do build a city of their name and many village long time after come. they of the second lineage call chalcas, which signify people of mouth, who also build a city. of their name, divide their limit and territory with the suchimilcos, the three be the tepanecans, which signify people of the bridge, they do inhabit upon the bank of the lake towards the west and they increase so as they call the chief and metropolitan of their province azcapuzalco, which be to say a aunt nest. and they continue long time, mighty after they come, those that people tescuco, which be those of culhua, which be to say a crooked people, for that in their country there be a mountain, much bend, and in this sort this lake be environ with these four nation. these inhabit on the east and the tepanecas on the north. these of tescuco be hold for great courtier for their tongue and pronountiation. be very sweet and pleasant. then arrive the tlalluicans, which signify man of the sierre or mountain. those be the most rude and gross of all the rest, who find all the plain about the lake possess even unto the sierre. they pass to the other side of the mountain where they find a very fertile, spacious and warm country, where they build many great village, call the metropolitan of their province quahunachua, which be as much to say as a place that sound the voice of a eagle, which our common people call, by corruption, quernavaca. and at this day they call this province the marquisate. those of the six generation which be the tlascaltecan, which be to say man of bread, pass the mountain towards the. east, cross all the sierre or mountain of menade, where that famous vulcan be betwixt mexico, and the city of angel, where they do find a good country, make many building, they build many town and city, whereof the metropolitan be call by their name tlascala. this be the nation which favour the spaniard at their entry. by whos^ help they do win this country and therefore, to this day, they pay no tribute but enjoy a general exemption. when all these nation, people, these country, the chinchimecans be the ancient inhabitant, make no resistance but flee and, as people amaze, they hide themselves in the most obscure of the rock but those that inhabit on the other side of the mountain where the tlascaltecan have plant themselves. do not suffer they, in quiet, as the rest of the chichimecans have do, but they put themselves in def^nce to preserve their country and be giant, as the history report. they seek to expel the last comer, but they be vanquish by the policy of the tlascaltecan who counterfeit a peace with they. they invite they to a great banquet, and when they be busy in their drunkenness, there be some lay in ambush who secret steal away their weapon, which be great club target sword of wood and other suc^ arm. then do they sudden set upon, they and the chichimecas seek to defend themselves. they do want their arm. so as they flee to the mountain and forest adjoin, where they pull down tree as if they have be stalk of lettice. but in the end the tluscaltecans be arm and march in order they defeat all the giant, not leave one alive. we must not hold this of the giant to be strange or a fable, for at this day we find dead man bone of a incredible bigness. when i be in mexico, in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred eighty six, they find one of those giant bury in one of our farm, which we call jesus du, of who they bring a tooth to be see which, without augment, be as big as the fist of a man, and according. to this all the rest be proportionable, which i see and admire at his deform greatness the tlascaltecan, by this victory remain peaceable and so do the rest of the lineage. these six lineage do always entertain amity together, marry their child one with another and divide their limit quiet. then they study with a emulation to increase and beautify their commonweal. the barbarous chichimecans see what pass, begin to use some government and to apparel themselves, be ashamed of what have pass for till then. they have no shame and have abandon fear. by their communication with these other people they begin to learn many thing of. they build small cottage, have some policy and government. they do also choose lord, who they do acknowledge for their superior, by mean whereof they do, in a manner, quite abandon this brutish life. yet do they always continue in the mountain divide from the rest notwithstanding, i hold it for certain that this fear have grow from other nation and province of the indies, who, at the first, be savage man who live only by hunt, pierce the rocky and rough country, discover a new world, the inhabitant whereof be almost like savage beast without cover or house without till, land without cattle, without king, law, god or reason, since other seek better and new land, inhabit this fertile country, plant politic, order and a kind of commonweal, although it be very barbarous after the same. man or other nation that have more understanding than the rest, labour to subdue and oppress the less mighty, establish realm and great empire. so it happen in mexico, at peru and in some part where they find city and commonweal plant among these barbarian. that which confirm, i in my opinion, whereof i have ample discourse in the first book, that the first inhabitant of the west indies come by land and so, by consequence, that the first continent of the indies join with that of asia, europe and afsrike, and the new world with the old. although they have not yet discover any country that touch and join with the other world, or if there be any sea betwixt the two, it be so narrow that wild beast may easy swim over and man in small boat. but leave this philosophy, let we return to our history of the mexicaines. departure of their journey and people, the province of mechovacan, cha^ 4.. three hundred and two year, after the former two lineage have leave their country to inhabit new spain, the country be now well people and reduce to some form of government, those of the seven cave or line arrive which be the mexicaine nation, the which, like unto the rest, leave the province of aztlan and teuculhuacan, a politic courtlike and warlike nation. they do worship the idol vitzliputzli, whereof ample mention have be make, and the devil that be in this idol speak and govern this nation. easy, this idol command they to leave their country, promise to make they prince and lord over all the province which the other six nation do possess. that. he will give they a land abound with gold, silver, precious stone, feather and rich mantel, whereupon they go forth, carry their idol with they in a coffer of reed, support by four of their principal priest, with who he do talk and reveal unto they in secret the success of their way and voyage, advise they of what shall happen. he likewise give they law and teach they the custom, ceremony and sacrifice they shall observe. they do not advance nor move without commandment from this idol. he give they notice when to march and when to stay in any place wherein they whole obey he. the first thing they do, wheresoever they come, be to build a house or tabernacle for their false god, which they set always in the midst of their camp and there place the ark upon a altar in the same manner as they have use in the holy christian church. this do they sow their land for bread and pulse which they use, and they be so addict to the obedience of their god that if he command they to gather, they gather, but if he command they to raise their camp, all be leave there for the nourishment of the age, sick and weary, which they lest purposely from place to place that they. may people it pretend by this mean that all the land shall remain. inhabit by their nation. this go forth and peregrination of the mexicaines will, happy, seem like to that of egypt and to the way which the child of israel make. see that they, as well as those, be warn to go forth and to seek the land of promise. and both the one and the other carry their god for their guide, consult with the ark and make he a tabernacle and he advise, they, give they law and ceremony. and both the one and the other speak many year in their voyage to their promise land, where we observe the resemblance of many other thing, as thehistory of the mexicaines do report and the holy scripture testify of the israelite, and without doubt it be a true. thing that the devil, the prince of pride, have labour by the superstition of this nation to counterfeit and imitate that which the most high god do with this nation. for, as be say before, satan have a strange desire to compare and make himself equal with god. so, as this mortal enemy have pretend false, to usurp what communication and familiarity he have please, with man. be there ever devil find so familiar, conversant with man as this devil vitzliputzli. we may well judge what he be for that there be never see nor hear speak of custom more superstitious, nor sacrifice more cruel and inhuman than those which he teach they. to conclude, they be invent by the enemy of mankind. the chief and captain who they follow be call mexi, whence come the name of mexico and of the mexicaine nation. this people march thus at leisure, as the other six nation have do people, and till the land in diverse part, whereof there be yet some show and ruin. and after they have endure many travel and danger, in the end they come to the province of mechovacan, which be as much to say as a land of fish, for there be great abundance in goodly great lake where, content themselves with the situation and temperature of the ground, they resolve to stay there. yet have consult with their idol upon this point and find he unwilling. they demand licence to leave some of their man to people so good a land, the which he grant. teach they the mean how to do it, which be that, when the man and woman shall be enter into a goodly lake call pascuaro to bathe themselves, those which remain on land shall steal away all their clothes and then, secret, raise their camp and depart without any bruit. the which be effect and the rest which dream not of this deceit, for the pleasure they take in bathe, come forth and find themselves spoil of their garment and thus mock and leave by their companion. they remain discontent and vex therewith, so as to make show of the hatred they have conceive against they. they say that they change their manner of life and their language. at the least. it be most certain that the me^hovacans have be always enemy to the mexicaines, and therefore they come to congratulate the marquis valle after his victory. obtain, when he have conquer mexico, of that which happen in malinalco, tula and in chapultepec, chap 5.. from mechovacan to mexico, be above fifty league, and upon the way be malinalco, where it happen that complain to their idol of a woman that be a notable witch, which come in their company, carry the name of their sister to their god for that, with her wicked art she do they much harm, pretend by certain mean to be worship of they as their goddess, the idol. speak in a dream to one of those old man that carry the ark. command he to comfort the people, make they new and great promise and that they shall leave this, his sister with her family, be cruel and bad, raise their camp at midnight in great silence, leave no show what way they pass. so they do, and the witch remain alone with her family. in this sort people, a town which they call malinalco, the inhabitant whereof be hold for great sorcerer, be issue from such a mother, the mexicaines, for that they be great, diminish by these division and by the number of sick and weary person which they have leave behind, mean to repair themselves and to stay in a place call tula. which signify a place of reed there, their idol. command they to stop a great river that it may cover a great plain. and by the mean, he teach they, they do environ a little hill, call coatepec, make a great lake, the which they do plant ^ound about with willow, elm, sapine and other tree. there begin to breed much fish and many bird come thither, so as it become a very pleasant place, the situation of this place seem pleasant unto they and be weary with travel. many talk of people there and to pass no far wherewith the devil be much displease. threaten the priest with death. command they to return the river to her course. say that he will that night chastise those which have be disobedient as they have deserve and as to do ill be proper to the devil, and that the divine justice do often suffer such to be deliver into the hand of such a tormentor that choose he for their god. it chance that about midnight they hear a great noise in one part of the camp and in the morning go thither, they find those dead that have talk of stay there. the manner of their death, be that their stomach be open and their heart pull out, and by that mean this good god, teach these poor, miserable creature the kind of sacrifice that please he which be in open the stomach to pull out the heart, as they have since practise in their horrible sacrifice. see this punishment, and that the plain be dry, the lake be empty. they ask counsel of their god what to do, who command they to pass on the which they do by little and little, until they come to chapultepec, a league from mexico famous for the pleasantness thereof. they do fortify themselves in these mountain, fear the nation which inhabit that country, the which be opposite unto they, especial for that. one name, copill, son to this sorceress, leave in malinalco, have blame and speak ill of the mexicaines. for this copill, by the commandment of his mother, awhile after, follow the mexicaines course, labour to incense the tapanecas and other neighbour against they, even unto the chalcas. so as they come with a strong army to destroy the mexicaines, copill, in the mean space, stand upon a little hill in the midst of a lake, call acopilco, attend the destruction of his enemy and they, by the advice of their idol, go against he, take he sudden and slay. he carry his heart to their god, who command they to cast it into the lake, feign that thereof do grow a plant, call tunal. where, since mexico, be? build. they come to fight with the chalcas and other nation have choose for their captain a valiant man call who, in a encounter, be take and slay by the enemy, but for all this they be not discourage but fight. valiant, and in despite of their enemy, they break the squadron and carry their age, their woman and young child. in the midst of their battle. they pass on to atlacuyavaya, a town of the culhuans who they find solemnize of a feast, in which place they fortify the chalcas. nor the other nation do not follow they, but grieve to be defeat by so small a number of man they be in so great multitude. retire to their town of the war the mexicaines have against they. of culhuacan, chap 6. the mexicaines, by the advice of their idol, send their messenger to the lord o^ culhuacan to demand a place to dwell in, who, after he have impart it to his people, grant they the place of ticaapan, which signify white water. to the end, they shall all perish. there be full of viper, snake and other venomous beast which breed in a hill near adjoin, but be persuade and teach by their devil. they accept, willing what be offer and, by their devilish art, tame these beast so as they do they no harm yea. they use they as meat, eat they with delight and appetite, the which the lord of culhuacan see and that they have till and sow the land. he resolve to receive they into the city and to contract amity with they. but the god who the mexicaines do worship, as he be accustom to do no good, but ill say unto his priest that this be not the place where he will have they stay and that they must go forth, make war. therefore, they must seek forth a woman and name she the goddess of discord, whereupon they resolve to send to the king of. culhuacan to demand his daughter to be queen of the mexicaines and mother to their god. who receive this ambassage willing, send his daughter present, gorgeous, attire and well accompany. the same night she arrive by order of the murderer who they worship. they kill she cruel, and have fl^a^d she, artificial as they can do. they do clothe a young man with her skin and thereupon her apparel, place he near their idol, dedicate he for^ goddess and the mother of their god and ever after do worship it, make a idol which they call to^cy, which be to say our grandmother. not content with this cruelty, they do, malicious, invite the king of culhuacan, the father of the young maid, to come and worship his daughter. who be now consecrate, ^ goddess, who come with great present and well accompany with his people, he be lead into a very dark chapel where their idol be that. he may offer sacrifice to his daughter that be in that place, but it chance that the incense that be upon the hearth, according to their custom, kindle in such sort as he may discern his daughter hair and have, by this mean, discover the cruelty and deceit he go forth, cry aloud, and with all his man he fall upon the mexicaines, force they to retire to the lake so as they be almost drown. the mexicaines defend themselves, cast certain little dart which they use in the war, wherewith they much gall their enemy, but in the end they get land and leave that place. they coast along the lake, very weary and wet. the woman and little child cry and make great exclamation against they and their god that have bring they into this distress. they be enforce to pass a river that can not be wade through and therefore they advise to make small boat of their target and of reed wherein they pass. then afterwards have leave culhuacan. they arrive at iztacalco and final to the place where the hermitage of saint anthony now be, at the entry of mexico, and to that quarter which they now call s. paul, during which time their idol do, comfort they in their travel and encourage. they promise great matter of the foundation of mexico, chap 7.. the time be now come that the father of lie shall accomplish his promise make to his people who can no long suffer so many turn, travel and danger. it happen that some old priest or sorcerer be enter into a place full of water-lily. they meet with a very fair and clear current of water which seem to be silver, and look about, they find the tree, meadow, fish and all that they behold to be very white. wonder hereat they remember a prophecy of their god whereby he have give they that for a token of their place of rest and to make they lord of other nation. then weep for joy. they return to the people with these good news. the night follow, vitzliputzli appear in a dream to a ancient priest, say that they shall seek out a tunal in the lake which grow out of a stone which, as he tell they be the same place where, by his commandment, they have cast the heart of copil son to the sorceress, their enemy. and upon this tunal they shall see a goodly eagle which feed on certain small bird. when they shall see this, they shall believe it be the place where. their city shall be build, the which shall surmountal other and be famous throughout the world. morning be come, the old man assemble the whole people, from the great to the least, make a long speech unto they how much they be bind unto their god. and of the revelation which, although unworthy, he have receive that night, conclude that all must seek out that happy place which be promise they which breed such devotion and joy in they all that present. they undertake the enterprise and divide themselves into band. they begin to search, follow the ^ of the revelation of the desire, place amidst the thick of these water-lily in the lake. they meet with the same course of water they have see the day before. but much differ. be not white but red like blood, the which divide itself into two stream, whereof the one be of a very obscure azure, the which breed admiration, in they note some great mystery, as they say, after much search here and there, the tunal appear. grow on a stone, whereon be a royal eagle with the wing display towards the sun, receive his heat. about this eagle be many rich feather, white, red, yellow, blue and green of the same sort as they make their image which eage hold in his talon a goodly bird. those which see it and know it to be the place foretell by the oracle, fall on their knee, do great worship to the eagle which bow the head, look. on every side^^hen be their great cry, demonstration and thanks unto the creator and to their great god, vitzliputzli, who be there, father, and have always tell they truth. for this reason they call the city which they found there tenoxtiltan, which signify tunal on a stone, and to this day they carry in their arm a eagle upon a tunal with a bird in his tallant and stand with the other upon the tunal. the day follow, by common consent, they make a hermitage adjoin to the tunal of the eagle, that the ark of their god may rest there till they may have mean to build he a sumptuous temple. and so they make this hermitage of flag and turf, cover with straw, then have consult. with their god, they resolve to buy of their neighbour stone, timber, lime in exchange of fish, frog and young kid, and for duck, water-henne, courlieu and diverse other kind of sea fowl, all which thing they do fish and hunt for in this lake, whereof there be great abundance. they go with these thing to the market of the town and city of the tapanecan and of they of tescuco, their neighbour, and with policy they gather together by little and little what be necessary for the build of their city, so as they build a better chapel for their idol of lime and stone and labour to fill up a great part of the lake with rubbish. this do the idol speak one night to one. of his priest in these term, say unto the mexicaines that the nobleman divide themselves, every one with their kinsfolk and friend, and that they divide themselves into four principal quarter about the house which you have build for my rest, and let every quarter build in his quarter, at his pleasure, the which be put in execution, and those be the four principal quarter of mexico, which be call at this day s jean, s mary, the round s paul and s sebastian. after this, the mexicaines be thus divide into these four quarter. their god command they to divide amongst they the god he shall name to they, and that they shall give notice to every quarter principal of the other four partical quarter where their god shall be worship, so as under every one of these four principal quarter there be many less comprehend, according to the number of the idol which their god command they to worship, which they call calpultetco, which be as much to say as god of the quarter. in this manner, the city of mexico, tenoxtiltan, be found and grow great of the sedition of those of tlatelulco and of the first king, the mexicaines do choose chap 8.. this division be make as aforesaid. some old man and ancient hold opinion that in the division they have not respect they as they deserve. for this cause, they and their kinsfolk do mutiny and go to seek another residence and as they go through the lake they find a small piece of ground or terrace which they call tloteloli, where they inhabit. call it tlatellulco, which signify place of a terrace. this be the three division of the mexicaines since they leave their country: that of mechovacan be the first and that of malinalco the second. those which separate themselves and go to tlatellulco be famous man but of bad disposition, and therefore they practise against the mexicaines, their neighbour, all the ill neighbourhood they can. they have always quarrel against they and to this day continue their hatred and old league. they of tenoxtiltan, see they of tlatellulco, thus opposite unto they, and that they multiply fear that in time they may surmount they. hereupon they assemble in counsel where they think it good to choose a king who they shall obey and strike terror into their enemy. that by this mean they shall be more unite and strong among themselves and their enemy not presume too much against they be. thus resolve to choose a king, they take another advice, very profitable, and assure to choose none among themselves for the avoid of diffention and to gain by their new king some other neighbour nation by who they be environ be destitute. of all succour. all well consider both to pacify the king of culhuacan, who they have great offend, have slay and flay the daughter of his predecessor and do he so great a scorn- as also to have a king of the mexicaine blood, of which generation there be many in culhuacan, which continue there since the time they live in peace among they. they resolve to choose for their king a young man call acamapixtli, son to a great mexicaine prince and of a lady daughter to the king of culhuacan. present. they send ambassador with a great present to demand this man who deliver their ambassage in these term: great lord, we your vassal and servant, place and shut up in the weed and reed of the lake alone and abandon of all the nation of the world, lead only and guide by our god to the place where we be, which fall in the jurisdiction of your limit of ascapusalco and of tescuco. although you have suffer, we to live and remain there. yet will we not, neither be it reason to live without a head and lord to command, correct and govern we, instruct we in the course of our life and defend we from our enemy. therefore, we come to you, know that in your court. and house there be, child of our generation, link and ally with you, issue from our entrails and you of our blood and you among ^he which we have knowledge of, a grandchild of you, and we call acamapixtli. we beseech you, therefore, to give he we for lord. we will esteem he as he deserve. see he be of the lineage of the lord of mexico and the king of culhuacan. the king have consult upon this point and find it nothing inconvenient to be ally to the mexicaines who be valiant man make they answer that they shall take his grandchild in good time. add thereunto that if he have be a woman he will not have. give she note the foul fact before speak of. end his discourse with these word: let my grandchild go to serve your god and be his lieutenant to rule and govern his creature by who we live, who be the lord of night, day and wind. let he go and be lord of the water and land and possess the mexicaine nation. take he in good time and use he as my son and grandchild. the mexicaines give he thanks all joint, desire he to marry he with his own hand, so as he give he to wife one of the noble lady among they. they conduct the new king and queen with all honour possible and make he a solemn reception, go all in general forth to see the king, who they lead into palace, which be then but mean, and have seat they in royal throne present one of the ancient and a orator much esteem amongst they do rise up, speak in this manner: my son, our lord and king, thou be welcome to this poor house and city, amongst these weed and mud, where thy poor father, grandfather and kinsfolk endure what it please the lord of thing create. remember, lord, thou comm^st hither to be the defence and support of the mexicaine nation and to be the resemblance of our god vitzliputzli, whereupon the charge and government be. give thou thou know we be not in our country. see the land we possess at this day be another. neither know we what shall become of we to morrow or another day. consider, therefore, that thou come not to rest or recreate thyself, but rather to endure a new charge under so heavy a burden wherein thou must continual labour, be slave to this multitude which be fall to thy lot and to all this neighbour people who thou must strive to gratify and give they contentment. see thou know we live upon their land and within their limit and end, he repeat these word: thou be welcome, thou and the queen, our mistress, to this your realm. this be the speech of the old man which, with other oration which the mexicaine history do celebrate, the child do use to learn by heart, and so they be keep by tradition. some of they deserve well to be report in their proper term. the king answer, thank they and offer they his care and diligence in their defence and aid in all he can. after they give he the oath and after their mane^ set the royal crown upon his head, the which be like to the crown of the duke of venice, the name of acamapixtli, their first king, signify a handful of reed, and therefore they carry in their armoury a hand, hold many arrow of reed, of the strange tribute the mexicaines pay. to they of azcapuzalco, chap 9. the mexicaines happen so well in the election of their new king that in short time they grow to have some form of a commonweal and to be famous among stranger, whereupon their neighbour move with fear, practise to subdue. they especial the tapane^ans who have azcapuzalco for their metropolitan city, to who the mexicaines pay tribute as stranger dwell in their land for the king of azcapuzalco, fear their power which increase, seek to oppress the mexicane and have consult with his subject. he send to tell king acamapixtli that the ordinary tribute they pay be too little and that, from thenceforth, they shall bring fir, tree, sapine and willow for the build of the city, and, moreover, they shall make he a garden in the water plant with diverse kind of herb and pulse which they shall bring unto he yearly by water dress in this manner, without fail, which, if they do not, he declare they his enemy and will root they out. the mexicaines be much trouble at this commandment, hold it impossible, and that this demand be to no other end but to seek occasion to ruin they. but their god vitzliputzli, comfort. they appear that night to a old man. command he to say to the king, his son, in his name, that he shall make no difficulty to accept of this tribute. he will help they and make the mean easy which, after happen, for the time of tribute be come, the mexicane carry the tree that be require and, moreover, a garden make and float in the water and in it much may, which be their corn, already grain, and in the ear there be also indian pepper, beet, tomates, which be a great sappy and savoury grain, french pease, f^gges, gourd and many other thing, all ripe and in their season, such as have not see the garden in the lake of. mexico, in the midst of the water, will not believe it but will say it be a enchantment of the devil who they worship. but in truth it be a matter to be do, and there have be often see of these garden float in the water, for they cast earth upon reed and grass in such sort as it never waste in the water. they sow and plant this ground so as the grain grow and ripen very well, and then they remove it from place to place. but it be true that to make this great garden easy and to have the fruit grow well be a thing that make man judge there be the work of vitziliputzli, who otherwise they call patillas special, have never make. nor see the like the king of azcapuzalco wonder much when he see that accomplish, which he hold impossible, say unto his subject that this people have a great god that make all easy unto they. and he say unto the mexicaines that see their god give they all thing perfect. he will the year follow. at the time of tribute, they shall bring in their garden a wild duck and a heron sit on their egg in such sort that they shall hatch their young one as they shall arrive without fail of a minute. upon pain of his indignation, the mexican be much trouble and heavy with this proud and strict command. but their god as he be accustom, comfort they in the night by one of his priest, say that he will take all that charge upon. he will they not to fear but believe that the day will come, whenas the azcapuzalcos shall pay with their life this desire of new tribute. the time be come as the mexican carry all that be demand of. their garden. among the reed and weed of the, they find a duck and a heron hatch their egg and at the same instant, when they arrive at azcapuzalco, their young one be disclose, whereat the king of azcapuzalco wonder beyond measure. he say again to his people that these be more than human thing, and that the mexican begin as if they will make themselves lord over all those province. yet do he not diminish the order of this tribute and the mexican find not themselves mighty enough endure this subjection and slavery. the space of fifty year. in this time the king acamapixtli die, have beautify the city of mexico with many goodly building street, conduit of water and great abundance of munition. he reign in. peace and rest. forty year have be always zealous for the good and increase of the commonweal. as he draw near his end, he do one memorable thing: that have lawful child to who he may leave the succession of the realm. yet will he not do it, but contrariwise, he speak free to the commonweal that as they have make a free election of he, so they shall choose he that shall seem fit for their good government, advise they therein to have a care to the good of the commonweal and seem grieve that he leave they not free from tribute and subjection. he die, have recommend his wife and child unto they. he leave all his people sorrowful for his death of the second king. and what happen in his reign. chap 10.. the obsequy of the dead king perform. the ancient, the chief of the realm and some part of the people assemble together to choose a king, where the ancient propound the necessity wherein they be, and that it be needful to choose for chief of their city a man that have pity of age of widow and orphan, and to be a father of the commonweal, for in very deed they shall be the feather of his wing, the kickshaw of his eye and the beard of his face. that it be necessary he be valiant, be needful, short, to use their force as their god have prophesy. their resolution in the end be to choose a son of the. predecessor, use the like good office in accept his son for successor, as he have do to the commonweal. rely thereon. this young man be call vitzilovitli, which signify a rich feather. they set the royal crown upon his head and anoint he, as they have be accustom to do, to all their king with a ointment they call divine. be the same unction wherewith they do anoint their idol present a orator, make a eloquent speech, exhort he to arm himself with courage and free they from the travel, slavery and misery they suffer, be oppress by the azcapuzalcos which do all do he homage this king be not marry, and his counsel hold opinion that it be good to marry he with the daughter of the. king of azcapuzalco to have he a friend by this alliance and to obtain some diminution of their heavy burden of tribute, impose upon they- and yet they fear lest he shall disdain- to give they his daughter by reason they be his vassal. yet the king of azcapuzalco yield thereunto. have humble require, he who, with courteous word, give they his daughter, call ayanchigual, who they lead with great pomp and joy to mexico and perform the ceremony and solemnity of marriage, which be to tie a corner of the man cloak to a part of the woman veil, in sign of the band of marriage. this queen bring forth a son, of who name? they demand advise of the king of azcapuzalco and cast lot, as they have accustom, be great give to soothsay especial upon the name of their child. he will have his grandchild call chimalpopoca, which signify a target, cast smoke the queen, his daughter. see the contentment the king of azcapuzalco have of his grandchild, take occasion to entreat he to relieve the mexicaines of the heavy burden of their tribute. see, he have now a grandchild, mexicaine, the which the king willing yield unto by the advice of his counsel, grant for the tribute which they pay to bring yearly a couple of duck and some fish in sign of subjection, and that they dwell in his land. the mexicaines by this mean remain much ease and content, but it last little for the queen. their die soon after and the year follow likewise. vitzilovitli, the king of mexico, die, leave his son, chimalpopoca, ten year old. he reign thirteen year and die thirty year old, or little more. he be hold for a good king and careful in the service of his god, who image he hold king to be. and that the honour do to their god be do to the king who be his image. for this cause the king have be so affectionate to the service of their god. this king be careful to win the love of his neighbour and to traffic with they, whereby he augment his city, exercise his. man in warlike action in the lake. dispose they to that which he pretend, as you shall see present, of chimalpopoca, the three king and his cruel death and the occasion of war which the mexicaines make chap 11.. the mexicaines, for successor to their decease king, do choose his son, chimalpopoca, by common consent, although he be a child of ten year old. be of opinion that it be always necessary to keep the favour of the king of azcapuzalco. make his grandchild king. they then set he in his throne. give he the ensign of war with a bow and arrow in one hand and a sword with rasour which they common use in the right. signify thereby, as they do say that they pretend, by. arm to set themselves at liberty. the mexicaines have great want of water, that of the lake be very thick and muddy and therefore ill to drink, so as they cause their infant king to desire of his grandfather, the king of azcapuzalco, the water of the mountain of chapultepec, which be from mexico, a league, as be say before, which they easy obtain and by their industry make a aqueduct of faggot, weed and flag, by the which they bring water to their city. but because the city be build within the lake and the aqueduct do cross it, it do break forth in many place, so as they can not enjoy the water as they desire and have great scarcity, whereupon whether they do express seek. it to quarrel with the tapanecan or that they be move upon small occasion. in the end they send a resolute ambassage to the king of azcapuzalco. say they can not use the water which he have gracious grant they and therefore they require he to provide they wood, lime and stone and to send his workman that by their mean they may make a pipe of stone and lime that shall not break this message. nothing please the king and much less his subject. seem to be too presumptuous a message and purposely insolent for vassal to their lord the chief of the counsel, disdain thereat. say it be too bold that, not content with permission to live in a other land and to have water give. they, but they will have they go to serve they. what a matter be that, and whereon presume this fugitive nation shut up in the mud. they will let they know how fit they be to work and to abate their pride in take from they their land and their life. in these term and choler, they leave the king, who they do somewhat suspect by reason of his grandchild, and consult again anew what they be to do, where they resolve to make a general proclamation that no tapanecan shall have any commerce or traffic with any mexicaine, that they shall not go to their city nor receive any into they upon pain of death, whereby we may understand that the king do not absolute command over. his people and that he govern more like a consul or a duke than a king, although, since with their power, the command of king increase, grow absolute tyrant, as you shall see in the last king. for it have be a ordinary thing among the barbarian that, such as their power have be, such have be their command. yea, in our history of spain we find in some ancient king that manner of rule which the tapanecan use. such be the first king of the roman, but that rome decline from king to consul and a senate till that, after they come to be command by emperor. but these barbarian of temperate king become tyrant, of which governement a moderate monarchy be the best and most assure. but return we now unto our history. the king of azcapuzalco see the resolution of his subject, which be to kill the mexican, entreat they first to steal away the young king, his grandchild, and afterward do what they please to the mexican, all in a manner yield hereunto to give the king contentment and for pity they have of the child. but two of the chief be much opposite, infer that it be bad counsel for that chimalpopoca, although he be of their blood, yet be it but by the mother side, and that the father be to be prefer. and therefore they conclude that the first they must kill be chimalpopoca, king of mexico. protest. so to do the king of azcapuzalco be so trouble with. this contradiction and the resolution they have take that soon after, for very grief, he fall sick and die. by who death? the tapan^cans finish their consultation, commit a notable treason. for one night the young king of mexico sleep without guard or fear of any thing. they of azcapuzalco enter his palace and slay. he sudden return unseen the morning be come, when the noble w^nt to salute the king, as they be accustom, they find he slay with great and cruel wound. then they cry out and fill all their city with tear and transport with choler. they present fall to arm with a intent to revenge their king death. as they run up and down full of fury and disorder, one of their chief knight. step forth labour to appease they with a grave admonition. whither go you, say he. o you mexicaines, quiet yourselves. consider that thing. do without consideration ar^ not well, guide nor come to good end. suppress your grief. consider that although your king be dead, the noble blood of the mexicaines be not extinct in he we have. child of our king, decease by who conduct, succeed to the realm you shall, the better execute what you pretend. have a leader to guide your enterprise. go not blind. surcease and choose a king first to guide and encourage you against your enemy. in the mean time, dissemble discreet. perform the funeral of your decease king, who body you see here present. for hereafter you shall find better mean. to take reu^nge. by this mean, the mexican pass no far, but stay to make the obsequy of their king, whereunto they invite the lord of tescuco and culhuacan. report unto they this foul and cruel fact which the tapanecan have commit, move they to have pity on they and incense they against their enemy, conclude that their resolution be to die or to be revenge of so great a indignity. entreat they not to favour so unjust a fact of their enemy, and that, for their part, they desire not their aid of arm or man but only to be looker on of what shall pass, and that for their maintenance, they will not stop nor hinder the commerce, as the tapanecan have do at these speech. they of tescuco and culhuacan. make they great show of good will and that they be well satisfy, offer they their city and all the commerce they desire, that they may provide, victual and munition at their pleasure, both by land and water. after this, the mexicane entreat they to stay with they and assist at the election of their king, the which they likewise grant. to give they contentment of the four king, call izcoalt, and of the war against the tapanecan chap 12.. the elector be assemble, a old man that be hold for a great orator. rise up who, as the history report, speak in this manner, the light of your eye, o m^xicaines, be darken, but not of your heart, for although you have lose he that be the light and guide of the mexicaine commonweal, yet that of the heart remain to consider that, although they have slay one man, yet there be other that may supply with advantage the want we have of he, the mexicaine nobility be not extinguish thereby, nor the blood royal decay. turn your eye and look about you, you shall see the nobility of mexico set in order, not one nor two, but many and excellent prince son to acamapixtli, our true and lawful king and lord. here you may choose at your pleasure, say i. will this man, and not that if you have lose a father, here you may find both father and mother. make account, o mexicaines, that the sun be eclipse and darken for a time and will return sudden. if mexico have be darken by the death of your king, the sun will soon show in. choose another king, look to who and upon who you shall cast your eye and towards who your heart be incline, and this be he who^ your god vitzliputzli have. choose and continue a while this discourse. he end to the satisfaction of all man, in the end, by the consent of this counsel, izcoalt be. choose king, which signify a snake of razor who be son to the first king, acamapixtli, by a slave of he, and although he be not legitimate yet, they make choice of he for that he exceed the rest in behaviour. valour and magnanimity of courage all seem very well satisfy, and above all these of tescuco for their king be marry to a sister of iscoalt, after the king have be crown and set in his royal seat, another orator step up discourse how the king be bind to his commonweal and of the courage he ought to show in travel. speak thus: behold, this day we depend on thou. it may be thou will let fall the burden that lie upon thy soldier and suffer the. old man and woman, the orphlin and the widow, to perish. take pity of the infant that go creep in the air, who must perish if our enemy surmount. we unfold then and stretch forth thy cloak, my lord, to bear these infant upon thy shoulder, which be the poor and the common people who live assure under the shadow of thy wing and of thy bounty. utter many other word upon this subject, the which, as i have say, they learn by heart, for the exercise of their child and after do teach they as a lesson to those that begin to learn the faculty of orator. in the mean time, the tapanecan be resolute to destroy the mexicaines, and to this end they have make great. preparation and therefore the new king take counsel for the proclaim of war and to fight with those that have so much wrong. they but the common people, see their adversary to exceed they far in number and munition for the war. they come amaze to their king, press he not to undertake so dangerous a war which will destroy their poor city and nation. whereupon be demand what advice be fit to take, they make answer that the king of azcapuzalco be very pitiful. that they shall demand peace and offer to serve. he draw they forth those marsh and that he shall give they house and land among his subject. that by this mean they may depend all upon one lord, and for the obtain hereof they shall carry their god in his litter for a intercessor. the cry of the people be of such force. have some noble that approve their opinion. as present, they call for the priest prepare the litter, and their god to perform the voyage as this be prepare and every one yield to this treaty of peace and to subject themselves to the tapanecan, a gallant, young man and of good sort. step out among the people who, with a resolute countenance, speak thus unto they: what meanu this, o you mexicaines, be you mad. how have so great cowardice creep in among we? shall we go and yield ourselves thus to? the azcapuzalcans then turn to the king. he say: how now, my lord, will you endure this? speak to the people that they may suffer. we to find out some mean for our honour and defence, and not to yield ourselves, so simple and shameful, into the hand of our enemy. this young man be call tlacaellec, nephew to the king, he be the most valiant captain and great counsellor that ever the mexicaines have. as you shall see hereafter, izcoalt encourage by that his nephew have so wise speak. retain the people, say they shall first suffer. he to try another, better mean, then turn towards his nobility. he say unto they: you be all here, my kinsman and the best of mexico, he that have the. courage to carry a message to the tapanecan. let he rise up. they look one upon another, but no man stir nor offer himself to the word. then this young man tlacaellec, rise, offer himself to go, say that see, he must die. it do import little whether it be to day or to morrow. for what reason shall he so careful, preserve himself? he be therefore ready, let he command what he please, and although all hold this for a rash attempt, yet the king resolu^d to send. he that he may thereon understand the will and disposition of the king of azcapuzalco and of his people hold it better to hasten his nephew death then to hazard the honour of his commonweal. tlacaelies, be ready, take. his way and be come to the guard who have commandment to kill any mexicaines that come towards they. by cunning or otherwise, he persuade they to suffer. he to pass to the king, who wonder to see he and hear his ambassage, which be to demand peace of. he, under hone condition, answer that he will impart it to his subject. will he to return the next day? for his answer than tlaca^llec demand a passport, yet can he not obtain any, but that he shall use his best skill with this. he return to mexico, give his word to the guard to return, and although the king of azcapuzalco desire peace, be of a mild disposition, yet his subject do so, incense he as his answer. be open war, the which be hear by the messenger. he do all his king command. he declare by this ceremony to give arm and anoint the king with the unction of the dead that in his king behalf he do defy he have. end all. the king of azcapuzalco suffer himself to be anoint and crown with feather. give goodly arm in recompense to the messenger. wish he not to return by the palace gate whereas many attend, to cut he in piece, but to go out secret by a little false postern that be open in one of the court of the palace. this young man do so and turn by secret way, get away in safety in sight of the guard, and there defy they. say tapanecans and azcapuzalcans, you do your office ill understand. you shall all die and not one tapanecan shall remain alive. in the mean time, the guard fall upon he where he behave himself so valiant that he ^lew some of they and see many more of they come run. he retire himself gallant to the city where he bring news that war be proclaim with the tapanecan and that he have defy their king of the battle the mexicaines give to the tapanecan and of the victory they obtain, chap 13.. the defy be know to the commons of mexico. they come to the king according to their accustom cowardice: demand leave to depart the city, hold their reign, certain the king, do comfort and encourage they. promise to give they liberty if they vanquish their enemy. will they not to fear the people? reply. and if we be vanquish, what shall we do if we be overcome? answer the king. we will be bind present to yield ourselves into your hand to suffer death, eat our flesh in your dish and be revenge of we. it shall be so then, say they, if you lose the victory. and if you obtain the victory, we do present, offer ourselves to be your tributary, to labour in your house, to sow your ground, to carry your arm and baggage when you go to the war for ever. we and our descendant after we. these accord make betwixt the people and the nobility which they do after. full perform, either willing or by constraint, as they have promise the king name for his captain, general tlacaellec. the whole camp be put in order and into squadron, give the place of captain to the most valiant of his kinsfolk and friend. then do he make they a goodly speech whereby he do great encourage they be now well, prepare, charge all man to obey the commandment of the general who he have appoint. he divide his man into two part. command the most valiant and hardy to give the first charge with he, and that all the rest shall remain with the king izcoalt un^il. they shall see the first assail. their enemy march then in order they be discover by they of azcapuzalco who present. come furious forth the city, carry great riches of gold, silver and arm of great value, as those which have the empire of all that country, izcoalt, give the signal to battle with a little drum he carry on his shoulder and present they raise a general shout: cry mexico, mexico. they charge the tapanecan and although they be far more in number yet do they defeat they and force they to retire into their city. then advance they which remain behind, cry tlacaellec, victory, victory. all sudden enter the city where, by the king commandment, they pardon not any man, no, not old man, woman nor child, for they slay they all and spoil the city. be very rich. and not content herewith, they follow they that. flee and be retire into the craggy rock of the sierre, or near mountain, strike and make a great slaughter of they, the tapanecan. be retire to a mountain, cast down their arm, demand their life and offer to serve the mexican, to give they land and garden, stone, lime and timber, and to hold they always for their lord. upon this condition, tlacaell^c retire his man and cease the battle. grant they their life upon the former condition, which they do solemn swear. then they return to azcapuzalco and so, with their rich and victorious spoil, to the city of mexico. the day follow the king assemble the nobility and the people to who he lay open the accord the commons have make demand of they if. they be content to persist therein. the commons make answer that they have promise and they have well deserve it and therefore they be content to serve they perpetual, whereupon they take a oath which, since they have, keep without contradiction. this do izcoalt return to azcapuzalco. by the advice of his counsel, he divide all the land and good of the conquer among the conqueror. the chief part fall to the king, then to tlacaellec and after to the rest of the noble, as they best deserve in the battle. they also give land to some plebeian have behave themselves valiant. to other they distribute the pillage, make small account of they as of coward. they appoint land in common for the quarter of mexico to every. one his part for the service and sacrifice of their god. this be the order which, after they always keep in the division of the land and spoil of those they have, vanquish and subdue by this mean, they of azcapuzalco remain so poor as they have no land, leave they to labour and, which be worse, they take their king from they and all power to choose any other than he of mexico. of the war and victory the mexican have against the city of cuyoacan, chap 14.. although the chief city of the tapanecan be that of azcapuzalco, yet have they other with their private lord as t^cuba and cuyoacan. these see the storm pass, will glad that they of azcapuzalco have renew the war against the mexican and see they daunt as a nation whole break and defeat. they of cuyoacan resolve to make war by themselves to the which they labour to draw the other neighbour nation who will not stir nor quarrel with the mexican. in the mean time, the hatred and malice increase. they of cuyoacan begin to ill entreat the woman that go to their market, mock at they and do the like to the man over who they have power, for which cause the king of mexico defend that none of he shall go to cuyoacan and that they shall receive none of they into mexico. the which make they of cuyoacan. resolve whole to war. but first they will provoke they by some shameful scorn which, be that have, invite they to one of their solemn feast after they have, make they a goodly banquet and feast they with a great dance. after their manner, they send they for their fruit woman apparel, force they to put it on and so to return home like woman to their city, reproach they that they be coward and effeminate and that they dare not take arm. be sufficient provoke those of mexico, say that for revenge they do. unto they, a foul scorn lay at the gate of their city of cuyoacan, certain thing which smoke by mean, whereof many woman be deliver before their time and many fall sick in. the end all come to open war and there be a battle, fight wherein they employ all their force, in the which tlacaellec, by his courage and policy in war, obtain the victory for have left king izcoalt in fight with they of cuyoacan. he put himself in ambush with some of the most valiant soldier and so turn about, charge they behind and force they to retire into their city. but see their intent be to fly into a temple which be very strong, he, with three other valiant soldier, pursue they eager and get before they seize on the temple and fire it, so as he force they to fly to the field where he make a great slaughter of the vanquish. pursue they two league. into the country unto a little hill where the vanquish cast away their weapon and their arm across, yield to the mexican and, with many tear, crave pardon of their overween folly in use they, like woman, offer to be their slave. so as in the end, the mexicaines do pardon they. of this victory, the mexicane carry away very rich spolle of garment, arm gold, silver, jewel and rich feather, with a great number of captive in this battle, there be three of the principal of culhuacan that come to aid the mexicaines to win honour the which be remarkable above all, and since be know to tlasaellec and have make proof of their fidelity. he give they mexicaine devise and have they always by his side. where they fight in all place very valiant. it be apparent that the whole victory be due to the general and to these three, for among so many captive, take two, three, part be win by these four, which be easy, know by a policy they use for take a captive they present, cut off a little of his hair and give it to other, so as it appear that those which have their hair cut amount to that number whereby they win great reputation and fame of valiant man they be, honour as conqueror, give they good portion of the spoil and land, as the mexican have always use to do, which give occasion to those that do fight to become famous and to win reputation by arm of the war and victory which the mexican have against the suchimilcos- chap 15- the nation of the tapanecan be subdue. the mexicaines have occasion to do the like to the suchimilcos who, as it have be say, be the first of the seven cave or lineage that people this land. the mexi^ans seek not the occasion, although they may presume as conqueror, to extend their limit. but the suchimilcos do move they to their own ruin, as it happen to man of small judgement that have no foresight, who not prevent the mischief they imagine, fall into it. the suchimilcos hold opinion that the mexican, by reason of their victory past, shall attempt to subdue they and consult hereon among themselves. some among they think it good to acknowledge they for superior and to applaud their good fortune. but the contrary be allow and they go out to give they battle. which izcoalt the king of mexico understanding. he send his general tlacael^ec against they with his army. the battle be fight in the same field that divide their limit, which two army be equal in man and arm but very diverse in their order and manner of fight. for that the suchimilcos charge all together on a heap, confuse, and tlacaellec divide his man into squadron with a goodly order, so, as he present, break his enemy, force they to retire into their city, into the which they enter, follow they to the temple, whither they flee, which? they fire and force they to fly unto the mountain. in the end they bring they to this point that they yield with their arm across the general tlacaellec return in great triumph. the priest go forth to receive, he with their music of flute, and give incense, the chief captain use other ceremony and show of joy, as they have be accustom to do, and the king with all the troop go to the temple to give thanks to their false god. for the devil have always be very desirous hereof to challenge to himself the honour which he deserve not. see it be the true god which give victory and make they to rule who he please. the day. follow king izcoalt, go unto the city. of suchimilco cause himself to be swear king of the suchimilcos, and for their comfort he promise to do they good in token, whereof he command they to make a great causeway stretch from mexico to suchimilco, which be four league to the end. there may be more commerce and traffic amongst they, which the suchimilcos perform, and in short time the mexicaine government seem so good unto they as they hold themselves happy to have change their king and commonweal. some neighbour prick forward by envy or fear, to their ruin be not yet make wise by other misery. cuitlavaca be a city within the lake which, though the name and dwelling be change, continue yet they be active to swim in the lake and therefore they think they may much indomage and annoy the mexicaines by water which, the king understanding, he resolve to send his army present to fight against they. but tlacaellec, little esteem this war, hold it dishonourable to lead a army against they, make offer to conquer they, with the child only, which he perform in this manner. he go unto the temple and draw out of the covent such child as he think fit for this action, from ten to eighteen year of age, who know how to guide their boat or canoe, teach they certain policy, the order they hold. in this war, be that he go to cuitlavaca with his child, where by his policy he press the enemy in such sort that he make they to fly. and as he follow they the lord of cuitlavaca, meet he and yield unto he himself, his city and his people, and by this mean he stay the pursuit. the child return with much spoil and many captive, for their sacrifice be solemn, receive with a great procession, music and perfume, and they go to worship their god in take of the earth which they do eat and draw blood from the forepart of their leg with the priest lancet, with other superstition which they be accustom to use in the like solemnity. the child be much honour and encourage, and the king embrace and kiss they and his kinsman and ally accompany they. the bruit of this victory run throughout all the country. how that tlacaellec have subdue the city of cuitlavaca with child, the news and consideration whereof open the eye of those of tesc^co, a chief and very cunning nation for their manner of life, so as the king of tescuco be first of opinion that they shall subject themselves to the king of mexico and invite he thereunto with his city. therefore, by the advice of his counsel, they send ambassador, good orator, with honourable present to offer themselves unto the mexican, as their subject desire: peace and amity, which be gracious accept. but by the advice of tlacaellec, he use a ceremony for the effect thereof, which be that those of tescuco shall come forth, arm against the mexican, where they shall fight and present yield, which be a act and ceremony of war without any effusion of blood on either side. thus the king of mexico become sovereign lord of tescuco, but he take not their king from they, but make he of his privy counsel, so as they have always maintain themselves in this manner until the time of motecuma, the second, during who reign the spaniard enter, have, subdue the land and city of tescuco. mexico remain lady and mistress of all the land and city about the lake where it be build. izcoalt have enjoy this prosperity and reign twelve year, die, leave the realm which have be. give he much augment by the valour and counsel of his nephew tlacaellec, as have afore be say, who hold it best to choose a other king than himself, as shall hereafter be show of the five king. of mexico, call motecuma, the first of that name, chap 16.. forasmuch as the election of the new king belong to four chief elector, as have be say, and to the king of tescuco and the king of tacubu, by especial privilege, tlacaellec, assemble these six personage as he that have the sovereign authority and have propound the matter unto they. they make choice of motecuma, the first of that name, nephew to the same tlacaellec. his election be very please to they all, by reason whereof they make most solemn feast, and more stately than the former present. after his election, they conduct he to the temple with a great train where, before the divine hearth, as they call it, where there be continual fire, they set. he in his royal throne, put upon he his royal ornament. be there the king draw blood from his ear and leg with a griffon talent, which be the sacrifice wherein the devil delight to be. honour the priest, ancient and captain make their oration. all congratulate his election. they be accustom in their election to make great feast and dance where they waste many light. in this king time, the custom be bring in that the king shall go in person to make war in some province and bring captive to solemnize the feast of his coronation and for the solemn sacrifice of that day. for this cause, king motecuma go into the province of chalco who have declare themselves his enemy from whence have fight valiant. he bring a great number of captive, whereof he do make a notable sacrifice the day of his coronation, although at that time he do not subdue all the province of chalco be a very warlike nation. many come to this coronation from diverse province as well, near as far off, to see the feast at the which all comer be very bountiful, entertain and clad, especial the poor to who they give new garment. for this cause, they bring that day into the city the king tribute with a goodly order which consist in stuff to make garment of all sort, in cacao, gold, silver, rich feather, great burden of cotton, cucumber, sundry sort of pulse, many kind of sea fish and of the fresh water great. store of fruit and venison, without number, not reckon a infinite number of present which other king and lord send to the new king. all this tribute march in order according to the province, and before they the steward and receiver, with diverse mark and ensign, in very goodly order. so, as it be one of the goodly thing of the feast to see the entry of the tribute, the king be crown. he employ himself in the conquest of many province, and for that he be both valiant and virtuous, he still increase more and mo^e use in all his affair the counsel and industry of his general tlacaellec, who he do always love and esteem very much, as he have good reason. the war wherein he be most trouble and of great difficulty, be that of the province of chalco, wherein there happen great matter, whereof one be very remarkable, which be that they of chalcas have take a brother of motecuma^s in the war, who they resolve to choose for their king, ask he very courteous, if he will accept of this charge. he answer, after much importunity still persist therein- that if they mean plain to choose. he for their king. they shall plant in the market place a tree or very high stake on the top, whereof they shall make a little scaffold and mean to mount unto it the chalcas. suppose it have be some ceremony to make himself more apparent present effect. it then assemble all his mexicaines about the stake. he go to the top with a garland of flower in his hand, speak to his man in this manner: o valiant mexicaines, these man will choose i for their king, but the god will not permit that to be a king. i shall committee any treason against my country, but contrariwise i will that you learn by i that it behove we rather to endure death then to aid our enemy. say these word, he cast himself down and be break in a thousand piece, at which spectacle the chalcas have so great horror and dispit. that present they fall upon the mexicaines and slay they all with their lance. as man, who they hold too proud and inexorable, say they have devilish heart. it chance the night follow. they hear two owl make a mournful cry, which they do interpret as a unfortunate sign and a presage of their near destruction. as it succeed, for king motecuma go against they in person, with all his power where he. vanquish they and ruin all their kingdom and pass beyond the mountain me^ade he conquer still even unto the north sea, then return towards the south sea, he subdue many province, so as he become a mighty king, all by the help and counsel of tlacaellec who, in a manner, conquer all the mexicaine nation. yet he hold a opinion, the which be confirm that it be not behooveful to conquer the province of tlascalla, that the mexicaines might have a fronter enemy to keep the youth of mexico in exercise and alarm, and that they may have number of captive to sacrifice to their idol, wherein they do waste, as have be say, infinite number of man which shall be take by force in the war. the honour must be give to motecuma, or, to speak true, to tlacaellec, his general, for the good order and policy settle in the realm of mexico, as also for the counsel and goodly enterprise which they do execute, and likewise for the number of judge and magistrate be as well. order there as in any commonweal, yea be it in the most flourish of europe. this king do also great, increase the king house, give it great authority and appoint many and sundry officer which serve he with great pomp and ceremony. he be no less remarkable, touch the devotion and service of his idol, increase the number of his minister and institute new ceremony whereunto he carry a great respect. he build that great temple, dedicate. to their god vitziliputzli, whereof be speak in the other book. he do sacrifice at the dedication of this temple a great number of man, take in sundry victory, final, enjoy his empire in great prosperity. he fall sick and die. have reign twenty eight year (@) to his successor, ticoci^, who do not resemble he neither in valour nor in good fortune. how tlacaellec refuse to be king, and of the election and deed of ticocic, chap 17.. the four deputy assemble in counsel with the lord of tcscuc^ and tacuba, where tlacaellec be precedent in the election, where by all their voice, tlacaellec be choose as deserve this charge better than any other. yet he refuse it, persuade they by pertinent reason that they shall choose. another say that it be better and more expedient to have another king and he to be his instrument and assistant, as he have be till then, and not to lay the whole burden upon he, for that he hold himself no less bind for the commonweal, then, if he be king, it be a rare thing to refuse principality and command and to endure the pain and the care and not to reap the honour. there be few that will yield up the power and authority which they may hold, be it profitable to the commonweal. this barbarian do herein exceed the wise among the greek and roman, and it may be a lesson to alexander and julius caesar, whereof the one hold it little to command. the whole world put his most dear and faithful servant to death upon some small jealousy of rule and empire, and the other declare himself enemy to his country, say that if it be lawful to do any thing against law and reason, it be for a kingdom. such be the thirst and desire of command. although this act of tlacael^e^^ may well proceed from too great a confidence of himself, seem to he though he be not king yet in a manner that he command king, suffer he to carry certain mark as a tiara or ornament for the head which belong only to themselves. yet this act deserve great commendation and to be well consider of, in that he hold opinion to be better able to. serve his commonweal as a subject, then be a sovereign lord and, as in a comedy, he deserve most commendation. that represent the personage that import most, be it of a shepherd or a peasant, and leave the king or captain to he that can perform it. so in good philosophy, man ought to have a special regard to the common good and apply themselves to that office and place which they best understand. but this philosophy be far from that which be practise at this day. but let we return to our discourse and say that, in recompense of his modesty and for the respect which the mexicaine elector bear, he they demand of tlacaellec that see, he will not reign who he think most fit. whereupon he give his voice to a son of the decease king, who be then very young, call ticocic. but they reply that his shoulder be very weak to bear so heavy a burden. tlacaellec answer that his be there to help he to bear the burden, as he have do to the decease by mean, whereof they take their resolution and tico^ic be choose to who be do all the accustom ceremony. they pierce his nostril and for a ornament put a emerald therein. and for this reason in the mexicane book this king, be note by his nostril pierce. he differ much from his father and predecessor. be note for a coward and not valiant. he go to make war for his coronation in a province that be rebel, where he lose more of his own man than he take captive. yet he return, say that he bring the number of captive require for the sacrifice of his coronation, and so he be crown with great solemnity. but the mexicaines discontent to have a king so little dispose to war practise to hasten his death by poison for this cause. he continue not above four year in the kingdom, whereby we see that the child do not always follow the blood. and valour of their father, and the great the glory of the predecessor have be, the more odious be the weakness and cowardice of such that succeed they in command and not in merit. but this loss be well repair by a brother of the decease who be also son to great motecuma, call axayaca, who be likewise choose by the advice of tlacacllec, wherein he happen better than before. of the death of tlacaellec and the deed of axayaca, the seven king of mexicaines, chap 18.. now be tlacaellec, very old, who, by reason of his age, he be carry in a chair upon man shoulder to assist in counsel when business require. in the end he fall sick, whenas the king, who be not yet crown, do visit he, often shed many tear, seem to lose in. he, his father, and the father of his country, tlacaellec, do most affectionate recommend his child unto he, especial the elder who have show himself valiant in the former war. the king promise to have regard unto he and the more to comfort the old man in his presence, he give he the charge and ensign of captain general, with all the pre-eminence of his father, wherewith the old man remain so well satisfy, as with this content he end his day. if he have not pass to another life, they may have hold themselves very happy see that of so poor and small a city wherein he be bear, he establish by his valour and magnanimity so great, so rich and so potent a kingdom. the mexican make his funeral as the founder of that empire more sumptuous and stately than they have do to any of their former king and present after axayaca. to appease the sorrow which all the people of mexico show for the death of their captain, he resolve to make the voyage necessary for his coronation. he therefore lead his army with great expedition into the province of tequantepec, two hundred league from mexico, where he give battle to a mighty army and a infinite number of man assemble together, as well out of that province as from their neighbour, to oppose themselves against the mexican, the first of his camp that advance himself to the combat. be the king himself. defy his enemy from who he make show to fly when they charge he, until he have draw they into a ambuscado where many soldier lay hide under straw, who sudden issue forth and they which flee turn head so as they of tiquantepec remain in the midst of they who they charge furious, make a great slaughter of they and follow their. victory. they raze their city and temple, punish all their neighbour rigorous. then go they on far and without any stay conquer to guatulco, the which be a port at this day well know in the south sea. axayaca return to mexico with great and rich spoil, where he be honourable crown with sumptuous and stately preparation of sacrifice, tribute and other thing, whither many come to see his coronation. the king of mexico receive the crown from the hand of the king of tescuco, who have the pre-eminence. he make many other enterprise where he obtain great victory, be always the first to lead the army and to charge the enemy, by the which he purchase the name of a most valiant captain. and not content to subdue stranger, he also suppress his subject, which have rebel which never any of his predecessor ever can do or dare attempt. we have already show how some seditious of mexico have divide themselves from that commonweal and build a city near unto they, which they call tlatelulco. whereas now, saint jaques, be these be revolt, hold a faction apart and increase and multiply much, refuse to acknowledge the king of mexico, nor to yield they obedience the king axayaca send to advise they not to live divide but be of one blood and one people to join together and acknowledge the king of mexico. whereupon the lord of tlatelulco make a answer full of pride and disdain, defieng the king of mexico to single combat with himself and present muster his man, command some of they to hide themselves in the weed of the lake. and the better, to deceive the mexican, he command they to take the shape of raven, goose and other beast, as frog and such like suppose by this mean to surprise the mexican as they shall pass by the way, and cawsy of the lake have knowledge of this defy and of his adversary policy. he divide his army, give a part to his general, the son of tlacaellec, command he to charge this ambuscado in the lake, and he with the rest of his people by. a unfrequented way, go and encamp before tlatelulco present. he call he who have defy he to perform his promise. and as the two lord of mexico and tlatelulco advance, they command their subject not to move until they have see who shall be conqueror. which be do and present. the two lord encounter valiant where have fight long. in the end the lord of tlatelulco be force to turn his back, be unable to endure the furious charge of the king of mexico. those of tlatelulco see their captain fly faint and flee likewise. but the mexican follow they at the heel, charge they furious. yet the lord of tlatelulco escape, not the hand of axayaca, for think to save himself, he flee to the top of. the temple but axayaca follow he so near as he seize on he with great force and throw he from the top to the bottom and after set fire on the temple and the city. while this pass, at tlatelulco, the mexicane general be very hot in the revenge of those that pretend to defeat he by policy and after he have force they to yield and to cry for mercy, the general say he will not pardon they until they have first perform the office of those figure they represent and therefore he will have they cry like frog and raven, every one according to the figure which he have undertake, else they have no composition. which thing he do to mock they with their own policy? fear and necessity be perfect teacher. so as they do, sing and cry with all the difference of voice that be command they to save their life. although they be much grieve at the sport their enemy make at they, they say that unto this day the mexican use to jest at the tlatelulcans, which they bear impatient when they put they in mind of this sing and cry of beast. king axayaca take pleasure at this scorn and disgrace and present after they return to mexico with great joy. this king be esteem for one of the best that have command in mexico. he reign eleven year and one succeed that be much inferior unto he in valour and virtue of the deed of autzol the eight. king of mexico, chap 19. among the four elector that have power to choose who they please to be king, there be one endue with many perfection, name autzol. this man be choose by the rest and this election be very please to all the people. for beside that, he be valiant all hold, he courteous and affable to every man, which be one of the chief quality require in they that command to purchase love and respect. to celebrate the feast of his coronation, he resolve to make a voyage and to punish the pride of those of quaxulatlan, a very rich and plentiful province and, at this day, the chief of new spain, they have rob his officer and steward that carry the tribute to mexico. and therewithal be rebel. there be great difficulty to reduce this nation to obedience. lie in such sort as a arm of the sea. stop the mexican passage to pass the which autzol, with a strange device and industry, cause a island to be make in the water of faggot earth and other matter by mean, whereof both he and his man may pass to the enemy where give they battle he, conquer they and punish they at his pleasure. then return he unto mexico in triumph and with great riches to be crown king according to their custom. autzol extend the limit of his kingdom far by many conquest, even unto guatimalla, which be three hundred league from mexico. he be no less liberal than valiant for. whenas the tribute arrive, which, as i have say, come in great abundance, he go forth of his palace, gather together all the people into one place, than command he to bring all the tribute which he divide to those that have need, to the poor. he give stuff to make, apparel and meat and whatsoever they have need of, in great abundance and thing of value, as gold, silver, jewel and feather be divide amongst the captain, soldier and servant of his house. according to every man merit this autzol be likewise a great politician. he pull down the house ill build and build other very sumptuous. it seem unto he that the city of mexico have too little water and that the lake be very muddy. and therefore he resolve to let in a great course of water which they of cuyoacan use for this cause. he call the chief man of the city unto he be a famous sorcerer have propound his meaning unto he the sorcerer, wish he to be well advise, what he do be a matter of great difficulty, and that he understand, if he draw the river out of her ordinary course, make it pass to mexico, he will drown the city. the king suppose these excuse be, but to frustrate the effect of his design be therefore in choler, he dismiss, he home and a few day after he send a provost to cuyoacan to take this sorcerer. who have understanding for what intent the king officer come? he cause they to enter his house and then he present himself unto they in the form of a terrible eagle, wherewith the provost and his companion be terrify. they return without take he autzol incense, herewith send other to who he present himself in form of a furious tiger. so as they dare not touch he, the three come and they find he in the form of a horrible serpent, whereat they be much afraid the king move the more with these do send to tell they of cuyoacan that if they bring not the sorcerer bind unto he, he will raze their city for fear whereof, or whether it be of his own free will or be force by the people he suffer himself to be. lead to the king who present, cause he to be strangle. and then do he put his resolution in practice, force a channel whereby the water may pass to mexico, whereby he bring a great current of water into the lake, which they bring with great ceremony and superstition have priest cast incense along the bank. other sacrifice quail and with the blood of they sprinkle the channel bank. other sound of cornet accompany the water with their music. one of the chief go attire in a habit like to their goddess of the water and all salute. she say that she be welcome. all which thing be paint in the annal of mexico, which book be now at rome, in the holy library, or vatican, where a father of our company that be come from mexico do see it, and other history, the which he do expound to the keeper of his holiness library, take great delight to understand this book which before he can never comprehend. final, the water be bring to mexico, but it come in such abundance that it have wellnear drown the city, as be foretell, and in effect it do ruin a great part thereof. but it be present, prevent by the industry of autzol, who cause a issue to be make, to draw forth the water by mean whereof he repair the building that be. fall with a exquisite work be before, but poor cottage. thus he leave the city environ with water, like another venice and very well build. he reign eleven year and end with the last and great successor of all the mexican, of the election of great motecuma, the last king of mexico, chap 20.. when the spaniard enter new spain, be in the year of our lord, one thousand five hundred and eighteen. motecuma, second of that name, be the last king of the mexicaines. i say the last, although they of mexico, after his death, choose another king, yea, in the life of the same motecuma who they declare a enemy to his country, as we shall see hereafter. but he that succeed, he and he that fall into the hand of the marquis de valle, have but the name and title of king. for that the kingdom be in a manner, all yield to the spaniard. so as with reason, we account motecuma for the last king. and so he come to the period of the mexicaines power and greatness, which be admirable, be happen among barbarian. for this cause and for that this be the season that god have choose to reveal unto they the knowledge of his gospel and the kingdom of jesus christ, i will r^ late, more at large, the act of motecuma, then of the rest. before he come to be king, he be by disposition very grave and stay and speak little, so as when he^ give his opinion in the privy counsel whereas he assist, his speech and discourse make every one to admire he, so as even then he be fear and respect. he retire himself, usual into a chapel, appoint for he in the temple of vitziliputzli, where they say their idol. speak unto he and for this cause he be hold very religious and devout. for these perfection, then, be most noble and of great courage. his election be short and easy, as a man upon who all man eye be fix as worthy of such a charge, have intelligence of this election. he hide himself in this chapel. of the temple, whether it be by judgement, apprehend so heavy and hard a burden as to govern such a people, or rather, as i believe, through hypocrisy, to show that he desire not empery. in the end they find he lead he to the place of council, whither they accompany he with all possible joy. he march with such a gravity as they all say, the name of motecuma agree very well with his nature, which be as much to say as a angry lord. the elector do he great reverence, give he notice that he be choose king from thence. he be lead before the hearth of their god to give incense, where he offer sacrifice in, draw blood from his ear and the calf of. his leg, according to their custom, they attire he with the royal ornament and pierce the gristle of his nostril. hang thereat a rich emerald. a barbarous and troublous custom. but the desire of rule make all pain light and easy. be seat in his throne. he give andience to the oration and speech that be make unto he which, according unto their custom, be eloquent and artificial. the first be pronounce by the king of tescuco, which be preserve for that it be late deliver and very worthy to be hear. i will set it down word by word, and thus he say: the concordance and unity of voice upon thy election be a sufficient testimony, most noble young man, of the happiness the realm shall receive. as well deserve to be command by thou, as also for the general applause which all do show by mean thereof, wherein they have great reason, for the empire of mexico do already so far extend itself that to govern a world as it be and to bear so heavy a burden, it require no less dexterity and courage than that which be resident in thy firm and valiant heart, nor of less wisdom and judgement than thou. i see and know plain that the mighty god love this city. see, he have give understanding to choose what be fit. for who will not believe that a prince who before his reign have pierce the nine vault of heaven shall not likewise now obtain those thing that be? earthly to relieve his people, aid himself with his best judgement, be thereunto bind by the duty and charge of a king who will likewise believe that the great courage which thou have, always, valiant, show in matter of importance shall now fail thou in matter of great need. who will not persuade himself but the mexicane empire be come to the height of their sovereignty. see the lord of thing create, have impart so great grace unto thou that with thy look only, thou breed admiration in they that behold. thou rejoice then, o happy land, to who the creator have, give a prince as a firm pillar to support thou, which shall be thy father and thy defence, by who thou shall be succour at need. who will be more than a brother to his subject. for his piety and clemency, thou have a king who, i^ regard of his estate be not incline to delight or will lie stretch out upon his bed, occupy in pleasure and vice, but contrariwise, in the midst of his sweet and pleasant sleep he will sudden awake for the care he must have over thou and will not feel the taste of the most savoury ^eates. have his spirit transport with the imagination of thy good. tell i then, o happy realm, if i have not reason to say that (@) ought rejoice. have, find such a king and thinkable young man and our most mighty lord, be confident and of ^ good courage that see the lord of thing create. have. give thou this charge. he will also give thou for^^ and courage to manage it, and thou may well hope th^^ he, which in time past have use so great bounty towards thou, will not now deny thou his great gift. see he have. give thou so great a charge which i wish thou to enjoy ma^^ year. king motecuma, be very attentive to this discourse which be end, they say he be so trouble that endeavour thrice to answer he he. can not speak, be overcome with tear, which joy and content do usual cause in sign of great humility, in the end be come to himself. he speak brie^ly. i be too blind, good king of tescuco, if i do not know that what thou have speak unto i proceed of mere favour. it please you to show. i see among so m^nie noble and valiant man within this realm, you have make ch^^^^ of the le^st sufficient, and in truth i find myself so incapable of a charge of so great importance that i know not what to do, but to beseech the creator of all create thing that he will favour i, and i entreat you all to pray unto he, for i these word utter. he begin again to weep how motecuma order the service of his house and of the war he make for his coronation. cha 21, he that in his election make such show of humility and mildness, see himself king, begin present to discover his aspire. thought the first be he. command that no plebeian shall serve in his house, nor bear any royal office as his predecesfour have use till then. blame they that will be serve by man of base condition. command that all the noble and most famous man of his realm shall live within his palace and exercise the office of his court and house, whereunto a old man of great authority, who have sometime be his schoolmaster, oppose himself. advise he to be careful. what he do and not to thrust himself into the danger of a great inconvenience in separate himself from the vulgar and common people, so as they shall not dare to look he in the face, see themselves so reject by he. he answer that it be his resolution and that he will not allow the plebeian to go thus mingle among the noble as they have. do one say that the service they do be according to their condition. so as the king get no reputation, and thus he continue, firm in his resolution, he present command his counsel to dismiss all the plebeians from their charge and office, as well those of his household as of his court, and to provide knight the which be do. after he go in person to a enterprise necessary for his coronation. at that time, a province lie far off towards the north ocean. be revolt from the crown whether he lead the flower of his people. well appoint there. he war with such valour and dexterity that in the end he subdue all the province and punish the rebel. severe return with a great number of captive for the sacrifice and many other, spoil all the city. make he solemn reception at his return and the lord thereof give he water to wash, perform the office of servant, a thing not use by any of his predecessor. such be the fear and respect they bear he. in mexico they make the feast of his coronation with great preparation of dance, comedy, banquet, light and other invention for many day. and there come so great a wealth of tribute from all his country that stranger unknown come to mexico and their very enemy resort in great number, disguise, to see these feast as those of tlascalla and mechovacan, the which motecuma have discover. he command they shall be lodge and gentle, entreat and honour as his own person he also make they goodly gallery like unto his own where they may see and behold the feast. so they enter by night to those feast as the king himself make their sport and mask, and for that i have make mention of these province. it shall. not be from the purpose to understand that the inhabitant of mechovacan, tlascalla and tapeaca will never yield to the mexican but do always fight valiant against they. yea, sometime the mechovacans do vanquish the mexican, as also those of tapeaca do, in which place the marquis don ferrand cortes, after that he and the spaniard be expel mexico, pretend to build their first city, the, which he call, as i well remember, segura la frontiere. but this people continue little for have afterward reconquer mexico, all the spaniard go to inhabit there. to conclude, those of tapeaca, tlascalla and mechovacan have be always enemy to the mexican, although motocuma say unto cortes that he do purposesy forbear to subdue they to have occasion to exercise his man. of war and to take number of captive of the behaviour and greatness of motecuma, chap 22.. this king labour to be respect, yea, to be worship as a god. no plebeian may look he in the face. if he do, he be punish with death. he do never set his foot on the ground but be always carry on the shoulder of nobleman, and if he light they lay rich tapestry whereon he do go. when he make any voyage, he and the nobleman go as it be in a park, compass in for the nonce and the rest of the people go without the park, environ it in on every side. he never put on a garment twice, nor do eat or drink in one vessel. or dish above once all must be new. give to his attendant that which have once serve he so as common they be rich and sumptuous. he be very careful to have his law observe and when he return, victor from any wa^^e, he feign sometime to go and take his pleasure. than will he disguise himself to see if his people suppose if he wear absent will omit any thing of the feast or reception. if there be any excess or defect, he then do punish it rigorous. and also to discern how his minister do execute their office. he often disguise himself, offer guiste and present to the judge, provoke they to do in justice. if they offend, they be present, punish with death, without remission. or respect, be they nobleman or his kinsman, yea, his own brother. he be little conversant with his people and seldom see retire himself, most common to care for the government of his realm. beside that, he be a great iusticy and very noble, he be very valiant and happy by mean, whereof he obtain great victory and come to this greatness as be write in the spanish history, whereon it seem needless to write more. i will only have a care hereafter to write what the book and history of the indies make mention of, the which the spanish writer have not observe, have not sufficient understand the secret of this country, the which be thing very worthy to be know, as we shall see hereafter- of. the presage and strange prodigy which happen in mexico before the fall of their empire, chap 23. although the holy scripture forbid we to give credit to sign and vain prognostication, deut 28. and that s jerome do, admonish we not to fear token from heaven, jer 10. as the gentile do. yet the same scripture teach we that monstrous and prodigious sign be not altogether to be contemn and that often they be forerunner of some general change and chastisement which god will take, as eusebius note well of caesarea, lib 9, evan daemon: 1, for that the same lord of heaven and earth send such and new thing in heaven, in the element, in beast and in his other creature, that this may partly serve as a advertisement to man and to be the beginning of the pain and chastisement by the fear and amazement they bring. it be write in the second book of macabee that before that, great change and persecution of the people of israel, 2. mac 5. which be cause by the tyranny of. antiochus, surname epiphanes, who the holy scripture call the root of sin. there be see for forty day, together, throughout all jerusalem, great squadron of horseman in the air who with their armour guilt their lance and target, and upon furious horse with their sword draw, do strike 1. mat 1. skirmish and encounter one against the other. and they say that the inhabitant of jerusalem see this. they pray to our lord to appease his wrath and that these prodigy may turn to good. it be likewise write in the book of wisdom, sap 17. that when god will draw his people out of egypt and punish the egyptian, some terrible and fearful vision appear unto they, as fire see out of time in horrible form. joseph. in his book of the jewishwarre, show many and great wonder go before the destruction of jerusalem and the last captivity of his wicked people, who god just abhor. euseb lib 1. eccle, hist and eusebius of caesarea, with other allege the same text, authorize prognostication: the history be full of like observation in great change of state and commonweal, as paulus orosius witness of many. and without doubt, this observation be not vain nor unprofitable, for although it be vanity, yea superstition, defend by the law of our god light to believe these sign and token. yet, in matter of great moment, as in the change of nation, kingdom and notable law, it be no vain thing but rather certain and assure to believe that the wisdom. of the most high, do dispose and suffer. these thing foretell what shall happen, to serve, as i have say, for a advertisement to some and a chastisement to other, and as a witness to all that the king of heaven have a care of man who, as he have, appoint great and fearful token of that great change of the world which shall be the day of judgement. so do it please, he, to send wonderful sign to demonstrate lesser change in diverse part of the world, the which be remarkable, whereof he dispose according to his eternal wisdom. we must also understand that, although the devil be the father of lie, yet the king of glory make he often to confess the truth against his will. which he have often declare for very fear: mat 1. luke. 4. as he do in the desert, by the mouth of the possess cry that jesus be the saviour come to destroy he. as he do by the who say that paul preach the true god, act 26. as when he appear and trouble pilate wife, who he make to mediate for jesus, a just man. and as many other history beside the holy scripture give diverse testimony of idol in approbation of christian religion, whereof lactantius and other make mention. let they read eusebius in his book of the preparation of the gospel and those of his demonstration, where he do ample treat of this matter. i have purposely speak this that no man shall contemn. what be write in the history and annal of the indies, touch, presage and strange sign of the approach, end and ruin of their kingdom and of the tyranny who they worship altogether, which in my opinion, be worthy of credit and belief, both for that it chance late and the memory be yet fresh, as also for that it be likely that the devil lament at so great a change and that god by the same mean begin to chastise their cruel and abominable idolatry. i will therefore set they down here as true thing. it chance that motecuma have reign many year in great prosperity and so puff up in his conceit as he cause himself to be serve and fear yea to be worship as a god, that the almighty lord begin to chastise he and also to admonish he, suffer even the very who he worship, to tell he these heavy tiding of the ruin of his kingdom and to torment he by vision which have never be see, wherewith he remain so melancholy and trouble as he be void of judgement. the idol of those of cholola, which they call quetzacoalt, declare that a strange people come to possess his kingdom. the king of tescuco, who be a great magician and have conference with the devil, come one day. at a extraordinary house to visit motecuma. assure he that his god have, tell he that there be great loss, prepare for he and for his whole realm. many witch and sorcerer go and declare as much, among which there be one do very particular, foretell he what shall happen and as he be with he, he tell he that the pulse of his foot and hand fail. he motecuma trouble with these news, command all those sorcerer to be apprehend, but they vanish present in the prison, wherewith he grow into such a rage that he may not kill they as he put their wife and child to death, destroy their house and family, see himself importune and trouble with these advertisement. he seek to appease the. anger of his god, and for that cause he labour to bring a huge stone thereon, to make great sacrifice for the effect whereof he send a great number of people with engine and instrument to bring it, which they can by no mean move, although be obstinate. they have break many instrument, but as they strive still to raise it, they hear a voice join to the stone which say they labour in vain and that they shall not raise it for that the lord of thing create will no more suffer those thing to be do there, motecuma understand this ommaund, the sacrifice to be perform in that ^lace. and they say the voice speak again. have i not tell you that it be not the pleasure of the lord of thing create, that it shall be do, and that you may well know that it be so. i will suffer myself to be transport. little then after you shall not move, i which happen so indeed. for present, they carry it a small distance with great facility than afterward they can not move it till that, after many prayer, it suffer itself to be transport to the entry of the city of mexico, where sudden it fall into the lake. where seek for it, they can not find it, but it be afterward find in the same place from whence they have remove it, wherewith they remain amaze and confound at the same. time there appear in the element a great flame of fire, very bright, in the form of a pyramid, which begin to appear at midnight and go still mount until the sun rise in the morning, where it stay at the south and then vanish away. it show itself in this sort the space of a whole year, and ever as it appear, the people cast forth great cry, as they be accustom, believe it be a presage of great misfortune. it happen also that fir^ take the temple whenas no body be within it nor near unto it, neither do there fall any lightning or thunder, whereupon the guard cry out. a number of people run with water, but nothing can help. so as it be all consume. and they say the fire seem to come forth of piece of timber which kindle more by the water that be cast upon it. there be a comet, see in the day time, run from the west to the east, cast a infinite number of sparkle, and they say the form be like to a long tail, have three head: the great lake, betwixt, mexico and tescuco, without any wind, earthquake or any other apparent sign, begin sudden to swell and the wave grow in such sort as all the building near unto it fall down to the ground, they say. at that time they hear many voice, as of a woman in pain which say sometime, o my child, the time of your destruction be come, and otherwhiles it say, o my child, whither shall i carry you that you perish not utter. there appear likewise many monster with two head which be carry before the king, sudden vanish. there be two that exceed all other monster be very strange. the one be the fisher of the lake. take a bird as big as a crane and of the same colour but of a strange and unseen form. they carry it to motecuma who at that time be in the palace of tear and mourn which be all hang with black for as he have many palace for. his recreation, so have he also other for time of affliction, where with he be then heavy charge and torment by reason of the threaten his god have give he. by these sorrowful advertisement, the fisher come about noon, set this bird before he, which have on the top of his head a thing bright and transparent in form of a look glass, wherein he do behold a warlike nation come from the east, arm, fight and kill. he call his divine and astronomer, whereof there be a great number who have see these thing and not able to yield any reason of what be demand of they, the bird vanish away so as it be never more see, whereupon motecuma remain very heavy and sorrowful. the other, which happen be a labourer, who have the report of a very honest man come unto he, tell he that be the day before at his work, a great eagle fly towards he and take he up in his talant without hurt. he carry he into a certain cave where it leave he the eagle pronounce these word: most mighty lord, i have bring he who thou have command, i, this indian labourer, look about on every side. to who he speak. but he see no man. then he hear a voice which say unto he: do thou not know this man who thou see lie upon the ground and look thereon? he perceive ^. man lie very heavy asleep with royal ensign flower in his hand and a staff of perfume burn, as they be accustom to use in that country. who the labourer behold, know it be the great king motecuma. and answer present. great lord, this resemble our king motecuma. the voice say again: thou say true. behold what he be and how he lie asleep, careless of the great misery and affliction. prepare for he. it be now time that he pay the great number of offence he have do to god. and that he receive the punishment of his tyranny and great pride. and yet thou see how careless he lie, blind in his own misery and without any feel. but to the end thou may the better see. he take the staff of perfume he hold, burn in his hand and put it to his face. thou shall then find he, without feeling the poor labourer. durstnot approach near he, nor do as he be command for the great fear they all have of this king. but the voice say: have no flare, for i be, without comparison, great than this king. i can destroy he and defend he. do therefore what i command thou, whereupon the labourer take the staff of perfume out of the king hand. and put it burn to his nose, but he move not, nor show any feel. this do the voice say unto he that see, he have find the king so sleepy he shall go awake, he, and tell he what he have. see. then the eagle, by the same commandment, take the man in his talent and set he in the same place where he find he and for accomplishment of that which it have, speak he, come to advertise he. they say that motecuma, look on his face, find that he be burn, the which he have not feel till then, wherewith he continue, exceed heavy and trouble. it may be that what the labourer report have happen unto he by imaginary vision, and it be not. incredible that god appoint by the mean of a good angel or suffer by a bad, that this advertisement shall be give to the labourer for the king chastisement, although a infidel see that. we read in the holy scripture that infidel and sinner have have the like apparition and revelation as nabucadonosor balaam and the of saul dan 2. num 22. 3. reg 28. and if some of these apparition do not so express happen yet, without doubt motecuma have many great affliction and discontentment by reason of sundry and diverse revelation which he have that his kingdom and law shall soon end. of the news motecuma receive of the spaniard arrival in his country and of the ambassage he send they, chap 24.. in the fourteen year of the reign of motecuma, which be in the year of our lord 1517.. there appear in the north sea ship and man land whereat the subject of motecuma wonder much, and desirous to learn and to be better. satisfy what they be, they go aboard in their canoe, carry many refresh of meat and stuff to make apparel upon colour, to sell they, the spaniard, receive they into their ship and in exchange of their victual and stuff which be acceptable unto they, they give they chain of false stone- red, blue, green and yellow, which the indian imagine to be precious stone. the spaniard inform themselves who be their king and of his great power. dismiss they will they to carry those. stone unto their lord, say that for that time they can not go to he, but they will present, return and visit he. those of the coast go present to mexico with this message, carry the representation of what they have see, paint on a cloth, both of the ship, man and stone, which they have. give they, king motecuma, remain very pensive with this message, command they not to reveal it to any one. the day follow he assemble his counsel and have, show they the paint clothes and the chain. he cousult what be to be, do where it be, resolve to set good watch upon all the sea coast to give present advertisement to the king of what they shall discover the year follow which. be in the begin of the year 1518.. they discover a fleet at sea in the which be the marquis of valle don fernande cortes with his companion, a news which much trouble motecuma and confer with his counsel. they all say that without doubt their great and ancient lord queztzalcoalt be come, who have say that he will return from the east, whither he be go. the indian hold opinion that a great prince have in time past, leave they and promise to return of the beginning and ground, of which opinion shall be speak in another place. they therefore send five principal ambassador with rich present to congratulate his come, say they know well that their great lord queztzalcoalt be come and that his servant motecuma send to visit he, for so he account himself. the spaniard understand this message by the mean of mar^^a, a indian woman who they bring with they and understand the mexicane tongue. fernande cortes find this a good occasion for his entry command to deck his chamber rich and be set in great state and pomp. he cause the ambassador to enter, who omit no show of humility but to worship he as their god. they deliver their charge. say that his servant motecuma send to visit he and that he hold the country in his name as his. lieutenant that he know well it be the topilcin, which have be promise they many year since, who shall return again unto they, and therefore they bring he such garment as he be wont to wear when he do converce among they. beseech he to accept willing of. they offer he many present of great value. cortes receive the present answer that he be the same they speak of, wherewith they be great satisfy, see themselves to be courteous, receive and entreat by he, for in that as well as in other thing, this valiant captain deserve commendation that if this course have be continue to win they by love, it seem the best occasion be offer that may be devise to draw this country to the gospel. by peace and love. but the sin of these cruel homicide and slave of satan require punishment from heaven, as also those of many spaniard, which be not in small number. thus, the high judgement of god dispose of the health of this nation. have first cut off the perish root and, as the apostle say, rom 11.. the wickedness and blindness of some have be the salvation of other. to conclude, the day after this ambassage, all the captain and comm^^ders of the fleet come unto the admiral where understand the matter and that this realm of motecuma be mighty and rich. it seem fit to gain the reputation of brave and valiant man among this people, and that by this mean, although they be few, they. shall be fear and receive into mexico. to this end, they discharge all their artillery from their ship, which be a thing the indian have never hear. they be amaze, as if heaven have fall upon they. then the spaniard begin to defy they to fight with they, but the indian not dare to hazard themselves. they do beat they and entreat they ill, show their sword, lance, pertuisan and other arm wherewith they do terrify they much. the poor indian be by reason hereof so fearful and amaze as they change their opinion, say that their lord topilcin come not in this troop, but they be some god, their enemy come to destroy they. whenas the ambassador return to mexico, mo^^cu^a be in the house of audience. but before he will hear, they, this miserable man, command a great number of man to be sacrifice in his presence and with their blood to sprinkle the ambassador. suppose by this ceremony which they be accustom to do in solemn ambassage, to receive a good answer. but understand the report and information of the manner of their ship, man and arm, he stand perplex and confound, then take counsel thereon. he find no better mean th^n to labour to stop the entry of these stranger. by conjuration and magic art they have accustom often to use this mean- have great conference with the devil by who help they sometime obtain strange effect. they therefore assemble together all the sorcerer, magician and enchanter who be persuade by motec^ma. they take it in charge to force this people to return unto their country. for this consideration. they go to a certain place which they think fit for the invocation of their devil and practise their art, a thing worthy of consideration. they wrought all they can but see nothing can prevail against the christian. they go to the king, tell he that they be more than man, for that nothing may hurt they, notwithstanding all their conjuration and enchantment. then motecuma advise he of another policy, that feign to be very well content with their come. he command all his country to serve these celestial god that be come into his land. the whole people be in great heaviness and amazement. and often news come that the spaniard inquire for the king of his manner of life, of his house, and mean he be exceed vex herewith. some of the people and other negromancier, advise he to hide himself, offer to place he, whereas no creature shall ever find he. this seem base unto he and therefore he resolve to attend they, although it be die in the end. he leave his house and royal palace to lodge in other, leave they for these, god, as he say, of the spaniard entry into mexico, chap 25.. i pretend not to entreat of the act and deed of the spaniard who conquer new spain, nor the strange adventure which happen unto. they, nor of the courage and invincible valour of their captain, don fernando cortes, for that there be many history and relation thereof, as those which fernando cortes himself do write to the emperor charles the five, although they be in a plain style and far from arrogancy, the which do give a sufficient testimony of what do pass wherein he be worthy of eternal merry. but only to accomplish my intention. i be to relate what the indian report of this action, the which have not to this day be write in our vulgar tongue, motecuma. therefore have notice of this captain victory that he advance for his conquest, that he be confederate and join with they of tlascalla, his capital enemy, and that he have severe punish they of cholola, his friend. he study how to deceive he, or else to try he in send a principal man unto he attire with the like ornament and royal ensign, the which shall take upon he to be motecuma, which fiction be discover to the marquis by they of tlascalla who do accompany he. he send he back after a mild and gentle reprehension, in seek so to deceive he, whereupon motecuma be so confound that, for the fear thereof, he return to his first imagination and practice to force the christian to retire by the invocation of conjurer and witch, and therefore he assemble a great number than before, threaten they that if they return without effect what he have give they in charge not any one shall escape, whereunto they all promise to obey, and for this cause all the devil officer go to the way of chalco, by the which the spaniard shall pass. when mount to the top of a hill, tezcalipuca, one of their principal god, appear unto they as come from the spaniard camp in the. habit of chalcas, who have his pap bind about eight fold with a cord of reed. he come like a man beside himself out of his wit and drink with rage and fury. be come to this troop of witch and conjurer. he stay and speak to they in great choler, why come you hither? what do motecuma pretend to do by your mean? he have advise himself too late for it be now, determine that his kingdom and honour shall be take from he with all that he possess for punishment of the great tyrannic he have commit against his subject. have govern not like a lord but like a traitor and tyrant. the enchanter and conjurer hear these word. know it be their idol and humble. themselves. before he they present, build he a altar of stone in the same place, cover it with flower which they gather thereabouts. but he, contrariwise, make no account of these thing, begin again to chide. they say: what come you hither to do, o you traitor? return present and behold mexico, that you may understand what shall become thereof. and they say that, turn towards mexico to behold it. they do see it, flame on fire. then the devil vanish away and they not dare to pass any far, give notice thereof to motec^ma, whereat he remain long without speak, look heavy on the ground. then he say: what shall we do if god and our friend leave we? and contrariwise, they help and favour our enemy. i be now resolute and we ought all to resolve in this point that, happen what may, we must not fly nor hide ourselves or show any sign of cowardice. i only pity the age and infant who have neither foot nor hand to defend themselves. have speak this: he hold his peace be transport into a ecstasy in the end. the marquis approach to mexico, motecuma resolve to make of necessity a virtue. go three or four league out of the city to receive he with a great ma^^^ty, carry upon the shoulder of four nobleman under a rich canopy of gold and feather. when they meet, motecuma descend and they salute one another very courteous, don fernando cortes say unto he that he shall not care. for any thing and that he come not to take away his real i no^ to diminish his authority. motecuma lodge cortes and his companion in his royal palace, the which be very stately, and he himself lodge in other private house. this night the soldier for joy discharge their artillery, wherewith the indian be much trouble be unaccustomed to hear such music. the day follow cortes, cause mot^cuma and all the noble of his court to assemble in a great hall where be set in a high chair. he say unto they that he be servant to a great prince who have send they into these country to do good work and that have find they of tl^scalla to be his friend, who complain of wrong and greevance do unto they daily by they of mexico, he will understand which of they be in the blame and reconcile they that hereafter they may no more afflict and war one against another, and in the mean time he and his brother, which be the spaniard, will remain still there without hurt they, but contrariwise they will help they all they can. he labour to make they all understand this discourse, use his interpterer and truchman, the, which be understand by the king and the other mexicane lord. they be wonderful, well satisfy and show great sign of love to cortes and his company. many hold opinion that if they have continue the course they begin, that day they may easy have dispose of the king and his kingdom and give they the law of christ without any great effusion of blood. but the judgement of god be great and the sin of both party be infinite. so as not have follow this course, the business be defer. yet in the end, god show mercy to this nation, impart unto they the light of his holy gospel, after he have show his judgement and punish they that have deserve it and odious offend his divine reverence. so it be that by some occasion many complaint grief. and jealousy grow on either side, the which cortes find, and that the indian mind begin to be distract from they. he think it necessary to assure himself in lay hand upon king motecuma, who be seize on and his leg fetter. true, this act be strange unto all man, and like unto that other, of he to have burn his ship and shut himself in the midst of his enemy, there to vanquish or to die. the mischief be that, by reason of the unexpected arrival of pamphilo narvaes at the true cross, draw the country into mutiny, cortes be force to absent himself from mexico and to leave poor motecuma in the hand of his companion, who want discretion, nor have not moderation, like unto he. so as they grow to that dissension, as there be no mean to pacify it. of the death of motecuma and the spaniard departure out of mexico, chap 26.. whenas cortes be absent from mexico, he that remain his lieutenant, resolve to punish the mexican severe, cause a great number of the nobility to be slay at a mask which they make in the palace, the which do so far exceed as all the people mutine and, in a furious rage, take arm to be revenge and to kill the spaniard. they therefore besiege, they in the palace press they so near that all the hurt the spaniard can do they with their artillery and crossbow may not terrify they nor force they to retire from their enterprise. where they continue many day, stop their victual nor suffer any one to enter or issue forth. they do fight with stone and cast dart after their manner with a kind of lance, like unto arrow, in the which there be four or six very sharp razor, the which be such as the history report that in these war, a indian, with one blow of these razor, almost cut off the neck of a horse. and as they do, one day fight with this resolution and fury the spaniard to make they cease. show forth mot^cuma with another of the chief lord of mexico, upon the top of a platform of the house cover with the target of two soldier that be with they. the mexicane, see their. lord motecuma stay with great silence. then motecuma, cause the lord to advise they to pacify themselves and not to war against the spaniard. see that he be a prisoner. it can little profit he, the which be understand by a young man call quicuxtemoc, who they now resolve to make their king speak with a loud voice to motecuma. will he to retire like a villain that? see he have be such a coward as to suffer himself to be. take they be no more bind to obey he, but rather shall punish he as he deserve. call he woman for the more reproach. and then he begin to draw his bow and to shoot at he, and the people begin to cast stone at he and to continue their combat. many say that motecuma be then hurt with a stone, whereof he die. the indian of mexico affirm the contrary and that he die, as i will show hereafter. alvero and the rest of the spaniard see themselves thus press, give intelligence to captain cortes of the great danger they be in, who have, with a admirable dexterity and valour, give order to narvaes affair and assemble the great part of his man. he return with all speed to succour they of mexico where observe the time the indian rest, for it be their custom in war to rest every four. day he one day advance with great policy and courage. so as both he and his man enter the palace, whereas the spaniard have fortify themselves, they than show great sign of joy in discharge their artillery. but as the mexican fury increase, be out of hope to defend themselves, cortes resolve to pass away secret, in the night, without bruit. have therefore make bridge to pass two great and dangerous passage. about midnight they issue forth, as secret as they can, the great part of his people have pass the first bridge, they be discover by a indian woman before they can pass the second, who cry out their enemy flee, at the which voice all the people run together with a horrible fury. so as in pass the second bridge. they be so charge and pursue, as there remain above three hundred man, slay and hurt in one place where at this day there be a small hermitage which they unproper call of martyr. many spaniard, to preserve the gold and jewel which they have, get perish and other stay to carry it away, be take by the mexican and cruel sacrifice to their idol. the mexican find king motecuma dead and wound, as they say, with poiniard, and they hold opinion that that night the spaniard show, he with other nobleman, the marquis in his relation, send to the emperor, write the contrary, and that the mexican kill, he that night, with a son of motecuma which he lead with. he, among other nobleman, say that all the treasure of gold, stone and silver fall into the lake and be never more see. but howsoever, motecuma, die miserable and pay his desert to the just judgement of our lord of heaven for his pride and tyranny, his body fall into the indian power. they will make he no obsequy of a king, no, not of a ordinary person, but cast it away in great disdain and rage, a servant of his. have. pity of this king, misery who before have be fear and worship as a god. make a fire thereof and put the ash in a contemptible place. return to the spaniard that escape. they be great, tire and turmoil the indian. follow they two or three. day very resolute. give they no time of rest. be so distress for victual as a few grain of may be divide among they for their meat, the relation. both of the spaniard and indian agree that god deliver they here. miraculous, the virgin mary, defend they on a little hill whereat this day three league from mexico there be a church build in remembrance thereof. call our lady of succour, they retire to their ancient friend of tlascalla, whence, by their aid and the valour and policy of cortes, they return afterward to make war against mexico by water and land, with a invention of brigantine which they put into the lake where, after many combat and above threescore dangerous battle, they conquer mexco on s hippolytus. day, the 13. of august 1521.. the last king of the mexican have obstinate, maintain the war, be in the end. take in a great canoe whereinto he flee, who be bring with some other of the chief nobleman before fernando cortes. this petty king, with a strange resolution and courage, draw his dagger, come near to cortes and say unto he: until this day i have do my best endeavour for the defence of my people. now be i no far bind, but to give thou this dagger to kill i therewith. cortes answer that he will not kill he, neither be it his intention to hurt they. but their obstinate folly be guilty of all the misery and affliction they have suffer. neither be they ignorant. how often he have require peace and amity at their hand. he then command they to be entreat courteous. many strange and admirable thing chance in this conquest of mexico. for i neither hold it for a untruth nor a addition which many write, that god favour the spaniard by many miracle, for else it have be impossible to surmount so many difficulty without the favour of heaven and to subject this nation with so few man. for although we be sinner and unworthy, so great a favour, yet the cause of our god, the glory of our faith, the good of so many thousand soul as be in these country, who the lord have predestinate, wrought this change which we now see by supernatural mean and proper. to himself, which call the blind and prisoner to the knowledge of himself. give they light and liberty by his holy gospel and to the end. you may, the better understand this and give credit thereunto. i will allege some example which, in my opinion, be fit for this history of some miracle which god have show at the indies in favour of the faith beyond the desert, of those that wrought they chap 27.. saint croix of the mountain be a very great province and far from the kingdom of peru, neighbour to diverse infidel nation which have not yet any knowledge of the gospel. if, since my departure, the father of our company which there have not instruct they yet. this province of s croix be christen and there be many spaniard and great number of indian baptize. the manner how christianity enter be thus. a soldier of a lewd life resident in the province of charcas, fear punishment, be pursue for his offence, go far up into the country and be receive courteous by this barbarous people. the spaniard see they in a great extremity for water and that to procure rain, they use many superstitious ceremony. according to their usual manner. he say unto they that if they will do as he say, they shall present, have rain, the which they willing offer to perform. then the soldier make a great cross, the which he plant on a high and eminent place, command they to worship. it and to demand water, the which they do. a wonderful thing to see there present fall such abundance of rain. as the indian take so great devotion to the holy cross, as they flee unto it in all their necessity and obtain all they demand, so as they break down their idol and begin to carry the cross for their badge, demand preacher to instruct and to baptize they. for this reason the province to this day have be call s croix de la sierre. but to the end we may see by who god wrought these miracle. it shall not be unfit to show how that this soldier, after he have some year, do these miracle like a apostle, and yet nothing reform in his lewd. course of life, leave the province of charcas and continue in his wicked course. be public. hang at potozi polo, who know he well, write all this as a notable thing happen in his time. cabeca de vaca, who since be governor of paraguey, write what happen unto he in his strange peregrination in florida with two or three other companion, the only remainder of a army, where they continue ten year with these barbarian, travel and search even unto the south sea. be a author worthy of credit. he say that these barbarian do force they to cure certain disease, threaten they with death if they do it not. they be ignorant in any part of physic and have nothing to apply. force by necessity make evangelical. medicine, say the prayer of the church and make the sign of the cross by mean whereof they cure these disease, which make they so famous as they be force to exercise this office in all town as they pass the, which be innumerable, wherein our lord do aid, they miraculous, and they themselves be thereat, amaze be, but of a ordinary life. yea one of they be a negro, lancero be a soldier of peru, of who they know no other merit but to be a soldier. he speak certain good word upon wound and make the sign of the cross: do present, cure they so, as they do say, as in a proverb, the psalm of lancero: be examine by such as: hold authority in the church, his office and work be approve some man worthy of credit report. and i have hear it speak that in the city of cusco, whenas the spaniard be besiege and so straight press, that without help from heaven it be impossible to escape the indian cast fire on the top of the house, whether the spaniard be retire, in which place the great church be now build, and although the cover be of a kind of straw which they call chicho, and that the fire they cast. be of the wood of fat and slimy firre-tree, yet nothing be set on fire nor burn, for that there be a woman, do quench it, present the which the indian do visible, see, as they confess afterward, be much amaze. it be most certain by the relation of many and by the history which be write that in diverse battle which the spaniard have as well, in new spain as in peru, the indian, their enemy, do see a horseman in the air, mount on a whit horse with a sword in his hand, fight for the spaniard. whence come the great reverence they bear at the indies to the glorious apostle saint james other, while they do see, in some battle, the image of our lady. from who the christian have receive in those part incomparable favour and benefit. if i shall particular relate all the work of heaven as they happen, it will make a very long discourse. it suffice to have say this. by reason of the favour which the queen of glory do to our man when they be press and pursue by the mexican, the which i have set down to the end, we may know how our lord have have a care to favour the faith and christian religion, defend those that maintain it. although happy by their work, they deserve not so great favour and benefit from heaven and therefore we ought not to condemn all these thing of the first conqueror of the indies, as some religious and learned man have do, doubtless with a good zeal but too much affect for, although for the most part they be covetous man, cruel and very ignorant in the course. that be to be observe with the infidel, who have never offend the christian yet, can we not deny? but on their part there be much malice against god and our man which force they to use rigour and chastisement. and moreover, the lord of all, although the faithful be sinner, will favour their cause and party, even for the good of the infidel, who shall be convert unto the holy gospel by this mean for the way of god be high and their path. admirable of the manner how the divine providence dispose of the indies to give a entry to christian religion, chap 28.. i will make a end of this history of the indies. show the admirable mean whereby god make a passage for the gospel in those part the which we ought well to consider of and acknowledge the providence and bounty of the creator. every one may understand by the relation and discourse i have write in these book, as well at peru as in new spain, whenas the christian first set footing that these kingdom and monarchy be come to the height and period of their power, the of peru possess from the realm of chille, beyond quitto, which be a thousand league, be most abundant in gold, silver, sumptuous service and other thing, as also in mexico, motecuma, command from the north ocean sea unto the south, be fear and worship, not as a man but rather as. a god, then be it that the most high lord have determine that that stone of daniel, which dissolve the realm and kingdom of the world, shall also dissolve those of this new world. and as the law of christ come, whenas the roman monarchy be at her greatness, so do it happen at the west indies, wherein we see the just providence of our lord for be then in the world, i mean in europe, but one head and temporal lord, as the holy doctor do note, whereby the gospel may more easy beimpart to so many people and nation. even so, have it happen at the indies, where have give the knowledge of christ to the monarch of so many kingdom. it be a mean that afterward the knowledge of the gospel be impart to all the people. yea, there be herein a special thing to be observe: that as the lord of cusco and mexico conquer new land, so they bring in their own language. for although there be, as at this day, great diversity of tongue, yet the courtly speech of cusco do and do at this day, run above a thousand league, and that of mexico do not extend far less, which have not be of small importance but have much profit in make the preach easy. at such a time when, as the preacher, have not the gift of many tongue, as in old time, he that will know what a help it have be. for the conversion of this people in these two great empire and the great difficulty they have find to reduce those indian to christ which acknowledge no sovereign lord. let he go to florida, bresil, the andes and many other place where they have not prevail so much by their preach in fifty year as they have do in peru and new spain in less than five. if they will impute the cause to the riches of the country, i will not altogether deny it. yet be it impossible to have so great wealth and to be able to preserve it if there have not be a monarchy. this be also a work of god in this age when, as the preacher of the gospel, be so cold. and without zeal and merchant, with the heat of covetousness and desire of command, search and discover new people, whether we pass with our commodity. for, as saint austin say, the prophecy of esaie be fulfil in that the church of christ be extend. august, lib 2. the ^^^ovang ^ 36. not only to the right hand but also to the left, which be, as he declare, by human and earthly mean which they seek, more common than jesus christ. it be also a great providence of our lord that whenas the first spaniard arrive there, they find aid from the indian themselves, by reason of their partiality and great division. this be well know in peru that the division betwixt the two brother and guasca, the great king, guanacapa, their father, be new dead, give entry to the marquis don francis pizarre and to the spaniard, for that either of they desire his alliance be busy in war one against the other. the like experience have be in new spain that the aid of those of the province of tlascalla, by reason of their continual hatred against the mexicaines, give the victory and siegniory of mexico to the marquis fernando cortes and his man, and without they it have be impossible to have win it, yea to have maintain themselves within the country. they be much deceive that so little esteem the indian and judge that by the. advantage the spaniard have over they in their person, horse and arm, both offensive and deffencive, they may easy conquer any land or nation of the indies chille stand yet, or to say better, aranco and tu^^^pel, which be two city where our spaniard can not yet win one foot of ground, although they have make war there above five and twenty year without spare of any cost for this barbarous nation, have once lose the apprehension of horse and shot and know that the spaniard fall as well as other man with the blow of a stone or of a dart, they hazard themselves desperate, enter the pike upon any enterprise. how many year have they levy man in new spain to send against the chychymequos which? be a small number of naked indian arm, only with bow and arrow. yet to this day they can not be vanquish, but contrariwise, from day to day they grow more desperate and resolute. but what shall we say of the chucos, of the chiraguanas, of the piscocones and all the other people of the andes? have not all the flower of peru? be there, bring with they so great provision of arm and man as we have. see, what do they? with what victory return they? sure they return very happy, in save of their life, have lose their baggage and almost all their horse. let no man think, speak of the indian, that they be man of nothing. but if they think so, let they go. and make trial. we must then attribute the glory to who it appertain that be principal: to god and to his admirable disposition. for if motecuma in mexico and the ingua in peru have be resolute to resist the spaniard and to stop their entry, cortes and pizarre have prevail little in their land, although they be excellent captain. it have also be a great help to induce the indian to receive the law of christ, the subjection they be in to their king and lord, and also the servitude and slavery they be hold in by the devil, tyranny and insupportable yoke. this be a excellent disposition of the divine wisdom, the which draw profit from ill to a good end and receive his good from a other ill which it have not sow. it be most certain that no people of the west indies have be more apt to receive the gospel than those which be most subject to their lord and which have be charge with the heavy burden, as well of tribute and service as of custom and bloody practice. all that which the mexicane king and those of peru do possess be at this day most plant with christian religion and where there be least difficulty in the government and ecclesiastical discipline, the indian be so weary with the heavy and insupportable yoke of satan law. his sacrifice and ceremony, whereof we have former speak, that they consult among themselves to seek out a new law and another god to serve, and therefore the law of christ seem unto they and do, at this day, seem just, sweet, clean, good and full of happiness, and that which be difficult in our law to believe, so high and sovereign mystery, have be easy among they, for that the devil have make they comprehend, thing of great difficulty, and the self-same thing which he have steal from our evangelical law as their manner of communion and confession, their adoration of three in one, and such other like the which, against the will of the enemy, have help for the easy receive of the truth by those. who before have embrace lie. god be wise and admirable in all his work. vanquish the adversatie even with his own weapon. he take he in his own snare and kill he with his own sword. final, our god, who have create this people and who seem to have thus long, forget they. when the hour^ be come, he will have the same devil enemy to mankind who they false hold for god shall give a testimony, against their will, of the true law, the power of christ and the triumph of the cross, as it plain appear by the presage prophecy sign and here before mention, with many other happen in diverse part, and that the same minister of satan, sorcerer, magician and other indian have confess. it and we can deny it, be most evident and know to all the world that the devil dare not hiss and that the practice, oracle answer and visible apparition, which be so ordinary throughout all this, infidelity have cease, whereas the cross of christ have be plant where there be church and where the name of christ have be confess. and if there be at this day any curse, minister of he that do participate thereof, it be in cave and on the top of mountain and in secret place, far from the name and communion of christian. the sovereign lord be bless for his great mercy and for the glory of his holy name. and in truth, if they do govern this people temporal and spiritual. in such sort as the law of jesus christ, have set it down with a mild yoke and light burden, and that they will impose no more upon they than they can well bear, as the letter patent of the good emperor of happy memory do command, and that they will employ half the care they have to make profit of these poor man sweat and labour for the health of their soul. it be the most peaceable and happy christian part of all the world. but our sin be often a occasion that god do not impart his grace so abundant as he will. yet i will say one thing which i hold for truth, that although the first entry of the gospel have not be accompany in many place with such sincerity and christian mean as they shall have use yet god of his bounty, have draw good from this evil and have make the subjection of the indian a perfect remedy for their salvation. let we consider a little what have be new convert in our time to the christian religion as well in the east as in the west, and how little surety and perseverance in the faith and christian religion there have be in place where the new convert have have full liberty to dispose of themselves according to their free will. christianity without doubt augment and increase. and bring forth daily more fruit among the indian slave and contrariwise, decrease and threaten a ruin in other part, where have be more happy beginning. and although the beginning at the west indies have be laboursome, yet our lord have speedy send, good workman and his faithful minister, holy man and apostolical as friar martin of valence of the order of s francis, friar dominicke of the order of s dominicke, friar john de roa of the order of s austen, with other servant of our lord, which have live holy and have wrought more than human thing. likewise prelate and holy priest, worthy of memory of who we hear famous miracle and the very act of the apostle yea. in our time we have know and confer with some of this quality. but for that, my intention have be only to touch that which concern the proper history of the indian themselves and to come unto the time that the father of our lord, jesus christ, will communicate the light of his word unto they. i will pass no far, leave the discourse of the gospel at the west indies for another time and to a better understanding. beseech the sovereign lord of all and entreat his servant humble to pray unto his divine majesty that it will please hi^ of his bounty often to visit and to augment by the gift of heaven this new christendom which these last age have plant in the far bound. of the earth. glory, honour and empery be to the king of world for ever and ever amen.