britainiae. @ @, @ @. james r right, trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. whereas we understand that the soil in virginia natural yield store of excellent mulberry tree, we have take into our princely consideration the great benefit that may grow to the adventurer and planter by the breed of silkworm and set up of silkworm in those part, and therefore of our gracious inclination to a design of so much honour and advantage to the public. we have think good, as at sundry other time, so now, more particular, to recommend it to your special care, hereby charge and require you to take speedy order that our people there use all possible diligence in breed silkworm and erect silkeworke and that they rather bestow their your special care hereby charge and require you to take speedy order that our people there use all possible diligence in breed silkworm and erect silkeworke, and that they rather bestow their travel in compass, this rich and solid commodity, then in that of tobacco which, beside much unnecessary expense, bring with it many disorder and inconvenience. and for as much as our servant john bonoeil have take pain in set down the true use of the silkworm, together with the art of silkemaking and of plant vine, and that his experience and ability may much conduce to the advancement of this business, we do hereby likewise require you to cause his direction, both for the, say, silkeworke and vineyard, to be careful put in practice throughout our conduce to the advancement of this business. we do hereby likewise require you to cause his direction, both for the say silkeworke and vineyard, to be careful put in practice throughout our plantation there, that so the work may go on cheerful and receive no more interruption nor delay. give under our signet at our palace of westminster, the nine day of july, in the twenty year of our reign of england, france and ireland, and of scotland, the five and fifty, to our right, trusty and right well-beloved cousin and counsellor, henry, earl of south-hampton, treasurer of our plantation in virginia, and to our trusty and well-beloved the deputy and other of our say plantation virginia. may it please the reader to amend the fault in print. treasurer of our plantation in virginia, and to our trusty and well-beloved the deputy and other of our say plantation virginia, may it please the reader to amend the fault in print. thus, to the right, noble company of virginia. health, my lord and other, i have be induce to present this small tract unto you from the superaboundant desire i have to further and advance the good success of that noble plantation. this discourse be therefore touch the feed and entertainment of your silkworm. it show how mulberry tree must be plant and their leaf gather, how to sow the seed of mulberry tree for he that will set up a seminary or orchard of the best tree of that nature. also, how to erect, set up. gather. how to sow the seed of mulberry tree for he that will set up a seminary, or orchard of the best tree of that nature. also, how to erect, set up and build house for the silkworm withal. this give direction how to plant and set the vine, how to dress and till it of sundry sort and fashion. likewise, it show when the grape be fit to be gather and how they be to make wine. furthermore, how to plant and set peach tree and fig tree, which in hot country be common, set among vine in vineyard in the open field. also, how to set the stone of diverse kind of fruit and how to dry both raisin, fig and peach to keep and preserve. among vine in vineyard, in the open field also, how to set the stone of diverse kind of fruit and how to dry both raisin, fig and peach to keep and preserve long. i have a servant of i who have dwell in virginia these six year, beside other of my friend and acquaintance of the country of languedock in france, which now dwell in virginia, also be send thither at the great charge of the company to make silk and dress vine. all which have certify i by their letter which i have receive from thence, that the wood in virginia be full of mulberry tree of the tall and broad that ever they see in any country, and great number there be, of sundry size and thence that the wood in virginia be full of mulberry tree of the tall and broad that ever they see in any country, and great number there be, of sundry size and bigness, and namely that they have see there some special tree of which one alone be able to bring forth as many leaf as will feed so many silkworm as shall yield five pound of silk. also, they inform i that there be great abundance of vine in virginia and many of they well load with grape. but because that young grow wood bush and weed so much choke and cover they, they can come to their full ripeness and the vermin, by reason the grape grow in the wood, eat many of they up before. and weed so much choke and cover they, they can come to their full ripeness and the vermin, by reason the grape grow in the wood, eat many of they up before they come to maturity. moreover, they avouch that virginia be a better country than languedock, which be one of the fruitful province in all france, by reason of the heat thereof and the richness of the soil which, notwithstanding, if so be virginia be once well inhabit and people it must needs, exceed it, namely for this reason because the mulberry tree and the vine do both grow natural in virginia, with many other good thing which come only by force and labour in the best part of france, and none may doubt hereof, to wit, vine do both grow natural in virginia, with many other good thing which come only by force and labour in the best part of france, and none may doubt hereof, to wit that the vine be choose of the best plant there and well dress, but that it will assure bring forth very good fruit. also, other vine plant may be send thither from other country to try which of they will prove best and of that which we have former say that the mulberry tree grow in abundance natural in virginia. it must needs thence follow that the worm will feed much better and with less labour of man than those in other country do, where mulberry tree grow only with main labour and toil and the follow that the worm will feed much better and with less labour of man than those in other country do, where mulberry tree grow only with main labour and toil, and the silk also of they will be far better, and such quantity of silk may easy be make in virginia if there be store of hand, as in a very short time it will serve all christendom. what a honour and wealth it will be to this kingdom of england. all man may judge. 2. the manner, how to prepare the place wherein silkworm be to be nourish. certain yea and many author have write that such place be neither to be too near the earth nor too near the tile, neither too low nor too high. to be nourish. certain yea and many author have write that such place be neither to be too near the earth nor too near the tile, neither too low nor too high to who. i confess this be good for such man as have choice of place. but there be many poor folk that be not able to get house with all commodity and fitness. and i have see by experience in the country of languedock, provence, and in seuenes, and in the country of auignon and in some part of italy, certain poor folk which dwell out of town, which have but one house upon a earthen floor and in it but one room where at one end they have their bed and at the other they dwell out of town which have but one house upon a earthen floor and in it but one room where at one end they have their bed and at the other they dress their meat, which, notwithstanding, nourish silkworm in it in the season of the year, at which time they prepare and set forth a corner of the, say, cottage to the same effect, according to the quantity of the leaf which they have, and oftentimes they pay for the leaf of a great mulberry tree, six or eight shilling the year yea, and many time the worm thrive better in they then in great chamber with other man, i mean for the little quantity of worm which such poor people have. moreover, i have observe that time the worm thrive better in they then in great chamber with other man. i mean for the little quantity of worm which such poor people have. moreover, i have observe that the silkworm do love and affect the air that come from the dry, sweet earth. provide that care be have, when the weather be cold or moist, to make some fire in such room, either of wood or of coal that be not of any strong smell. 3. of the build of house to nourish silkworm, in those that will build with small charge house in virginia wherein to feed worm, after the manner as be practise in messina in sicily, in which country there be some store of mulberry tree within the wood it be. house in virginia wherein to feed worm after the manner as be practise in messina in sicily, in which country there be some store of mulberry tree within the wood, it be a thing which may easy be do also in virginia, because there be likewise great number of mulberry tree there within the wood and the country hot and all thing for this purpose most fit this to do, then they must choose a place in a good air and near the mulberry tree and there build a long house in form of a bowl alley cover over, but a little high and somewhat large. they must cover it well, either with tile, plank or other thing, against the heat and rain for the preservation of the alley cover over, but a little high and somewhat large. they must cover it well either with tile plank or other thing against the heat and rain for the preservation of the worm. and the side of the wall must be well close, either with plaster plank or other matter in these wall. make many window on both the side of the house. let the window be of wood to open and shut and to give air to the worm whensoever they need it. and for as much as the south wind be hurtful to the worm, those window must be shut. careful on that side when the wind blow there these window may be cover with paper which window may be set on and take off the worm. those window must be shut careful on that side when the wind blow there. these window may be cover with paper, which window may be set on and take off the hinge when need be. furthermore, some must watch that neither rat, mouse, bird nor poultry come there, for they will eat up the worm. likewise the pissemire sometime hurt they much, and therefore care must be have to mark the place on which side they come and there sow sawdust of oak wood, ash or lyme, or else rub the wall whereby they pass with chalk or with the oil of juniper or any other kind of oil on the outside of the house only, for on the inside of the house oil will be hurtful. with chalk or with the oil of juniper or any other kind of oil on the outside of the house, only for on the inside of the house oil will be hurtful to the worm. beware also that the paper of the window be not oil. 4. touch the, erect and build up of hothouse or oven such man as be provide of fit house as aforesaid, for the say worm may build in they hothouse as they make in such country wherein they nourish great number of silkworm. they must build of these hothouse at both the end of the house if it be great and spacious, but if the house be little, one will be enough, and it must be build in this form. follow first. both the end of the house, if it be great and spacious, but if the house be little, one will be enough and it must be build in this form. follow first, a hole must be make in the house wall wherein you will build your hothouse or oven and therein build up, as it be, a oven after the manner of the country oven. the oven mouth must be at the outside of the house with a little chimney to it, and the back of the oven within the inside of the house. then must you have earthen pot, like flower pot, without hole in the bottom and scarce so big as they, which must be make purposely so as they may be able to abide the you have earthen pot, like flower pot, without hole in the bottom and scarce so big as they, which must be make purposely so as they may be able to abide the fire. these pot must be place with a distant proportion of space between pot and pot, and so build they in within the vault of the say oven with brick and clay. the mouth of the say pot must stand out at the back of the oven and look into the inside of the house, but the bottom of the pot must stand and look towards the fire within the inside of the oven, and in this manner must the pot be incorporate within the oven. after this do, you may make fire in the oven. look towards the fire within the inside of the oven, and in this manner must the pot be incorporate within the oven. after this do, you may make fire in the oven when need shall be, for the pot be hot will thereby cast a heat out and warm all the house, and the smoke get out at the chimney of the oven mouth at the outside of the house. item. it will be good to put into these pot certain branch of rosemary or time rose or other sweet smell, for that be a mean to keep the house in a temperate and reasonable heat, as need and occasion require. beside, those sweet smell be very agreeable, and please to the worm these oven or stove will. to keep the house in a temperate and reasonable heat as need and occasion require. beside those sweet smell, be very agreeable, and please to the worm. these oven or stove will be very useful in virginia principal in those silkeworme-house which shall be build among the wood where store of mulberry tree grow, for these place be more cold, shady and moist than other where the sun come free. by this mean they may heat, dry temper and well qualify the air there as they please and make the place thereby every way well agree to the silkworm. in these woody place also, you shall do well to cut down all other tree that grow near to the mulberry tree and over-shade they, and also to prune. to the silkworm in these woody place also, you shall do well to cut down all other tree that grow near to the mulberry tree and over-shade they, and also to prune off the bough of the mulberry tree that grow too thick that so the sun may come fair to the tree and leaf for the better of the food for the silkworm. 5. of the greatness of the house man may build they as great or as little as they please, albeit the large still, the more commodious howsoever. it will be well to make a partition in one end of the house and to board that corner, so part with board, to cool the leaf in it as soon as they be gather and to make a partition in one end of the house and to board that corner, so part with board to cool the leaf in it as soon as they be gather and to make a door on the outside to go in thereat to lay in the leaf and the other door on the inside to take out and give meat to the worm item. it will be convenient to make, either in the midst of the house or against the wall, as they shall judge the fit, a certain frame of wood with board or little table, one stage or story still above another, every one of which stage of table or shelf must be distant from another one foot and a half or thereabouts, and in every table, one stage or story still above another, every one of which stage of table or shelf must be distant from another one foot and a half or thereabouts, and in every frame there may be five or six story or room of shelf, according to the height of the roof of the house, all of one distance one from the other, and as touch the breadth of the, say, table or shelf of these frame. they must be four foot broad. those shall be set in the middle of the house, but such as shall be set against the wall, must have but three foot breadth because they can serve and reach leaf to the worm that shall be lay upon they, but on the one side. be set against the wall, must have but three foot breadth, because they can serve and reach leaf to the worm that shall be lay upon they, but on the one side. it be to be note that the board or shelf that be to be put in such frame be to be of fir or of other wood that have no strong and ill smell, or else let they be make of reed or, best of all, of indian mat to serve in stead of shelf of wood, for these be the fit of all other because they keep the worm more dry and fresh in hot weather by reason of the wind that blow through they. these mat, may have cross joice of board to support. other because they keep the worm more dry and fresh in hot weather by reason of the wind that blow through they. these mat may have cross joice of board to support they, or else cord put through the bore hole of the side of the frame as bedcord in a bedstead. but if the table or stage be make of board than they be to be very thin to the end. they may not receive too much moistness from the worm. the frame must be make very firm and strong lest if it fall it kill all your worm and you lose your labour, which have happen to some touch the length of the say frames. they may be according to the length of the board you kill all your worm and you lose your labour, which have happen to some touch the length of the, say frames. they may be according to the length of the board you have, but if the board happen to be very long, than they must be underprop with some piece of wood in the middle. man mayset up such frames in little house as well as in great house, but less according to the bigness of the house. also they may take away such frame once a year, namely after that the worm have spin their silk, and so for that time the house may serve for some other use. provide always they dress, nor take no tobacco there, for it be exceed, contrary and mortal to the silk, and so for that time the house may serve for some other use. provide always they dress, nor take no tobacco there, for it be exceed, contrary and mortal to the worm. even the very breath of one that have take it breathe upon they will certain kill they. likewise, care must be have, once every year, when you set up the say, frames and table, to wash they well and to rub they with sweet smell herb, as with rosemary time, fennell or such like 6.. the time when silkworm be to be hatch out of their seed or egg, first of all, when the spring time be come and you see that the mulberry tree thrust forth great bud and their leaf begin to show. out of their seed or egg. first of all, when the spring time be come and you see that the mulberry tree thrust forth great bud and their leaf begin to show forth themselves, then must you take the silk-worme seed, according to the quantity of leaf and the room of the house that you have to feed they in, and put the say seed within a new box or in a clean linen cloth and keep the seed reasonable warm, either within your pocket or otherwise. after four or five day you shall visit it very often and as soon as you see some worm hatch, then must you put the seed in a big box, if the former be too little, but let it be very. very often and as soon as you see some worm hatch, then must you put the seed in a big box, if the former be too little, but let it be very clean, and care must be have that the say seed be no thick in the box, then half a inch thick. after that you must take a piece of clean paper of the roundness or compass of the box and fill it with hole as big as the tag of a point can make, and lay that round paper over the seed in the box, then set mulberry leave the young and tender leaf you can get over the say paper that the worm may pass through the hole and feed on the leaf. also care. box, then set mulberry, leave the young and tender leaf. you can get over the say paper that the worm may pass through the hole and feed on the leaf. also care must be have that when you shall see the leaf cover with little and blackish worm, you must draw they out of the box with the whole leaf with the point of a pin or such like thing and lay they in sheet of great and strong paper. turn up all the edge of the say paper about a inch or more for the better contain of the worm and easy remove they. or in a big box the leaf with the worm upon it, close by one another and assoon as you have. take away. better contain of the worm and easy remove they, or in a big box the leaf with the worm upon it, close by one another and assoon as you have. take away both leaf and worm, put in new fresh leaf, the young and tender upon the say seed, and so do still till all the worm be hatch. for sometime it will be seven or eight day till they all can be hatch. then put together all such as be hatch in two or three day without mingle they with those that be big or lesser and give they fresh leaf once a day. also, care must be have that while the worm come forth of the seed to keep it in reasonable warmth, either near the lesser and give they fresh leaf once a day. also, care must be have that while the worm come forth of the seed, to keep it in reasonable warmth, either near the fire or between two pillow which be for that end to be warm, often yet in a mean, lest you spoil all with too much heat. by this figure be show the order to rank the table on the scaffold for to lay the leave on to feed the worm there. by this figure be show the manner to place the rod between the table for the worm to climb up () d spin their silk. by this figure be show the fashion of the engine, how to wind oft the silk from the cod with. table for the worm to climb up () d spin their silk. by this figure be show the fashion of the engine. how to wind oft the silk from the cod with the furnace and cawthern for that purpose. by this figure be show the portrait of the cod and the butterfly come forth, of they to engender and lay their egg upon black serge, chamblet, tammey or such like stuff as have be say 7.. how to enlarge the silkworm and cleanse they from ordure as they grow. when you perceive the worm begin to wax in bigness and therefore press one another too much, about a quarter of a hour or thereabouts. after that you have, give they fresh leaf, you shall take out the say. wax in bigness and therefore press one another too much, about a quarter of a hour or thereabouts after that you have, give they fresh leaf. you shall take out the say leaf again together with all the worm from the say paper or box and shall set they in a large place. and if there remain any worm upon the old leaf, then must you set fresh leaf in a small quantity to the end. the worm may gather themselves upon they to be take out, as we have say, which, when they have do, you may cast out the old leaf and their ordure, and this must be do twice a week or thereabouts. it be to be note that in hot country the worm do. you may cast out the old leaf and their ordure, and this must be do twice a week or thereabouts. it be to be note that in hot country the worm do eat but seven or eight week at most in a whole year and the four first week after they be hatch. they require but very small attendance. also, it be to be note that the worm, before they come to their perfection, have four sickness natural to they, as we will show: 8. touch their first sickness eight or ten day after that you shall see the worm head grow big and white. it be a sign that they enter into their first sickness and mew or change their first skin. then shall you see they. shall see the worm head grow big and white. it be a sign that they enter into their first sickness and mew or change their first skin. then shall you see they hide themselves under the leaf without eat of they. then must you give they but a few leaf, namely to feed these among they that be not sick and those only for you be to know that their sickness come not to they all and every one at once and the same time. two or three day after that, you shall see they come from under the leaf of a grayish colour and creep upon the leaf that be fresh set on. then must you shift they to another place and cleanse they as we have. from under the leaf of a grayish colour and creep upon the leaf that be fresh set on. then must you shift they to another place and cleanse they, as we have say. also, you be to note that until such time as the worm have pass their three sickness, you be to lay under they upon the table or shelf leaf of broad course clean paper and twice a day give they new and fresh green leaf to feed on. lay the smooth side of the leave upward and that side of the leaf which be full of vein and string downward, for the worm come up to the upper part of the leaf always to feed, and it feed best and with most ease upon the. be full of vein and string downward for the worm come up to the upper part of the leaf, always to feed, and it feed best and with most ease upon the smooth side of the leaf, be the tender. you must also tear the leaf in the middle or in more piece that the worm may, the more ready and easy creep through it to get upon the top of it, which will be more needful in virginia because of the broadness of the leave there. 9, their second sickness. eight day after or thereabouts, the say worm be wax, white and big. by the one half they begin to enter into their second sickness, natural to they. then may you see they again hide under the the say worm be wax white and big by the one half. they begin to enter into their second sickness, natural to they. then may you see they again hide under the leaf. then be you to govern they, as we have say before, and as they grow big, to shift they from time to time into new, clean, fresh and more spacious place. 10. the three natural sickness of silkworm. eight or ten day more after that you shall see they wax big yet by the one half, remain under the leaf as aforesaid. then enter they into their sickness and alteration of their skin. then must you give they but a few leaf, as we say before, and keep the room where they be reasonable, warm. enter they into their sickness and alteration of their skin, then must you give they but a few leaf, as we say before, and keep the room where they be reasonable, warm during their, say, sickness, for it be the most dangerous of all the rest for there. sometime some of the worm grow very yellow and yield a waterish matter out from they which be a certain sign of their death, and they be so contagious then unto other that if then they be not pick from the rest and throw away, they will likewise infect they. then must you change their place as afore into a large and more spacious according as they increase in number and bigness of body. then may you take they very infect they, then must you change their place as afore into a large and more spacious according as they increase in number and bigness of body. then may you take they very gingerly and soft, with all the leaf with your finger end very clean. but have special care that you have touch no tobacco and if you have take any, beware you breathe, not near upon they, for this and other strong scent be a pest unto the worm. after their three sickness, give they fresh leave three time a day and you must first let the say leaf be cool a hour or more for that be better, before you give they to the silkworm. when the leaf be too fresh they surfeit and feed. so let the say leaf be cool a hour or more for that be better, before you give they to the silkworm. when the leaf be too fresh, they surfeit and feed so greedy as to burst themselves. beware, you gather the leaf not wet, that be to say after the rain or after the dew, but you must gather they dry. take heed, you give they not wet to the worm, for that will spoil they. therefore you shall do well, if you fear a raynie season, to gather in fair weather as many leaf as may serve you a day or two for be keep in a cool place, not moist as in a dry soller or such like, and the leave something spread abroad and often may serve you a day or two for be keep in a cool place, not moist as in a dry soller or such like, and the leave something spread abroad and often turn that they heat not after this sickness you may set your worm upon the shelf without paper if you will. 11. their four natural sickness. eight or ten day more after that, more or less, the worm enter into their four sickness. now be they wax far big of body than ever before. then must you govern and attend they as we have before describe, and then you must provide more place according to the quantity of the worm you have, and from time to time shift they into fresh and neat place more ample. before describe. and then you must provide more place according to the quantity of the worm you have, and from time to time shift they into fresh and neat place, more ample and large yet so as they may be reasonable near one to another, and then give they as many leaf as they will eat, tear they in the middle. 12. what provision of branch must be make to cause silkworm to spin their silk seven or eight day before the worm be ready to spin? you must make provision of branch of tree, of the small and firm that can be get as birchin bough, heath or hather broome, cut of vine or any flexible and bend tough branch. they must not be use green but the small and firm that can be get as birchin bough, heath or hather broome, cut of vine or any flexible and bend tough branch. they must not be use green but dry, for fear the moistness of the green branch hurt the worm and mingle with these bough certain sweet herb as rosemary time or lavender, because the silkworm love great aromatical smell but not scent that be strong and unpleasant. 13. the time when to cause worm to spin and how you be to set and dress up bough: ten or twelve day after the worm shall have attain to their full bigness of body, according to their course of nature. then shall you see some of they run upon the green fresh mulberry leave without the worm shall have attain to their full bigness of body according to their course of nature. then shall you see some of they run upon the green fresh mulberry leave without eat any of they. if, then, you perceive they to be very bright and clear in their belly and neck, that be a sign and token they be ready to spin, then be you to prepare and set up your bough and branch and set they in rank upon the story of shelf or table upright. stand the big end rest upon the low shelf and the small end of the say bough rest against the next upper shelf or board to that and spread they about. arch at large what you can to the end. shelf and the small end of the say bough rest against the next upper shelf or board to that and spread they about, arch at large what you can, to the end. the worm may have more room and scope to make their ball or bottom of silk. leave a foot and a quarter distance between the say bough one from another, at the big and low end of they and between the two side or arch of these say bough upon the shelf you be to set your worm and give they fresh, green and tender leaf as much as they will eat and as you shall perceive they to be ready to make their silk, they will be climb up upon the say bough and if tender leaf. as much as they will eat and as you shall perceive they to be ready to make their silk, they will be climb up upon the say bough. and if you see any of they, not to get up but wander here and there from the say branch, not find they, you must take he or they with your finger, clean and nice, and set it at the foot of the bough, for then, if he be ready to spin, he will get upon it. at that time you must cleanse they very often, because they dung much and than you may handle they with the hand. for that rejoice they. so you have a care not to crush or press they, and when you shall because they dung much and than you may handle they with the hand. for that rejoice they. so you have a care not to crush or press they, and when you shall see that there remain but a few to spin, take the rest and put they with other of the same forwardness. let care be have always as well of those that gather the leaf as those that handle the worm, that their hand be very neat and clean, as we have remember. likewise you must have care, when the weather be cold or moist, to have some fire in the room. if you cast a little vinegar upon the coal or some sweet smell herb or flower into the pot, build in the oven to that. to have some fire in the room. if you cast a little vinegar upon the coal or some sweet smell herb or flower into the pot, build in the oven to that end, it comfort the worm. and as for such man as have no such oven, they may make some fire in the chimney of the room or in a pan with wood-coale. well, kindle first. 14. when you must draw the silk ball bottom or cod, after that the worm have make they, ten day after or thereabouts that the silkworm have make their silk ball or bottom upon the bough, then be you to take away the branch with the ball and to take the cod off from the, say, bough or branch then also. silk ball or bottom upon the bough, then be you to take away the branch with the ball and to take the cod off from the, say, bough or branch. then also must you choose out the very best silk ball to make as much seed as you will preserve for the next year. there go two hundred silk cod or bottom to make one ounce of seed. but if they be double, that be to say if there be find two or three worm in one silk ball or bottom, as it often fall out, we be to judge and estimate then that one hundred couple of worm will make one ounce of seed or thereabouts, and one ounce of seed bring forth six, eight and ten. we be to judge and estimate, then, that one hundred couple of worm will make one ounce of seed or thereabouts, and one ounce of seed bring forth six, eight and ten pound of silk by the year, more or less, according as the season be fit. in valencia, in granada and in sundry other place, they keep ordinary for seed those bottom of silk wherein be two or three worm a piece, because their silk be neither so fine nor so easy to be spin as the other they may be know by the handle of they, for they be strong round and big than the rest. but sometime it fall out that the worm can break through their silk bottom. in such case they must be of they, for they be strong, round and big than the rest. but sometime it fall out that the worm can break through their silk bottom. in such case they must be clip at the small end with the point of a pair of siser without cut the piece clean off from the bottom, in which you must have a care not to offend the worm. then with a needle and a thread must you thread they together, not thrust the needle through the body of the bottom, but at one side only pass the needle through the first course down or sleeve. note also that such silk bottom as have but one worm you need not to cut they. then hang they upon nail or wooden pin. through the first course down or sleeve. note also that such silk bottom as have but one worm, you need not to cut they then hang they upon nail or wooden pin where vermine can come. and when the worm shall come forth and be butterfly, you be to take they by the wing and set they upon certain shelf to the end that the male and the female may couple together. also, then must you be provide of some stuff, old or new, that have no wool upon it but use no linen or paper, and hang up the say stuff in some part of the house. then take the butterfly all couple together as they be by their wing and set they upon the say stuff. and hang up the say stuff in some part of the house. then take the butterfly, all couple together as they be by their wing and set they upon the say stuff, be it, say piropus, the backside of old velvet or such like stuff as have no wool on it. so hang up against the wall, as we have say, but in any case set not they thereon till they be couple and join together, for otherwise the seed will prove worth nothing, and if any be so poor that they can get such stuff, let they take walnut-tree, leave one handful or more and tie they together by doozen the back of the leaf on the backside and hang they at a nail or pin and let they take walnut-tree, leave one handful or more and tie they together by doozen the back of the leaf on the backside and hang they at a nail or pin and set the couple butterfly upon they, as we have say. note that the butterfly come not out of the cod common but in the morning about eight a clock. you shall know the seed by the colour thereof, the good from the bad, to wit that of couple worm, which be good become blackish within eight or ten day, after the other remain yellowish and that be worth nothing. when you see that all the butterfly be dead and the seed become grayish, you shall take it up with a knife very gingerly, and that which and that be worth nothing. when you see that all the butterfly be dead and the seed become grayish, you shall take it up with a knife very gingerly, and that which remain upon the leaf you may take up easy with your finger. and if by chance some seed shall be lay upon paper or linen, it cleave so fast that you can get it off without spoil it. in such case you must keep it, paper and all, to the next year, and in the due season the worm will come forth thereout of themselves, but the other seed gather from the stuff or leaf aforesaid. you must put in a box very clean, the side close past with paper that no air nor dust get. themselves, but the other seed gather from the stuff or leaf aforesaid. you must put in a box very clean, the side close past with paper, that no air nor dust get in, and keep it in a chest in a dry, temperate place till the next year. but take heed, you keep it neither in too cold nor in too warm a place, for then the heat will hatch the worm, though it be in winter, and then be no leaf to feed they. they starve and die, and so all your labour be lose. 15. how you may discern the male worm from the female, the silk bottom of the male and female, and also the male butterfly from the female. now to know the male. 15. how you may discern the male worm from the female, the silk bottom of the male and female, and also the male butterfly from the female. now, to know the male worm from the female, which can be well discern till the worm be grow great, you shall distinguish they by their head, because the male worm have his head more wrinkle, have eye as a man will think, whereas the female have her head round with small appearance of eye. as for the bottom, you may know the male by the form of his silk bottom, for the male make his bottom lesser and very sharp at one end and but half so sharp at the other end, whereas the silk bottom of the female be silk bottom for the male make his bottom lesser and very sharp at one end and but half so sharp at the other end, whereas the silk bottom of the female be big and soft, round at one end and half point at the other. as concern the butterfly, the male be lesser of body than the female and stir the wing often than the female and more strong. 16. how you must manage and handle the silk bottom to draw their silk out of they before the worm turn to be butterfly. as soon as you have take the bottom of silk from the branch abovenamed, before they turn to be butterfly, it be best to spin the silk from off the bottom, because after the bottom you have take the bottom of silk from the branch abovenamed before they turn to be butterfly. it be best to spin the silk from off the bottom, because after the bottom have be once pierce they can yield so fine silk but only a course silk or sleeve, and he that shall not be able to get his silk to be spin before the bottom may be pierce, which will be about a fortnight or three week after the worm have spin. then aforehand you may kill the worm thus with the heat of the sun. to this end, then you must spread the silk bottom in the sun at noonday, when it be in the great heat, upon plank or such like, for the space of sun. to this end, then you must spread the silk bottom in the sun at noonday, when it be in the great heat, upon plank or such like, for the space of one hour, turn they often. after that gather they all into a heap in a linen cloth and therewith cover they to smother the worm within their bottom and continue in so do two or three day, and in case the sun shall be want in light and heat to kill the worm, then, after you have draw your bread from out the oven or else have heat it to the same measure and proportion of heat. all the ember of the fire first take out, you may put the bottom into the oven upon wooden. or else have heat it to the same measure and proportion of heat. all the ember of the fire first take out. you may put the bottom into the oven upon wooden board or some such like thing and stir they often, as we have already say. but remember that you leave not the bottom above a hour in the oven, lest the silk burn or be too much dry up, become unfit to be spin afterward. beware also, the oven be not too hot, and if the worm be not dead at the first time, put they in again till they be dead. after that you must keep the silk bottom in a place where they may not be press together too hard and where vermine can put they in again till they be dead. after that you must keep the silk bottom in a place where they may not be press together too hard and where vermine can come, and so you may keep they till you have time convenient to spin the silk. yet if you can spin the silk before you kill the worm, the silk will prove much better and more easy to be spin. there be another way and better to kill the worm within their bottom, for such as can do it, and this they practice at messina. they have furnace and great cauldron or copper such as dyer use those. they fill half full with water, then they make a fire in the furnace to heat the water. messina. they have furnace and great cauldron or copper such as dyer. use those. they fill half full with water, then they make a fire in the furnace to heat the water. then they lay a round lid or cover of plank or board within the cauldron or copper. but so bear up by the copper that it touch not the water, though it lie near to it within three or four finger breadth of it, which round lid or cover must be bore as full of hole as a sieve. upon this cover they lay a thin carpet of darnix or the like, and upon the carpet the silk bottom be lay which must be stir often, and the cauldron or copper must be cover above the. a thin carpet of darnix or the like and upon the carpet the silk bottom be lay, which must be stir often, and the cauldron or copper must be cover above the lid that the heat may smother the worm within the bottom. when the worm be dead, take up the bottom and lay they in some room where there be air to draw out and dry their moistness. by this mean the silk lose not the colour and be as good and as easy to be spin as if it have be spin assoon as the worm have make it 17.. the manner, how to prepare the silk bottom that be pierce which be keep for seed, how to make of, they course, silk and of the the worm have, make it 17.. the manner, how to prepare the silk bottom that be pierce which be keep for seed, how to make of, they course, silk, and of the best and fine of that kind, as concern such bottom of silk as be pierce. they can serve to make fine silk, but course, yet of that you shall make the best, of that sort, namely when they be right, manage in this manner: take the, say, pierce bottom and wash they in fresh water. have by you a cauldron with clear water in it, which be set on the fire and ready to boil, put soap in it, and when that it boil and the soap be melt, put the silk bottom in it, and it, which be set on the fire and ready to boil, put soap in it, and when that it boil and the soap be melt, put the silk bottom in it and let they boil one quarter of a hour or thereabouts and stir they. after that, take they out and wash they in clean water and dry they. when they be dry, then must you beat they with a round staff of a good bigness upon a stone or other thing, and then they will become white and smooth as wool. after that, woman may spin they in this manner as follow: first of all, they must pull they with their finger one after another and open they very wide, as they do wool when they spin. spin they in this manner as follow. first of all they must pull they with their finger one after another and open they very wide, as they do wool when they spin it. then must they put the silk upon the distatfe and spin it as small and fine as they can, or will other do, card it with card make for the purpose but than it can be spin so even as touch the refuse or dross, that must be card for to spin it. he that will have his say course, silk yellow be, must put the pierce bottom in fresh water four or five day and change the water every day and press the bottom with his hand. after that he must dry they and must put the pierce bottom in fresh water four or five day and change the water every day and press the bottom with his hand. after that he must dry they and so they may be spin as though they have be sodden, and this without lose their colour. 18. how you be to gather the mulberry leave so as the tree may best thrive thereby and the leave be the better. it be good for he that have mulberry tree that he gather his leaf, but once in two year, viz if he have 500 tree to gather the leaf of 250.. one year keep the other half for the next year. nevertheless, such as can spare the leaf may gather they in this manner. that follow. tree to gather the leaf of 250. one year, keep the other half for the next year. nevertheless, such as can spare the leaf may gather they in this manner that follow of all the principal bough and branch of the tree, you be to gather leaf after leaf, leave the stalk behind and the end or tip of the branch, together with the young leaf, to the end that the say bough or branch may grow, so much the better. and as for the little sprig that grow within the tree, if they be in too great number and thick or rank, you may pluck they off with their leaf as touch. young mulberry tree, you be to gather the leaf only of the principal branch, as too great number and thick or rank, you may pluck they off with their leaf. as touch young mulberry tree, you be to gather the leaf only of the principal branch. as we have say, care must be have to keep the leaf of the old tree till the worm have pass their three and four sickness, for than it be that they beget their silk. and the leaf of such old tree beget more silk than the young one, and the worm eat more leaf in three or four day after they be grow to their bigness than ever they do in all their time before now. forasmuch as it sometime fall out in the spring time that it rain two or three day together, so as their bigness than ever they do in all their time before now, forasmuch as it sometime fall out in the spring time that it rain two or three day together, so as the leaf can dry by the weather. in such a case, while the worm be yet little, you may cut off some branch of the mulberry tree and hang they up in house where the air may come to dry they. and as soon as the leaf be dry you must pluck they, for otherwise the branch will draw the sap and juice of the leaf to they. otherwise, if you gather the leave wet, you may dry they by, spread they upon a clean linen cloth, stir they often and wipe they with another clean the leaf to they. otherwise if you gather the leave wet, you may dry they by. spread they upon a clean linen cloth, stir they often and wipe they with another clean linen cloth till they be dry. 19 touch the husband of mulberry tree. it be to be note that mulberry tree be to be husband, open dig and dung at the foot as the olive tree, namely in such place where they grow with main labour of man, but in such place where they grow natural, where the nature of the soil be such that it bring they forth without so much handy labour. there their fruit be better and those man that will have some tree plant upon their land they be to make good. that it bring they forth without so much handy labour. there their fruit be better and those man that will have some tree plant upon their land they be to make good choice of they in summer and mark they so as they may know they in winter, to remove they in the due season fit to plant they in and to choose the very best of they you be to cull out, such as have round leaf and not fork, for both the fruit and the leaf of they be better than those of the other tree. these five and twenty year i have see diverse country where they begin and afterward find it very profitable to plant mulberry tree about their ground in stead of hedge. other tree. these five and twenty year i have see diverse country where they begin and afterward find it very profitable to plant mulberry tree about their ground in stead of hedge, where they grow so speedy that the second year they may begin to gather some leaf during the time that the worm be small, forasmuch as the leaf of little tree grow soon than they of big tree. to plant mulberry tree in form of a thick hedge, for to have the first young leaf for the worm new hatch, you must make a ditch of a foot and a half deep and as broad and therein plant your young tree. then fill the ditch with earth almost full, then cut off the branch of the ditch of a foot and a half deep and as broad and therein plant your young tree. then fill the ditch with earth almost full. then cut off the branch of the tree that you have set for that will make they grow the better. and place they two foot near one another, and whosoever will have a double hedge of they, let he make another ditch three or four foot near that and plant it as in the other their wood. when they be plash, be as good to burn as any other and their ash better. 20.. how to prepare the seed of mulberry tree to make a nursery. whosoever will make a nursery of the seed of mulberry tree? when the fruit be ripe, let ash, better 20.. how to prepare the seed of mulberry tree to make a nursery. whosoever will make a nursery of the seed of mulberry tree, when the fruit be ripe, let he observe that tree that bear the fair and round leaf, and of that tree let he gather so many mulberry as will fit he for his seed, which must be thus use: first, wash the mulbery in two or three water, press they with your hand, and then take up the seed that remain in the bottom of the water. after that, dry your seed in the house and keep it till the month of march. next come, such man as will gain one year. sow it assoon as they have. gather it without dry. your seed in the house and keep it till the month of march. next come, such man as will gain one year, sow it assoon as they have, gather it without dry it, and other man sow the mulberry whole as they be, in that manner that we will say 21.. in what manner you be to sow the seed of mulberry tree for a nursery, first you must dig, husband, and make bed of fat earth, the mould be make small and well dung with good old dung, thorough rot, and you must make your bed four foot or four and a half broad, and within the say bed you must make four or five straight line of ray or furrow, all half a foot, equal, distant. bed four foot or four and a half broad, and within the say bed you must make four or five straight line of ray or furrow, all half a foot equal, distant one from another, and every furrow must be two inch deep and four broad. and between every bed you must leave little ally or space half a foot broad which will serve you to go to weed or water they without tread upon they. then be you to sow the seed in the say furrow and cover it a inch deep or thereabouts of the fine mould. the first year you must take care to water it often if the weather be dry, and the earth must be keep clean from weed a year after that. the fine mould the first year you must take care to water it often if the weather be dry, and the earth must be keep clean from weed. a year after that you may pull up and transplant your mulberry tree into another ground more at large- viz two foot one from the other, as ordinary other tree be- dispose of and there let they grow till they be as big as a man arm at his wrist or thereabouts, and then you may transplant they into the place or ground where you will have they continue for ever. leave a distance the one from the other of fifteen or sixteen foot namely, so as the bough of one tree grow, not within another. care must be have. continue for ever, leave a distance the one from the other of fifteen or sixteen foot namely, so as the bough of one tree grow not within another. care must be have that in hot country these tree be set deep into the earth, then in a cold soil, for fear of burn the root. 1. another discourse: how to plant the vine, how to dress and husband it sundry way, how to choose the ground and the seat to that effect. first, such as will plant vine, they be to choose a soil proper and convenient for that use. if you plant it in a low ground and moist, there the vine grow well and bear store of fruit, but the grape never ripen well and therefore convenient for that use if you plant it in a low ground and moist. there the vine grow well and bear store of fruit, but the grape never ripen well and therefore the wine be not good, nor can it be keep long. you must then make choice of a dry soil who aspect be towards the full south sun and cover or shelter from the noth wind, if it be possible, and if you meet with rise ground as the side of hill hang down, they be most proper, and though they be full of little stone and gravel, they be also the better for they and not the worse. the wine of such place be better able to be, keep long and fit also to be. little stone and gravel they be also, the better for they and not the worse. the wine of such place be better able to be, keep long and fit also to be carry far. first you must open the earth and dig it one foot and a half deep or thereabouts. and after you have dig as much earth as you have plant to set, you must make ditch in the say ground, look towards the full south, one foot and a half deep and as broad and of the length that the place be of. the ditch must be three or four foot distant one from another. so after you have select your plant, whether with root or without, as of slip or cut for the vine. the ditch must be three or four foot distant one from another. so, after you have select your plant, whether with root or without, as of slip or cut, for the vine grow aswell without root as with, and that which be set without root be of the long endurance and last, though true it be that the first year it will not grow so much as that which have root, these plant, i say, must be plant three or four foot one from another, in as much distance as the ditch be one from another, and the vine plant must be plant in a straight line in form of a chequer quadrangle-wise here. observe that if the plant be without root, you must cause they to soak. and the vine plant must be plant in a straight line in form of a chequer, quadrangle-wise here. observe that if the plant be without root, you must cause they to soak in fresh water. twelve or fifteen day ere you plant, they put the big end of the plant in the water a foot deep. but if they have root, you must cut they off, unless they be pluck up. one day or two at most before you plant they and put they in water two or three day, he that shall plant the vine must have one to help. he who shall lay the vine in the ditch, all along the say ditch, of what distance he will, one from the other. and in plant he must have one to help he who shall lay the vine in the ditch all along the say ditch, of what distance he will, one from the other. and in plant he shall tread in the ditch. let some of the dig earth fall into the place where he be to plant or set his vine. then shall he take his plant and bow it one foot in the earth of the ditch or thereabouts according to the length of the plant, put the big end within the ditch towards the plump south of the sunrising and with the hand raise up the point end or top of it, set his foot on the root and cast some mould on it, half a foot deep or more. and and with the hand raise up the point end or top of it, set his foot on the root and cast some mould on it half a foot deep or more, and tread on it that it may be firm. and he must do so all along the ditch. use a line to plant they with a equal distance, do the like in and through all the ditch. when your vine shall be thus plant, then let fall more mould within the ditch all along, yet you must not fill it up the first year. also, be sure that you make that earth that be between two ditch slaunt on both side and husband the say vine. from time to time the earth of itself will fall into. be sure that you make that earth that be between two ditch slaunt on both side and husband the say vine. from time to time the earth of itself will fall into the ditch and fill they. the vine be no soon plant, but it must be cut. not leave upon each branch above three knob or knot which we call eye, but the old vine that be plant about house to make long vine. that must not be cut as yet, for you must leave it all, the old wood or branch and one part of the last year branch. both must be cut, the first year in the begin of the new moon, the second year it must be cut at the full moon and then of the last year branch. both must be cut, the first year in the begin of the new moon, the second year it must be cut at the full moon and then leave it but one branch, the low and strong, leave upon the say branch, but four knob or knot or thereabouts, according as the vine shall be wax. also, you be to note that in cut the vine you must have a good knife, or rather a sharp hook, as in france, in such a form as the shoemaker knife, wherewith you must cut the branch very even and very near the old wood, to the end that the vine grow may cover the cut. when you see in the month of may or june that the branch very even and very near the old wood to the end that the vine grow, may cover the cut. when you see in the month of may or june that there grow upon your vine, many sprig arise from the foot of the old wood. you must pluck they off with your hand and let none grow. but such as grow upon the last year branch, unless the vine be very strong. in such case you may leave she some of such twig to multiply she. those that will have their vine grow without stake or prop, as they do in languedock and provence, such you be to cut so short every year that you leave they but two or three knob to the end the stake or prop, as they do in languedock and provence. such you be to cut so short every year that you leave they but two or three knob to the end. the vine may grow big and be strong enough at the foot. the three year the vine begin to pay and recompense or reward her master for his labour. then must you cut she a little long and leave she more branch, viz two or three in every one and ever the low. observe also that if the vine breed much wood than you must cut it when the moon wane. but if it bring forth little wood or branch, cut it in the first quarter of the moon towards the full thereof. all must be cut. cut it when the moon wane. but if it bring forth little wood or branch, cut it in the first quarter of the moon, towards the full thereof. all must be cut in december, january and february. 2. another manner of plant the vine, namely such as have no root: first of all you must dig and prepare the earth, as we have say, and make it very even. then take a line and lay it along the earth where you will plant. look towards the south sun. as we have say, you must have a pin or dibble of iron or of wood to make a hole therewith in the earth, one foot and a quarter deep. then put the big end of your vine-plant within the pin or dibble of iron or of wood to make a hole therewith in the earth one foot and a quarter deep. then put the big end of your vine-plant within the hole of the earth, so make and if you have dung very rot, put of it one handful in the say hole. then tread it with your foot and with the pin or dibble bear the earth round about the plant to fasten it that the earth may thereby join close and be combine with it. then cut it as we have say and keep it very neat and clean from weed all the year. 3. another fashion of dress the vine, after the manner of italy and of piedmont or savoy, the great part of keep it very neat and clean from weed all the year. 3. another fashion of dress the vine: after the manner of italy and of piedmont or savoy- the great part of the vine of those country- be plant in the open field and grow up upon tree that be plant there. to that end, they plant one or two vine at one tree, namely of the long vine. they can get to the end. they may grow and be the soon upon the top of each tree and they cut the branch of the tree off that be too long that the tree may grow round as much as may be touch the vine. it must be cut every year, as we say already. yet they must off that be too long that the tree may grow round as much as may be. touch the vine, it must be cut every year, as we say already. yet they must leave this many more branch than be usual, leave upon other vine and where there be no tree plant there, cut off some long and big bough of tree or get even whole tree of the bigness of a man thigh or thereabouts. leave only upon they the big end of the bough and plant they in the earth to support and prop up the vine. observe also that they plant the, say, tree or bough ten or twelve foot distance one from another or thereabouts. you must be careful when they be rot to set. the vine. observe also that they plant the say tree or bough ten or twelve foot distance one from another or thereabouts. you must be careful when they be rot to set other in their room also. they may till and sow that land with corn, not endamage the vine which be husband. while they till the say land- and for as much as in virginia there be find old vine in the land that the inhabitant do clear for their use- they may spare the say vine and plant by they such tree or bough as we say, and tie the vine upon they to prop they up as be say, for they will bring forth much fruit the very first year which will be as much. as we say, and tie the vine upon they to prop they up, as be say, for they will bring forth much fruit the very first year, which will be as much time gain and labour spare withal. they may also plant of the long vine they can find near to the tree to cause they grow upon they, both near the house and way where they will have tree to grow, and these vine will bear great store of grape, though not to make so good wine as be make of the low vine, yet good enough to be drink at meat. i have see in the low geuanden, in languedock, a tree bear, a vine, which have yield in one year as many grape as make. good enough to be drink at meat. i have see in the low geuanden in languedock, a tree bear, a vine, which have yield in one year as many grape as make half a tun of wine. 4. another form of dress the vine, as they do in vivaretz and in awergne, they plant it as we have say and they cut it a little long than they do in languedock. after that they plant stake of wood of five or six foot long and bind three or four of they together by their upper end in form of a round tent. this they do thus because the vine there be strong than in other place of france, and they tie the vine upon they, but in winter in form of a round tent. this they do thus because the vine there be strong than in other place of france, and they tie the vine upon they. but in winter, when they will cut the vine and husband it, they take away the stake and towards the end of march they set they up again, as they do in france, where they stick but one stake upright at one vine whereto they bind it. 5. another way to dress the vine, after the manner of the country of seuenes. there they plant the vine as follow: first have prepare the soil, they make ditch, as we have tell you before. then plant they the vine two foot one from the other. and the first year they as follow: first have prepare the soil. they make ditch as we have tell you before. then plant they the vine two foot one from the other, and the first year they cut it very short, leave but three knob or knot out of the earth. the second year they cut it at the first quarter of the moon and leave to every one but one branch as long as they can leave it and set a stake at every one of the vine. two year after they provide they certain wooden fork of the bigness of a man leg and wooden pole as big as his arm, also small pole. then they stick the fork in the earth from six to six foot distance all along the of a man leg and wooden pole as big as his arm, also small pole, then they stick the fork in the earth from six to six foot distance, all along the ditch where the vine be plant, and as much in height or less if they think it fit. and so they do, alike in each ditch. then they lay the big pole from one fork to another, tie they together with osier or willow, and then they tie the lesser pole be six or seven foot length, athwart over the big pole, bind they together with osier in distance one from another of one foot and a half, much in the form of the net that man lay to take dear to transport from one park. together with osier, in distance one from another of one foot and a half, much in the form of the net that man lay to take dear to transport from one park into another. they cut the vine the second year, as long as they can leave it, and they leave it but one branch, to wit the strong, to the end. the vine may mount up the soon upon the say frame of pole which we now describe, and they bind it thereupon. now, when the vine be upon it, which be the year follow, then must you leave more branch to the say vine when you cut it, according as you shall see that her stock be strong and able enough to feed she and you. then must you leave more branch to the say vine when you cut it according, as you shall see that her stock be strong and able enough to feed she and you must leave in every branch five or six knot or eye and every year bind up the end of all the new branch which be leave uncut upon the pole frame with osier or with green rush or what you can get. they plant such vine upon the arable land about house and upon or over the high way term. they treilly or plait high vine which they plant as follow: first they dig a ditch in the place where they mean to set the vine in that sort we describe afore, and they plant the high vine which they plant as follow: first they dig a ditch in the place where they mean to set the vine in that sort we describe afore, and they plant the vine within the ditch, as also we have show. then provide they wooden fork and big and small pole, as be afore, set down such fork as be set in the ditch must be but two or three foot high, plant a row of they six or seven foot from the, say, ditch or thereabouts, right against the south, and lay on they great and small pole and tie they as aforesaid, such vine as be plant over the high way too and near house. there the fork must be long, to wit seven or eight. and small pole and tie they as aforesaid. such vine as be plant over the high way too, and near house. there the fork must be long, to wit seven or eight foot high, and the pole so much the strong to be able to bear the burden of the vine and have a respect to the breadth of the, say way cart and horseman pass under they in those country, without hurt to the vine or molestation to the passenger. such vine be to be plant at both the side of such way and tie up and dress as be, say, 6. how to husband the vine and in what season of the year. the vine must be husband three time a year, to wit in march. up and dress as be say. 6. how to husband the vine and in what season of the year. the vine must be husband three time a year, to wit in march for the first time, the second time in may, the three in august. in march you be to dig it deep enough, viz three quarter of a foot depth or thereabouts, and at the other time half a foot deep or thereupon, and in plough it you must have care to pluck off the end that grow upon the old wood of the say vine, for they spoil the vine. 7. how you be to choose the vine-plant, for to plant of the best when the grape be ripe, then consider what plant be best and vine, for they spoil the vine. 7. how you be to choose the vine-plant for, to plant of the best. when the grape be ripe, then consider what plant be best and which bear most branch. then mark the same plant so as you may know they again in winter, to transplant of they elsewhere. and also, if there be any vine that thrive not well, pluck they up and set in their room some of those fruitful one. and if there be any vine which have a branch long enough, cut it, not from the vine but lay it in the earth a foot and a half deep or thereabouts, leave out of the earth the small end thereof with three or four knot upon it, and vine, but lay it in the earth a foot and a half deep or thereabouts. leave out of the earth the small end thereof with three or four knot upon it, and cut off the rest. it will bring forth fruit the same year. but you must lay in the earth. so but one branch of a vine in one year, for fear you spoil the vine by too much, suck it. you be to cut the same branch from the old vine the next year. after that, to the end it draw not the sap and juice away too much from the old one, and by that time the say branch will have take root enough, able to feed itself, and thus you may store and furnish. and juice away too much from the old one, and by that time the say branch will have take root enough, able to feed itself, and thus you may store and furnish your vineyard in a small time with very good plant. 8. how to make wine and how to know when the grape be full ripe, when you shall see the grape very black and that there be no grayish grain among they, and that the stalk of the branch be become radish and the white grape draw to be of a yellowish colour and the grain tender. these be token that they be ripe, which thing you shall yet better perceive in taste. they, if they, be sweet in taste and the liquor be gluish between the grain tender. these be token that they be ripe, which thing you shall yet better perceive in taste. they, if they be sweet in taste and the liquor be gluish between your finger, then be it time to gather they. yet in every place they can ripen alike. so well as in some, though it be under the same climate, in low place and moist, wet ground, they be never so good nor so soon ripe as they be in the dry ground and the hilly or side of hill, and as in the stony and grave ground, and that be the cause why they be not to be gather so soon in moist ground. note also, when you gather your grape, that you may have the and grave ground and that be the cause why they be not to be gather so soon in moist ground. note also, when you gather your grape, that you may have the wine to be good and fit to keep long. do it in dry weather, not in rainy, for that spoil the wine and take away his strength and hurt the vine. when you gather your grape, choose the ripe and carry they home, but aforehand provide a or such a tub as brewer use in brew and such as have no great store of grape (). use lesser vessel as barrel or half hogshead to let the wine purge itself in. the grape must be tread in the vessel with bare leg and foot first of. grape (). use lesser vessel as barrel or half hogshead to let the wine purge itself in. the grape must be tread in the vessel with bare leg and foot, first of all in a lesser vessel or tub, and then after that remove the tread grape into a big vat by degree, as they be tread, husk and all together, and you may fill the or tub within half a foot of the brim thereof. such vessel must stand upon the one end upon their bottom, but all open upward. they must be well bind for otherwise the force of the new wine will break they all in piece. whosoever will have his wine all claret, let he gather all his grape all at once. the white: for otherwise the force of the new wine will break they all in piece. whosoever will have his wine all claret, let he gather all his grape all at once, the white and the black, and put they all together in the vessel and let they work together before you put they into the or tub. make a little bundle of short vine-branche. then make a hole in the low end of the or tub in the forepart to draw the wine out when it be purge. put the say bundle of vine-branche within the say vessel just before the tap-hole and lay a clean stone or brick upon it to keep it from heave up with the wine. this will hinder when you draw the wine. that. vessel just before the tap-hole and lay a clean stone or brick upon it to keep it from heave up with the wine. this will hinder, when you draw the wine, that the skin or husk of the grape come not out at the tap-hole with it. you must let the wine work and purge itself five or six day or more. if you will have it look very red after that, draw it below and put it in barrel or hogshead. by this time you have gather your green grape. after you have tread the same as we have say, put they into the or tub with the husk or skin of the former press grape out of which you have draw the wine and mingle they. same as we have say, put they into the or tub with the husk or skin of the former press grape out of which you have. draw the wine and mingle they well together, either with the foot or with a staff, and let the wine work together as before and it will be a mean small wine for the household. after, when it have purge itself seven or eight day, draw it out and barrel it. beware you stop not the large upper hole of the vessel until the wine have lose and spend all his great heat. there be some who, after this press the husk in the press, draw out all that can come thereout, put that liquor into a barrel by itself. other go. his great heat. there be some who, after this press the husk in the press, draw out all that can come thereout, put that liquor into a barrel by itself. other go further and put water to the husk and latter wine at diverse time, not all at once but by little and little. put one ten part of water in proportion of the quantity of the wine which they have so draw, and they let it work and purge itself in the or lesser vessel five or six day and then draw it and barrel it. this will be pretty small wine for the servant or household, and whosoever will make wine mere white, let he gather all his white grape by themselves and let the wine it. this will be pretty small wine for the servant or household, and whosoever will make wine mere white, let he gather all his white grape by themselves and let the wine work and purge itself in the but two or three day, for if you let it stand long the colour will be yellow. this be the manner practise in languedoc, provence and elsewhere, but in poictou and in some other part of france they do otherwise. that it may be the white. after it have be tread, draw out the wine and put it in barrel and there let it purge without his husk or skin. you must be careful to fill up the barrel every day according as it diminish with work, otherwise the lees. in barrel and there let it purge without his husk or skin. you must be careful to fill up the barrel every day according as it diminish with work, otherwise the lees and other corruption will go down into the barrel and when hot weather come will spoil the wine. you may do so with the claret, when you will not have it too red but clear, and namely in hot country. 9 observation touch the wild vine that grow in virginia and how to make wine of the same. i have be inform by such as have be in virginia that there grow infinite number of wild vine there and of several sort. some climb up to the top of tree in the wood and they bring as have be in virginia, that there grow infinite number of wild vine there, and of several sort. some climb up to the top of tree in the wood and they bring forth great quantity of small black grape, which be the plain to be see when the leaf be fall off from the tree. another sort of grape there be that run upon the ground almost as big as a damson, very sweet, and make deep red wine which they call a fox-grape, a three sort there be, which be a white grape, but that be but rare, which be all devour by the bird and beast. now, if such man as dwell there will take the pain to gather some of they when they be ripe. be, but rare, which be all devour by the bird and beast. now, if such man as dwell there will take the pain to gather some of they when they be ripe and tread they as aforesaid and make the wine work with water, put it in fat or tub, as we say. it will purge itself as well as good wine do. and if the grape be too hard they may boil they with some water. and if the cauldron be too little to boil they all together, boil they one after another till all be boil, and then put they all into the or tub, to wit the wine, the water and the husk of the grape, and then let they work thus together, five or be boil and then put they all into the or tub, to wit the wine, the water and the husk of the grape, and then let they work thus together five or six day, or else so long till you think it fit and good to be drink. after that you may draw it and barrel it, as we have say, and use it when you need. i have oftentimes see such wine make reasonable good for the household, and by this mean every man may present have wine in virginia to drink. 1. how to plant the fig tree and the nature of the same. the fig tree be a tree that grow speedy and the second year begin to bear fruit and be of that nature. plant the fig tree and the nature of the same. the fig tree be a tree that grow speedy and the second year begin to bear fruit, and be of that nature that during a month or five week in that season, when grape be ripe and good to eat, you may gather ripe fig of it every day. the fig tree herein be like the vine, that it may be plant without root of a branch, albeit such as have root, bring forth soon and be either pluck up or cut off a long time before you must put they in water, as we have say of the vine, and plant they in the like manner and in hot country they plant they ordinary in the open. before you must put they in water, as we have say of the vine, and plant they in the like manner and in hot country. they plant they ordinary in the open vineyard, for it love natural to grow with the vine as have affinity together for their fruit grow and be ripe at one time. when you plant the fig tree without root, you must lay the branch within the earth, as we have say of the vine. 2. how to plant peach tree and the nature of they. the peach tree of every kind be tree of no long continuance and ordinary be plant in the open vineyard as the fig tree, without hurt to they and their fruit ripen in one season, many be in. be tree of no long continuance and ordinary be plant in the open vineyard as the fig tree without hurt to they, and their fruit ripen in one season. many be in their vineyard when they gather and eat a peach that please they well, in their taste, do forthwith plant the stone thereof in the earth in that place, where they will have a peach tree grow the next year and there the same grow without any further labour. the like may be do of all sort of peach yea, even with apricock, and those that will not plant they in their vineyard may plant they first in their garden and transplant they afterward where they please, and they will bring forth the like fruit as the that will not plant they in their vineyard, may plant they first in their garden and transplant they afterward where they please, and they will bring forth the like fruit as the tree of which the stone be there be place in france, as at paris, where they graft they upon plum-tree or almond-tree, which be more last, though not fit to be plant in vineyard because the plum-tree breed too many root and sucker, which spoil the vine. 3. how to plant quince-tree? as for quince-tree, they may be plant of a bough thereof without root as fig tree, though it be better to plant they with root, when such may be, have they like well to be plant in moist ground, yet they will grow every. root as fig tree, though it be better to plant they with root, when such may be have. they like well to be plant in moist ground. yet they will grow every where. also, you may graft they one upon the other, thereby to get the better fruit. likewise, you may sow his seed, to wit, when his fruit be ripe, then be you to take out the kernel and sow they, as you sow the seed and kernel of apple and pear, which common be do in february and march 4.. of the olive tree and the nature thereof, the olive tree also be a great lover of the vine common. they plant it in march, april and may ordinary. they plant no nursery of they, because and the nature thereof. the olive tree also be a great lover of the vine common. they plant it in march, april and may ordinary. they plant no nursery of they because they be a long time in grow. there grow at the root of the old tree, sprig or sucker which be grow big. they use to cut they off together with as great a piece of the stock of the old tree as be a man two fist or thereabouts, and this be without hurt the tree. and so they plant the say sprig or sucker with their adjunct aforesaid: put that great piece in the earth which serve it in stead of a root. then must we cut off his head or top upward as or sucker, with their adjunct aforesaid, put that great piece in the earth which serve it in stead of a root, then must we cut off his head or top upward, as common we do to other tree also, you may sow some of his fruit, together with the stone thereof be very ripe, as about christ-tide, when they be blackish, and this without dry. they you must husband it at the root, as the vine, twice in a year and fatten the earth with good dung if need require. in many place they sow corn or other thing under the olive tree without hurt to they. 5. of the pomegranate tree and of his nature, the pomegranate tree be ever little of the bigness and form of. or other thing under the olive tree without hurt to they. 5. of the pomegranate tree and of his nature, the pomegranate tree be ever little of the bigness and form of a white thorn in hot country. they grow near the highway and in wood, especial in stony ground. they make few nursery of they because they cast many sprig at the foot, whereof so many may be pluck off and plant where they will and as many as they please. note that there be some sweet and some bitter. the bitter be not eat but be good for other use, as namely for currier to give a good gloss to their spanish leather skin. be once sow or plant in any place there they grow of. but be good for other use, as namely for currier to give a good gloss to their spanish leather skin. be once sow or plant in any place there. they grow of themselves and he that will sow of they when he eat of the best of they, he may put the seed or kernel of they present in the earth. 6. the manner of sow the seed or kernel of sundry kind of fruit for to have tree of they, and how to preserve the seed until the time be fit to sow they. for the seed of the vine it may be well sow and it will grow as other seed do, but because it be a long time a grow, they use to sow very. the seed of the vine. it may be well sow and it will grow as other seed do. but because it be a long time a grow, they use to sow very little of it. yet whosoever will be curious to try- conclusion- may sow of it as they sow other seed. for to draw out and get the seed of they, the grape be very ripe. you must gather they and wring they between your hand, and so take out the seed or kernel and then sow the same present, or else dry they in the shadow, not in the sun, and keep they till february or march next come and then soak they in fresh water two or three day before you sow they 7.. for the shadow, not in the sun, and keep they till february or march next come and then soak they in fresh water two or three day before you sow they. 7. for the seed of the fig tree, draw it also out of his fig be fresh and sow it, as that of the mulberry tree whereof we have treat already. 8. the stone of peach and apricock be the seed of those tree which thrive best when they be plant. assoon as they be out of their fruit without dry they and those that will keep they till march next must dry they in the shadow, not in the sun, and before you plant they, put they four or five day in water or wine than put keep they till march. next must dry they in the shadow, not in the sun, and before you plant they, put they four or five day in water or wine than put they four inch deep in the earth. otherwise, without dry they, you may keep they in a earthen pot with earth in it. 9, the cherry stone be to be manage as the peach and apricot, as we say before. the fruit that come of they will prove as the cherry be, howbeit not altogether so big as the former, be 10. walnut must also be plant green and fresh and with all the upper rind. and take heed, rat and mouse come not at they to eat they, for they be very liquorish of they. also be plant green and fresh and with all the upper rind. and take heed, rat and mouse. come not at they to eat they, for they be very liquorish of they. also. you may keep they dry, as we say heretofore, of other thing, but they profit not so well. the tree that shall come thereof, be of the say nature will produce the like fruit. 11. the almond be to be husband and plant as the peach and apricot. 12. the stone of plum be to be use and plant as the almond, but the tree that shall come of they will not be so good, and that be the reason why they must be graft. 13. the chest-nut be to be plant green and fresh. the tree that shall come of. they will not be so good and that be the reason why they must be graft. 13. the chest-nut be to be plant green and fresh, else it will never prosper. if you let it be dry, you must put they in the earth three or four inch deep and to keep they you must put they in fresh water three or four day, then wipe off the water from they and keep they in a pot with earth in it until the spring come to plant they. the tree that will come of they will not bring forth so good fruit as the chest-nut be and therefore the best way be to graft they. 14. the seed of lemon and orange. that will come of. they will not bring forth so good fruit as the chest-nut be and therefore the best way be to graft they 14.. the seed of lemon and orange ordinary be sow assoon as they be. take out of their fruit they prepare the soil towards the south well, dig and dung and plant they the small end upward two inch deep in the earth. also they graft they ordinary to get the better and goodly fruit of they 15.. for the seed of apple and pear, the fruit be very ripe. you be then to take out the seed and dry they in the shade and you may keep they till february, follow or march to sow they. then must you have prepare for. be then to take out the seed and dry they in the shade, and you may keep they till february, follow or march. to sow they then must you have prepare for they good ground and you must make in it small ray or furrow of two or three inch in breadth and of like depth. each furrow be three quarter of a foot distant one from the other and you must sow the seed within the say furrow. cover they with earth. it be very good to sow they assoon as they be take out of their fruit, for they come forth of the earth the soon, and it be needful to graft they, because the fruit that proceed of they otherwise be not so good it. of their fruit, for they come forth of the earth the soon and it be needful to graft they, because the fruit that proceed of they otherwise be not so good. it be also good that all the seed and stone here beforenamed be plant and sow at the first quarter of the moon. 16. how to dry grape to keep they? when the grape be very ripe, then be you to choose they in the vineyard of the big and best and namely white one. after you have, choose and gather as many as you will have, you must burn a certain quantity of vine-cuttings, not mingle therewith any other kind of wood, and then gather the ash thereof. but the best be that they be all. will have. you must burn a certain quantity of vine-cuttings, not mingle therewith any other kind of wood, and then gather the ash thereof, but the best be that they be all of white vine branch. after that, put fair water and those ash in a cawldron upon the fire and seethe they together till you have make a clear liquor. then take away all the ash, put the liquor into a clean cawldron again and set it over the fire and be ready to seethe. then must you take rod of wood, such as chandler use, whereupon they set and make their candle, upon which rod you must tie the bunch all along: one bunch of grape on one side the rod, and on the other side. use, whereupon they set and make their candle, upon which rod you must tie the bunch all along: one bunch of grape on one side the rod and on the other side another bunch of grape. tie they with thread by their stalk to hang they on which do then dive they in the liquor as the chandler put his candle in the melt tallow, and that sundry time, as four or five time thus have, dive one rod of raisin, hang it by to dry, then take another and wet it in the same manner and set it by, and do so of all the rest, then hang they up in the sun, or else spread they upon hurdle or lattice of rod or such like, until and set it by and do so of all the rest. then hang they up in the sun or else spread they upon hurdle or lattice of rod or such like until they be almost dry. then barrel. they. press they very flat in the say barrel other, dry they. without this steep they even as they come from the vine. 17. how to dry figs? first, gather they very ripe and have make ready hurdle or lattice of reed or of osier. join together, as osier lattice use to be, with light or cliff between osier and osier, to the end that the air pass through the rift and void space of. they may help the sun to dry they up when they be spread upon the. osier and osier to the end that the air pass through the rift and void space of. they may help the sun to dry they up when they be spread upon the, say, lattice table and take heed that neither the rain nor the due fall upon they also. you may dry they in this manner: first take a big reed or cane of two or three foot long and bear little hole all the length of it, through which hole you be to put little stick very sharp of two foot long. then thread the fig upon the little stick till they be very full of. they then hang the cane in the sun and when they be dry barrel, they press they very hard in the fig upon the little stick till they be very full of they. then hang the cane in the sun and when they be dry, barrel they. press they very hard in the barrel, as we say, of grape 18.. how to dry peach of all kind and apricock: when they be very ripe, than you must pare off the upper skin and cleave they into four quarter and dry they as fig and barrel they to keep they for winter. the manner, how to dress they after they be dry, for to eat they be this: you must provide a clean earthen pot, and after you have wash your peach in fair water, than put they into the pot and put in as much wine as will cover. you must provide a clean earthen pot and after you have wash your peach in fair water, than put they into the pot and put in as much wine as will cover the peach and then seethe they half a quarter of a hour. also they may be make ready another way, without boil they by, put they in wine and soak they three or four day, and this way they be better. also you may put in some cinnamon in powder. in this manner you may keep they one month within the say pot. use they every morning. they provoke a appetite or good stomach and be very wholesome. 19. how to hinder wild beast from eat the fruit in the night you must make fire in. they every morning. they provoke a appetite or good stomach and be very wholesome. 19- how to hinder wild beast from eat the fruit in the night. you must make fire in sundry place, and namely in every such way as lead to the wood, and that only in the night, and no wild beast will come near. they and special, do this about the vineyard from the time the grape begin to be ripe until they be whole ripe. 20. advice for those in virginia: touch the place for to plant vine in forasmuch as every plat of ground be not fit for the vine. it be good and convenient that every town and village whereabout be or shall be, find any good or proper ground for. every plat of ground be not fit for the vine. it be good and convenient that every town and village whereabout be or shall be find any good or proper ground for that purpose, that there the inhabitant shall plant vine one near another, and such man as have interest or right to such ground may change they for some other in another quarter of the country, according to the quantity that every one may be able to apply himself unto, for the vine be thus join together will not cost more to keep then one plat. neither shall the wild beast eat any the more, and so one may help another and learn one of another like good neighbour. conclusion: i have many more useful thing to plat. neither shall the wild beast eat any the more, and so one may help another and learn one of another like good neighbour. conclusion: i have many more useful thing to impart which, for want of leisure, i must leave unpublish till some other time, wherefore i will now only hearty recommend these my approve experiment, which i have send you to the care and diligent practice of you: the colony of virginia and the summer land. if you cheerful apply yourselves to these instruction, i shall be encourage to do more and better service for you hereafter, and you, for your pain, i dare assure it, shall be rich recompense with ample profit, especial and above all other, if you constant pursue those two most invaluable. for you hereafter, and you for your pain, i dare assure it, shall be rich recompense with ample profit, especial and above all other, if you constant pursue those two most invaluable commodity of silk and wine, which you may, with ease and little cost, bring speedy to perfection for nature, which do nought in vain have every where for this purpose, most luxurious store, virginia, ready to your hand with excellent mulberry tree and vine of diverse sort, which none, though never so malicious or can or dare deny since then that nature herself, as proud of this, her sumptuous work, beckon you to she and point you round about with her bounteous hand to behold here, in every place, her brave mulberry and her merry vine. proud of this, her sumptuous work. beckon you to she and point you round about with her bounteous hand to behold here in every place her brave mulberry and her merry vine. listen no more to i, then, but harken to she now. what she say and true counsel you, most part from herself and some part of what she have hear from other, and thus she speak unto you, friend, of my best belove nation. view i well and tell i, if you be not, come into another land of promise, into another paradise, to pass by my most fertile grain so much of all commend, the nourish maiz and many other thing. behold now only my two great treasure, my rich plant, my mulberry and my pass by my most fertile grain. so much of all commend the nourish maiz and many other thing. behold now only my two great treasure, my rich plant, my mulberry and my vine, which i have purposely provide ready for you, and that abundant, without your care, without your cost or charge, believe i. i make all my least and common work for some good purpose. ever, much more these than that be so precious regard they. well, i hear you all confess now they be rich and beautiful. how hap it then that i and they be slight so much by you. and that which worst be all for a smoky witch. i have hear some say that die be make of conjurer bone and card of. they be slight, so much by you, and that which worst, be all for a smoky witch. i have hear some say that die be make of conjurer bone and card of witch skin, whereby those that handle they though they lose still and be undo by they, yet they can never leave they sure there be some such sorcery in this weed. it be first sow, it seem, by some indian enchanter hand with spell and magic verse or otherwise. you can never so much dote on it, for all the fruit of this, it be but smoke which vanish and likely will not always last. but these, my two other bounty i have give you for silk and wine, be they never so plentiful yet shall. be but smoke which vanish and likely will not always last. but these, my two other bounty i have give you for silk and wine, be they never so plentiful yet shall they be always durable and general staple to your excessive gain. do not then still ixion-like embrace. a cloud for juno and smoke for substance. let but the fruitful soil and happy clime here, the chief nurse of these and all other plant, persuade you. for i all, author of agriculture, will tell you that neither arable pasture, meadow nor any other ground be so proper to plant the vine in, as those clear ground be wherein not shrub but tall tree grow. and what country in the world so full as this of tall and? so proper to plant the vine in as those clear ground be wherein not shrub but tall tree grow. and what country in the world so full as this of tall and goodly timber tree so as when you clear your ground you easy may remove your vine into they, and the remove give they also a perfection. likewise, may you leave your mulberry still grow even where you plant your vine. for such love and affinity there be between these two as good thing always go together, that the soil and clime, which fit the one, fit the other, and what the one love or hate, the other do the like be not this know to all. yet the abundance of they, both so natural, grow here. one fit the other, and what the one love or hate, the other do the like. be not this know to all. yet the abundance of they, both so natural, grow here together, will, without other experience sufficient, confirm it again. be not this country and climate here most proper, which i have choose for they? you shall not have, see they be sure of it, so free and willing, flourish every where, as they do. for this purpose, compare virginia now with other country that be seat in the same degree of latitude, that she be, mark their commodity, and you shall see that she be as well a kin to they, in they, as in the same degree your great mathematician hariot, who live sometime in be mark their commodity and you shall see that she be as well a kin to they in they as, in the same degree, your great mathematician hariot, who live sometime in virginia, virginia in the same degree of latitude that persia be, and who, with many praise just due unto she, write of she and her commodity, say in that his book, that she be seat in the same latitude that persia be, and they that have travel persia and write of it will tell you @ @ paulus venetus, 1. book 19, chap, how it abound with all good grain and fruit and how it exceed in silk and wine as this her cousin-german, in the same degree virginia, do the like with mulberry vine, maize. it abound with all good grain and fruit and how it exceed in silk and wine as this. her cousin-german, in the same degree, virginia, do the like with mulberry vine, maize and other grain. another, a eye witness also, of persia, say that @ @ romanus, 3. book 19, chap chorazain, a province of that country, be so fruitful of all thing that a dearth be never know there and that you may see in one only city. call such store of silk, as in one day you may buy as much as will load 3000. camel. and who know not that the abundance of silk raise from the propriety of that soil and climate be the unspeakable, rich, staple commodity of that great empire, these silk. 3000.. camel, and who know not that the abundance of silk raise from the propriety of that soil and climate? be the unspeakable, rich staple commodity of that great empire. these silk be the sinew of the persian state, by which treasure the sophy be enable, still, as he do, to wage war with the turk to the great good of all christendom. i need not tell you, by the way, how hopeful a trade this be to the english east india company, if it be not, as pity it be, sinister hinder, for by this mean great store of clothes may be. vent there, multitude of poor set on work, see master mu^nes and master m^sseldens book of this- and england enrich and make in time the mean great store of clothes may be, vent there, multitude of poor set on work- see master mu^nes and master m^sseldens book of this- and england enrich and make in time the magazine for silk. and by this fetch of silk still from the fountain head in persia, the turk shall be deprive of this great tribute, weaken in his treasure and impoverish, and the persian by this trade be the more enrich and strengthen against the turk to the common good of christendom. and i hope all good man will wish this trade to prosper and proceed, still with the persian, far rather then with the turk. so much the more for that all. author and traveller report. * * paulus venetus mercator, the persian to be. and proceed still with the persian far, rather then with the turk. so much the more for that all. author and traveller report * * paulus venetus mercator, the persian, to be courteous, gentle, liberal, kind to christian and a lover of learning and of art, especial astrology, physic and poetry, so as, when there shall be a ambassador once settle with the sophy there can be, expect nothing but all good usage with a great gain. the turk, contrariwise, be rude, barbarous, cruel, covetous, perfidious, a christian and a learning-hater. the love of persia, so like virginia in many thing, have make i stay long in she then, otherwise i will, but now i will take my leave of she and her rich store of silk and like virginia in many thing have make i stay long in she then, otherwise i will. but now i will take my leave of she and her rich store of silk and lead you thence to a great and a more opulent empire yet, to china @ @ virginia, in the same degree of latitude that china be, which also be seat in the same degree of latitude that our virginia be. and here you may see how likewise they two be a kin in sundry natural commodity which by recite and compare of they you shall easy perceive china be store with wood of mulberry to feed silk worm with, and such abundance of silk they make. @ @ joh bar^ius, decad asian that at the city. shall easy perceive, china be store with wood of mulberry to feed silk worm with, and such abundance of silk they make @ @ joh bar^ius, decad asian, that at the city of nimpo, which other call liampo, the portugal have observe 16^000 pound weight of silk carry out in ship in three month space into cambula, the chief city of tartary. there come every day from china about a thousand wagon lade with silk. as @ @ paul venetus, geograph, author of no small credit, and one that be there, report, china also be full of navigable river and be fertile of all grain, maiz, rice and other, of which it have three or four harvest in a year. it be store with fish and fowl. it. of navigable river and be fertile of all grain, maiz, rice and other, of which it have three or four harvest in a year. it be store with fish and fowl. it have mine of silver, brass, iron and other metal, quicksilver, niter, allom and precious stone, pearl, musk, cotton, rhubarb, china root store of flax and rich fur. @ @ gonsales, mendosa. history of china 1. book 3. chap, they lose not a span of ground, but all place. be employ to their proper use. the dry they sow with wheat and barley, the moist with rice and sugar cane. hill and mountain abound with pinetree and chessenut, between which they plant maiz and sow panic and all kind of pulse. in other, proper place, be mulberry. with rice and sugar cane. hill and mountain abound with pinetree and chessenut, between which they plant maiz and sow panic and all kind of pulse. in other proper place be mulberry grove, fair garden, orchard and flax ground. no waste land, but all put to some good use or other. it be not my purpose to speak of the sharp wit or of the excellent art and industry of the chinese, wherein they equal, if not exceed, all nation of the world. again, that be beside our matter now. but as there be a consanguinity betwixt china and virginia in the same degree of latitude, so i will only compare and show the like, affinity and agreement betwixt the native commodity of the one and the other. betwixt, china and virginia in the same degree of latitude. so i will only compare and show the like, affinity and agreement. betwixt, the native commodity of the one and the other climate. china have store of maiz for food and mulberry tree for silk. and what maiz and mulberry virginia have be so well know to all. as of that i need say no more. china yield store of fish and fowl. virginia have the like. and for fish, no where more plenty nor so large as there, witness your many sail that yearly come out of england hither for this purpose. so as at this time, it make a great trade and will yearly more and more increase, still especial after your saltwork that be now. out of england hither for this purpose, so as at this time it make a great trade and will yearly more and more increase, still especial after your saltwork that be now set up be finish. and for the flax of china, you have natural grow in virginia: silke-grasse flax and hemp of diverse sort and of approve goodness, and which culture will yet much more perfect. you have likewise, as china know, mine of iron and of copper and of other rich mine also. you have more than hope. china have pearl and some of the indian wear it in virginia as it have musk, so have virginia the beast call by some muscassus, which have good musk and by all likelihood be of the same kind. the indian wear it in virginia as it have musk, so have virginia, the beast call by some muscassus which have good musk and by all likelihood be of the same kind. the rich fur report of china be exceed by virginia in store of bear, otter, martin and black fox skin, beside many other of which the french and dutch have make, hard by you here, a great trade these many year. as for the other natural commodity mention that china have and be not yet here, know to the now colony as rhubarb china root @ @ in his description of virginia, say that it have allom, niter, pitch tar, turpentine, iron, copper, silk, flax, hemp, tobacco and precious stone, niter, allom, quicksilver, etc. you may. root @. @ in his description of virginia, say that it have allom, niter, pitch, tar, turpentine, iron, copper, silk, flax, hemp, tobacco and precious stone, niter, allom, quicksilver, etc. you may probable, at least presume, consider that virginia consort with china in so many know thing as in the same height, the like happy temper, clime, the like fruitful soil, the like many navigable river, the many like native know commodity already name. you may probable presume, i say that time and your industry, in diligent search, which for these reason you ought the rather to quicken, will discover also hereafter many of these, if not all, unto you. and as for the other commodity that virginia have not at all as yet, as rice and sugar, to quicken, will discover also hereafter many of these, if not all, unto you. and as for the other commodity that virginia have not at all as yet, as rice and sugar likewise, none may doubt see the soil and clime here be endue with no contrariety, extremity or distemperature to hinder the growth of they, but have all convenience alike, fit for these purpose. there be no doubt, then, i say, but that when they be once transport hither from other place and plant here, but that it must needs prove capable of they be so natural, fit already for they neither. yet be it to be think that any cultivate country in the world, though never so fruitful, have all thing at first there natural grow. so natural fit already for they neither yet. be it to be think that any cultivate country in the world, though never so fruitful, have all thing at first there, natural grow in it, as now it have, but that many of they be bring afterward thither from other place. and so in like sort, the spaniard have transport out of europe and the east-indies diverse plant of fruit, drug and die and many rich commodity which they have prosperous plant in the west indies, to their great gain, as may easy be show. and you, if you consider your store of your plain, moist, fat and fruitful ground and your goodly river by they for help of water, you can doubt but that you be most fit. if you consider your store of your plain, moist, fat and fruitful ground and your goodly river by they for help of water, you can doubt but that you be most fit provide for the entertain and bring up of rice and sugar cane. you have already make successful trial of other ground which prove most proper for cotten, wool plant and indigo, for the order of which, and of many other more profitable commodity, you shall short, as i hear, have direction print and send unto you now for the three or four harvest which china have yearly, so as dearth be never hear of there it be know likewise and write of @. @ in his ()tion of virginia, virginia, that at roanoak they reap three. china have yearly, so as dearth be never hear of there. it be know likewise, and write of @ @ in his ()tion of virginia, virginia, that at roanoak they reap three harvest in five month space. they sow in may and in june and in july and reap again in july, august and september. and as for that part of virginia which be now plant, there be @ @ mr perce, the cape merchant, under his hand-writing, one of the most ancient and expert planter now in england, that credible aver that they may and do begin to sow of our country grain in september, and so after continue still their seed season for wheat. very well, until the middle of february follow, and about the end. do begin to sow of our country grain in september, and so after continue still their seed season for wheat. very well, until the middle of february follow, and about the end of june they begin to reap the first harvest of wheat and barley, which be very good, and in the other month after that, which be late swoon, whereupon be to be infer that virginia have store of plough and good husbandman need not only never fear dearth and scarcity, but may by the many seeding and many harvest be make a country as plentiful of all grain as china or any other whatsoever in the world. beside some know commodity you have which china want to omit, other, that which be call terra-lemnia former a. plentiful of all grain as china or any other whatsoever in the world beside some know commodity you have, which china want to omit, other, that which be call terra-lemnia, former a peculiar treasure of the great turk only @ @ mendosa history of china. and wine of grape, whereof they have none for all. they be make either of the palm three call or of the palm that bear date which be exceed good and make with diverse mixture after diverse fashion. this perhaps make they less care either to plant or to dress the vine, but to bid china farewell now and the multiplicity of her commodity and her affinity with virginia. i will return again to speak particular of our mulberry and silk and for vine, but to bid china farewell now, and the multiplicity of her commodity and her affinity with virginia, i will return again to speak particular of our mulberry and silk, and for this purpose i will now carry you into france and italy only to view the rich and mighty profit that they make of they, notwithstanding their mulberry tree, which be esteem always to countervail the half of all. the whole charge of this business be not produce by the earth of her own accord with my help only, as here, but by labour and industry and expense @ @ 16.. augustino gallo, a excellent author of agriculture, say that but a few year since, find the sweet by keep silkworm in the territory of bresci^. they. industry and expense. @ @ 16. augustino gallo, a excellent author of agriculture, say that but a few year since find the sweet by keep silkworm. in the territory of bresci^ they do yearly sow million of mulberry tree which after four year growth, the best and fair of they be remove to be plant by high way side or other place where they think fit, and that both noble and ignoble do take such a pleasure in keep great store of silkworm. so as gain quicken their industry, they do more and more among all sort yearly augment this business. @ @ ol serres, agricultur, book 5., cap 15. it be not above twenty year since these silkworm be general set up in france, henry the great. sort yearly augment this business. @ @ ol serres, agricultur, book 5., cap 15. it be not above twenty year since these silkworm be general set up in france. henry the great, with great wisdom, appoint commissioner for that purpose. @ @ tellier, memoir and instruction, etc. pag 3. tellier in his book of the silke-arte, say that the invention and first knowledge of silk come from the east indies into europe above a thousand year since and be bring into italy not above two or three hundred year ago, for before that time this fabric and work be more rare and strange there than it be about twenty year since in france, afore which time, though not many year since, the people of provence, languedock and dauphine. and work be more rare and strange there than it be about twenty year since in france. afore which time, though, not many year since, the people of provence, languedock and dauphine, the neighbour province to italy, apply themselves to this silkworm, find the progress so easy and profitable, insomuch as the sole revenue of silk bring more money, say he at this present, to those province than all their corn, oil and woad together, which, notwithstanding, be there in very great abundance. @ @ ol serres agricultur, book 5., cap 15.. another say that france must save and gain by the progress of this silk fabric, above four million a year, italy then incomparable more, and yet france, for the get of this great gain, make of. must save and gain by the progress of this silk fabric above four million a year. italy then, incomparable more. and yet france, for the get of this great gain, make of the silkworm breed of one ounce of seed in the most place, but five or six pound of silk every pound worth two and three french crown and somewhat more. yet in the better part of france, as in languedock and provence, they make seven or eight pound of of a ounce of sike-seede. @ @ agostino gallo 6. of his agriculture. but in italy, namely in brescia, they make of one ounce of spanish silke-seede, eight, nine and ten pound of silk, and the silkworm spin of this ounce of silke-seede, cate, but about two. italy, namely in brescia, they make of one ounce of spanish silke-seede, eight, nine and ten pound of silk and the silkworm spin of this ounce of silke-seede cate, but about two hundred and fifty pound weight after the @ @ the brescia pound weight be twelve ounce weight of genoa and eight ounce weight of the great ounce of venice, pound weight of brescia of mulberry leave, to make the say quantity of silk, and of a ounce of calabrian silke-seed they make there in brescia eleven and twelve pound weight of silk and the worm of that seed, as be of a big breed, eat about three hundred brescia weight of mulberry leave, and no doubt, but in other place of italy which be yet more. worm of that seed as be of a big breed, eat about three hundred brescia weight of mulberry leave. and no doubt, but in other place of italy which be yet more proper for this business, they make of the like proportion of seed a great quantity of silk than this. such difference there be betwixt climate and climate in the natural propriety of it, to the great increase and better of this work. consider therefore the great charge and labour that italy and france be at in plant of mulberry tree and for that purpose, sow mulberry seed and expect six or seven year after, for so long it be ere they grow to perfection afore they can make good profit of they. and consider beside that, sow mulberry seed and expect six or seven year after, for so long it be ere they grow to perfection, afore they can make good profit of they. and consider beside that their climate be nothing so proper for this silke-commodity as virginia be, and yet for all that, they make their great gain of it. it can be doubt, then, but virginia have infinite store of the best sort of mulberry tree ready, grow up to your hand without your charge or labour, and have the climate as be experiment, more natural, proper for this work and the food for the silkworm better, whereby they become more strong to pass their natural and other casual sickness with less danger, and so be general, more healthful and also. work and the food for the silkworm better, whereby they become more strong to pass their natural and other casual sickness with less danger and so be general, more healthful, and also be big body and make large silke-bottome and finish their work in a short time than other do. otherwhere have all these preeminence? it can be doubt, i say, by any reasonable man, but that virginia be every way better fit to yield incomparable, asleep, far rich profit by the silkeworke to you than france or italy can do to they. and if in france their profit be thus rate by they, which account always, that the four part of the price of the silk defray all the charge, there remain three part of clear gain. france, their profit be thus rate by they which account always, that the four part of the price of the silk defray all the charge. there remain three part of clear gain to the owner, and in italy a six part will discharge all expense, make five part of clear gain where they reckon nevertheless that the price of the mulberry leaf, as i will show by and by, countervail the full half of the whole charge of the silkeworke. you may then certain assure yourselves that in virginia, where you have what store of mulberry leave you will for nothing, with all the other advantage afore mention that the ten or twelve part of your silk you make there must needs clear all your charge and make. leave you will for nothing, with all the other advantage. afore mention that the ten or twelve part of your silk you make there must needs clear all your charge and make nine, ten or eleven part clear gain to yourselves. your chief charge will be for the gather of the leaf to feed the worm. a man and a boy will feed the worm come of six ounce of seed till they be pass their four sickness and within a fortnight of spin, but for the last fortnight, because the worm must be then careful and often feed, that be the chief time wherein they conceive and store up the matter. for the silk which they after vomit out and spin, than you must add three or and often feed, that be the chief time wherein they conceive and store up the matter. for the silk which they after vomit out and spin, than you must add three or four helper to the other two aforesaid for the feed and shift of the worm and other employment. woman, child and impotent person may be use, and as one skilful governor of the silkworm may employ hundred under he, so he may, in six week space, easy teach they the chief point of this art, if they be capable and will addict themselves to the learning of it. @ @ ol serres ibid, the governor of the silkworm in france, have two, three and four crown a month beside his diet and his charge continue from. the learning of it. @ @ ol serres, ibid, the governor of the silkworm in france, have two, three and four crown a month beside his diet, and his charge continue from the first hatch of the worm to the finish and wind of the silk. @ @ tellier in his book of the silke-art. moreover, you must not think it to be absolute necessary to be so superstitious in curious. follow all the book, rule and write precept so as if any of they be omit or every thing be not precise. follow in the hatch lodging, feed and tend of the silkworm, that then all the business be spoil and overthrow for it may, notwithstanding, profit and succeed to the contentment of those that keep they. hatch, lodging, feed and tend of the silkworm, that then all the business be spoil and overthrow, for it may, notwithstanding, profit and succeed to the contentment of those that keep they only. let every man do what he can, commodious to his power and ability, and assure himself, though he keep not all strict rule in every thing, that yet he may make a great gain. notwithstanding, still the great the more curious he be in observe and practise all the approve, experiment, rule and precept hereunto belong. these rule be chief to show the perfection of this art and that also a man may learn thereby that if the silkworm miscarry or prosper not so well one year, what may be the cause of it? and perfection of this art and that also a man may learn thereby that if the silkworm miscarry or prosper not so well one year, what may be the cause of it and where the fault lie and how next year that may be remedy which be amiss afore, without despair, or be discourage beside. you must know that all general rule ever admit some exception and vary according to some particular circumstance. and therefore to make the rule the sure for you, the nature of the climate must be observe how and in what one climate differ from another, as also the season of one year alter from another in cold, heat, drought or moisture, the manner of the lodging, the quality of the wind to be let. differ from another, as also the season of one year alter from another in cold, heat, drought or moisture, the manner of the lodging, the quality of the wind to be let in and keep out upon occasion fit, and so, according to all the different quality to govern this work, different with discretion. as if it be a cold season, to use more artificial heat for the cherish the worm. if it be a very hot season, to let in the cool air and the wind as much as may be to refresh they, especial when they spin their silk for fear of stifle they with too much heat. if it be a moist time, the worst season of all other ever for the silkworm to use. when they spin their silk, for fear of stifle, they with too much heat. if it be a moist time, the worst season of all other ever for the silkworm to use dry heat and perfume. so much the more to qualify the moist and the ill season and to be careful that the mulberry leaf be well dry and keep the long after it be gather afore it be give. but if the season be dry, then consider that the leaf, after it have lie and cool a while, may be give the fresh and the mulberry tree root may be water in these drought to refresh the leaf, as they do sometime in spain, especial if it be in a dry and hot ground, which otherwise the mulberry tree root may be water in these drought to refresh the leaf, as they do sometime in spain, especial if it be in a dry and hot ground, which otherwise, without these caution, be not so good. then must you consider also, if the mulberry three grow in a shady place or in a sour, foul or wet soil, what inconvenience that food may bring unto the worm and thereafter either to avoid it whole, if it be possible, or else to qualify it as well as may be. nevertheless, note that in a hot and dry year a man may be more bold to feed with those leaf that grow in a shady or moist ground. by reason, the temper of the season have the hot and dry year, a man may be more bold to feed with those leaf that grow in a shady or moist ground by reason, the temper of the season have, the better correct the ill quality of they. thus regard with reason always, what kind of ground the leaf grow in and in what qualify season you gather it in, and consider the kind and nature of the tree and the nature and kind of the silke-seed you use, and, according to all particular circumstance, well, ponder so to make your exception and to order every thing with judgement and discretion. thereafter, time and observation will teach you many experiment, out of which perhaps some more rule of art may be make as best fit in some. every thing with judgement and discretion. thereafter, time and observation will teach you many experiment, out of which perhaps some more rule of art may be make, as best fit, in some particularity, the country and climate of virginia, which find, after good trial make. you shall do well to set they down in writing that in time they may be publish also for the better direct and profit of other, and because in persia, where such infinite store of silk be make, it be not likely that they tie themselves to all the strict rule and nicety which for the most part be necessary to be observe in many country, but do what be fit otherwise for that climate most proper for this work with which virginia and nicety which, for the most part, be necessary to be observe in many country, but do what be fit otherwise for that climate, most proper for this work, with which virginia so near agree and natural consort as be aforesaid for this especial purpose therefore, mean be make, i hear, to certify you from the english factory in persia of the art and order that they use in all particular for the silkeworke there, which may guide you happy to a more compendious and ready way for the better speed of this rich business. and yet, where all these rule be curious follow, they make not only spain and italy but in the worse part of france and otherwhere, a far great gain. so much for so. yet where all these rule be curious follow, they make not only spain and italy but in the worse part of france and otherwhere, a far great gain. so much for so much, by feed the silkworm then by any other commodity whatsoever, insomuch as some gentleman in italy, which keep no silkworm themselves and which be therefore of the worst sort of husband, yet by let out their mulberry tree to other for the leaf only, make a great part of their revenue. some 500 li, some 1000 li a year, some more, some less, according to the number, greatness and goodness of their mulberry tree. @ @ ol serres ibid. so likewise in auignon, dauphine, lauguedoc, provence and other part of france, some let out their according to the number, greatness and goodness of their mulberry tree. @ @ ol serres, ibid. so likewise in auignon, dauphine, lauguedoc, provence and other part of france, some let out their mulberry tree to other from two shilling to twelve shilling apiece, and upward, according as they be. @ @ augustino gallo, ibid. but some other gentleman in italy let out their mulberry tree after another manner, namely they be at the charge only to give the leaf of their mulberry tree to some poor folk for which they be to find at their cost the silke-seed and be to feed and tend the worm till they have make their silk, which do they divide the silk bottom by half between they. thus you see what a the silke-seed and be to feed and tend the worm till they have make their silk, which do they divide the silk bottom by half between they. thus you see what a rich revenue i have provide for you in mulberry tree alone, which be half the charge and yet cost you nothing. and i hope i need not tell you how it be a matter no less profitable than easy for the better advance this commodity to build for this purpose, far from your house if need be, in the most convenient place of the best mulberry wood, some slight silkworm lodging, soon set up and with stove in they, after that excellent manner of sicily former describe, which by this art may correct the ill site. best mulberry wood, some slight silkworm lodging, soon set up and with stove in, they after that excellent manner of sicily former describe, which by this art may correct the ill site and temper and qualify the air well in the cold, moist and shady wood, lest otherwise that may be a hindrance to this work. and here also, in these lodging you may make good shift, especial for so great a gain, with necessary provision to lodge yourselves from the beginning to the end of your silke-haruest time, about some six week only, where you shall need but one, three part of your company, the first four week and two, three part more the last fortnight, only for the often then and plentiful feed of the worm. shall need but one, three part of your company, the first four week, and two, three part more the last fortnight, only for the often then and plentiful feed of the worm to invite you to this enterprise. you have abundance of choice material to erect these silke-lodging with, which will cost you nothing but a little labour to cut out some post and to fit they and set they up, or to see out small quarter and rafter and plank and board to fence the side in stead of wall and to cover the roof in stead of tile. all which must be so close, lay in all place, one within another, that no rain, wind nor weather get in at any rift or crevice to hurt. in stead of tile, all which must be so close, lay in all place, one within another, that no rain, wind nor weather get in at any rift or crevice to hurt the worm, which the better to prevent the chink, if any be, may be, all stop every where about with some loam or clay, and thus, for their better profit, may many family, especial of the poor sort, join hand together for the speedy set up of these silke-lodging and for the gather and sort of the mulberry leave and for the help and teach one another to feed and order the worm and so work and live together all the silke-haruest time and at the end of it to divide all the silk bottom make. teach one another to feed and order the worm, and so work and live together all the silke-haruest time, and at the end of it, to divide all the silk bottom make among they, by number, weight or measure after the number and proportion of every family and person, as to some one, some two, some three, some four share, and so more or less ratable, and according to their first agreement set down in writing here. also, in the mean time, for their better sustenance, may they commodious, keep near about they their poultry, swine and milch cattle for milk and butter, and spare their own pasture near home the while. thus you see what rich benefit i afford you for your small labour only, and if and milch cattle for milk and butter and spare their own pasture near home. the while. thus you see what rich benefit i afford you for your small labour only, and if i shall give you all thing perfect without your pain at all, i shall breed but my own contempt and nurse your sloth for these, my great commodity and all other, then i ask some little attendance of you, just due unto i to bring they to perfection. give i but two handmaid only, art and industry to wait upon. i and i will most honourable and rich then endow, both they and you. and for this purpose now, not to speak of husbandry at large, i will chief commend the skill of garden to you. most honourable and rich then endow both they and you. and for this purpose now, not to speak of husbandry at large, i will chief commend the skill of garden to you all and every one, let none be ignorant, to sow, to set, to plant, to graft, to manure, to dress and order all plant according to their kind and that in proper ground and season fit they. this be part of that skill which emperor, king and senator of rome have both write of and practise. let no man then disdain it, but get and peruse their and such like book of this and other husbandry. i know not whether the profit of it or delight be great, wherefore all and every one in virginia man, and peruse their and such like book of this and other husbandry. i know not whether the profit of it or delight be great, wherefore all and every one in virginia, man and woman too, from the high to the low in some proportion, must know and practice it if they mind to thrive, prosper and have true delight. by garden alone, especial in these rich ground and temperate clime, may all have delicate variety and good sufficiency of sustenance. be there nothing else for summer and for winter, beside the cassavi for good bread. i may particularize the wholesome and great variety of many other nourish root and herb and of other garden and orchard fruit in these hot country especial most excellent for food and this. may particularize the wholesome and great variety of many other nourish root and herb and of other garden and orchard fruit in these hot country especial, most excellent for food. and this be the chief sustenance of the wise and sober ancient in the golden time. panis and holus @ @ julius scaliger, by a most learned and judicious writer, be derive from two greek word that signify all and the whole. for the ancient esteem say he that if they have but bread and garden fruit, they have all and the whole, and every whit that be necessary for their food. neither be this all, for as you may be feed, so may you be clothe, also by this skill alone, as by the expert plant of. that be necessary for their food. neither be this all, for as you may be feed, so may you be clothe, also by this skill alone, as by the expert plant of cotten, silk, grass, flax, hemp and some such other like. beside the art of plant, well, follow as it can, so will it bring you to the great wealth. above all thing whatsoever else. i need not tell you, beside of the mulberry plant for silk, the infinite treasure by plant vine, olive tree and sugar cane for wine, oil and sugar, nor of many other rich plant for physical drug, die, paint and many other use. and as for your wine and oil to be make here, beside many other profit, you shall therein be. many other rich plant for physical drug, die, paint and many other use. and as for your wine and oil to be make here, beside many other profit, you shall therein be advantage above the west-indies also, which have neither of these two commodity. the king of spain, in policy, forbid the plant of they there, notwithstanding the country. be very proper for they, for they two be the great staple commodity of spain, the canary and other his dominion, with which they abound, and know that trade of merchandise consist in bring in of ware from one country into another, maintain mutual traffic. therefore betwixt his west indies and his other dominion by the take of the commodity of one another, which can be do unless one. from one country into another, maintain mutual traffic, therefore betwixt his west indies and his other dominion by the take of the commodity of one another, which can be do unless one country have store of those commodity which the other want, for store of the same merchandise in all part, will but glut and hinder all. wherefore, to balance the commodity well of all his dominion for the good of all, the plant for wine and oil in the west indies, upon good reason, be inhibit, the like he do in brasilia who, though they have store of ginger there yet, may it not be carry from thence into spain, for fear of impoverish, they of s domingo who chief trade it be to get their live. have store of ginger there, yet may it not be carry from thence into spain, for fear of impoverish. they of s domingo, who chief trade it be to get their live by, and the like do great britain. for you here, which suffer no sheep to be carry thither, that cloth may not be make there, but so order it, for the good of both, that you here shall have from thence her native commodity and her manufacture only, and use no foreign merchandise but such as be for health or like necessity, for which you return the proper commodity of virginia thither. moreover, by the art of skilful plant graft, transplant and remove the bad wild plant, be wonderful, better, insomuch as one of the best. you return the proper commodity of virginia thither, moreover, by the art of skilful plant graft, transplant and remove the bad wild plant be wonderful, better insomuch, as one of the best author of husbandry say @ @ ol serres, book 6. cha 17.. that every replant or remoo of wild plant have regard to the fitness of the soil and season, be worth half a graft, so as two remoove then be worth a whole graft. one that have write a historiosme say well and witty @ @ plin, natural hist, lib 17. c 10, that this remove and transplant of wild plant do wonderful, mitigate and a ingentle they whether it be, say he, because that the nature of plant as of man be desirous of. that this remove and transplant of wild plant do wonderful, mitigate and a ingentle they, whether it be, say he, because that the nature of plant, as of man, be desirous of novelty and peregrination, or because that at their part from the former ground, they leave there that rank wildness, virulence and ill quality that be in they and as wild beast, so they become gentle by handle whilst the plant be pluck up by the root. since then, the transplant and remove wild plant do so much, domesticate and enable they. i need not tell you then how, by graft or remove only the mulberry tree and wild vine. may infinite be better. to show this, i will instance in one plant for all, in the tell you then how, by graft or remove only the mulberry tree and wild vine. may infinite be better. to show this, i will instance in one plant for all, in the print book of the valuation of the commodity of virginia, sarsaparillia wild be five pound the hundred and sarsaparillia domestic be ten pound the hundred. so as the spaniard have no other but the wild sarsaparillia at first, yet by replant and cultivate it that he make it domestic and so much thereby ennoble it in worth and goodness, as raise it to a double price, you see, and the like be to be do with other wild plant by the often remove or graft of they as he than that be ask what be the. double price, you see, and the like be to be do with other wild plant by the often remove or graft of they as he than that be ask what be the first and chief thing in oratory, say pronunciation and be demand what be the second thing in it and afterward what be the three, still answer pronunciation. so if i be ask what be the best art chief to advance the plantation and planter, i shall answer as oft or often, the garden art of plant, plant still. i can wish, therefore, that every freeholder, beside his proper profession, shall be enjoin to have a garden and practice sometime garden and plant and that, according to the custom and wise institution of the roman censor, those freeholder, beside his proper profession, shall be enjoin to have a garden and practice sometime, garden and plant and that, according to the custom and wise institution of the roman censor, those shall be severe punish that do not husband well their field and garden and well culture their vineyard, tree and plant. let every one then, in virginia and the summer land that mind to have plenty of healthful food and of good raiment and of great wealth. let he begin to addict and delight himself in this most profitable and please art of gradening and graft. now, whereas the labour of clear the wooded ground here in virginia be suppose by some to be a hindrance to your profit, it be nothing. so for the many and graft. now, whereas the labour of clear the wooded ground here in virginia be suppose by some to be a hindrance to your profit, it be nothing so, for the many great commodity that to good husband may arise by the wood still, clear off the ground will, with large interest, mean, while repay the cost and labour, especial, after that excellent and rare invention of saw-mill, a incredible advancement to the colony be once put in practice. what shall i speak of the store of timber so necessary for your building and other use, for clapbord, pipe-stave and other rich wood for noble service? or of the abundant store of wood never to be spend for your iron work and for your glass furnace now set? for clapbord, pipe-stave and other rich wood for noble service, or of the abundant store of wood never to be spend for your iron work and for your glass furnace, now set up for pot-ash and soap-ash, for boil of sugar and of pitch and tar and for all furnace work, the great devourer of fuel and destroyer of wood, beside of the great use and profit of prop your vine by whole tree or by stalk and for pole for the hop which grow here wild, but above all, what endless store of excellent timber have you for the most excellent use of build ship? and herein i can, i confess, conceal the pride i take in my virginia. for what country in the world again abound? have you for the most excellent use of build ship, and herein i can, i confess, conceal the pride i take in my virginia. for what country in the world again abound so plentiful as this with all thing whatsoever for make ship? no one thing be want for beside: timber of all sort for all use in this kind and store of mast, no, where tall and large you have, try, iron also of perfect goodness and silk grass, flax and hemp as well for sail and cordage, as for rich use and forest of tree for pitch and tar. so as nothing for this purpose be lack here, but only shipwright which now also, with great wisdom be late, send to build you boat and pinnace. tree for pitch and tar, so as nothing for this purpose be lack here, but only shipwright, which now also with great wisdom be late, send to build you boat and pinnace for trade and buss for the rich fish here that all the world afford, of cod and sturgeon, of great skull, of herring as big again as those in other place, and such plenty also of other excellent fish unknown to these part that by credible report @ @ m purchas in his pilgrimage, there have be 5000. take at a draught the least of two foot in length, whereof likewise there may be a great gain make by skilful salt pickle or dry of they. moreover, beside the increase of ship and of mariner and of two foot in length, whereof, likewise, there may be a great gain make by skilful salt, pickle or dry of they. moreover, beside the increase of ship and of mariner and the store of sustenance that this fish may yield unto the colony, for which purpose, therefore, no householder that be a good husband will be without his fisherboat and net for his own provision- there be yet other great advantage and profit also that it bring with it, namely the fish upon the coast of virginia. be much more timely then, in other place your merchant have make their prime market and be ready to return before other come that bring their fish from other place to this salt be make now in virginia. you shall your merchant have, make their prime market and be ready to return before other come that bring their fish from other place to this salt be make now in virginia you shall with small charge transport great multitude of people hither, for since there may well be many hundred sail employ in fish here, people will be bring most part for the salt that they lade here for their fish, which will cost you but little, and by this mean also may a double profit be raise unto the planter by bring their people hither every fish time and as occasion serve, take some of his man here with he to help he fish which do he send they back again unto the colony to follow his commodity. fish time and, as occasion serve, take some of his man here with he to help he fish, which do? he send they back again unto the colony to follow his commodity and other business here. but to go on now, though this be grant by some, that the store of wood in virginia well use, be no impediment but a matter of singular benefit to the plantation. yet other object, some other hindrance by the native savage. but as for the many advantage that arise, rather by the just war with they and vanquish of they, a matter so easy to be do i refer you to the last declaration of the state and colony of virginia, where the reason be well and full, handle. as for they a matter so easy to be? do i refer you to the last declaration of the state and colony of virginia, where the reason be well and full handle. as for myself, i utter disclaim: they they have do against all my law. they be most unnatural and so none of i, and therefore they that know no industry, no art, no culture, nor no good use of this bless country here, but be mere ignorance, sloth and brutishness and a unprofitable burden only of the earth. such as these i say, like the dai and sylli and such other people, be natural bear slave, as my chief arist ^ politic () secretary well define, and there be a natural kind of right in you that be. and sylli and such other people be natural bear slave, as my chief arist ^ politic () secretary well define, and there be a natural kind of right in you that be breed, noble, learned, wise and virtuous, to direct they aright, to govern and to command they but other. now there be perhaps that be discourage from this worthy enterprise by railer and scoffer at this noble work. man, next a kin indeed to these hateful, savage enemy herein to god their king and country, but regard not they the mocker, not regard be mock himself. go on then, and cheerful proceed, especial in those my two fore-praised great commodity which, if you do, as you know, not yet the twenty part of they that this rich. himself. go on, then, and cheerful proceed, especial in those my two fore-praised great commodity, which, if you do, as you know, not yet the twenty part of they that this rich country yield, so those then also, i will show hereafter to you among all which the most honourable and the chief, be that by the industry of some noble and heroic spirit, bear to immortalize their name and nation. a passage to the south sea will, beyond our fall and mountain, through the continent of virginia, assure be find. all the indian, from canada to florida, relate that there be, beyond the mountain, here to the west and northwestward, a great sea and man and ship in shape and fashion like to you that trade there. to florida relate, that there be beyond the mountain, here to the west and northwestward, a great sea and man and ship in shape and fashion like to you, that trade there. so as this can be no fiction nor no falsehood, these diverse nation be so far asunder all constant, agree in the same report. by this discovery and passage to the south sea, find be from our fall, by the native relation hereabout and by the judgement and computation of most learned mathematician, about a fortnight journey only, or thereabouts, part to be make by land and part by water, by some river lead to that sea. what a infinite rich trade may there be make from hence then, to the east indies, to china, to by land and part by water, by some river, lead to that sea. what a infinite rich trade may there be make from hence then, to the east indies, to china, to cathay and other place in the south sea for this passage, as it will be short, safe and easy. so will it not only save the life of many man now daily lose, and spare much ship of necessity waste by the great long voyage that now be take, but will also bring great wealth and treasure. treble the gain now get by your quick return that will be hereby make, moreover, also, what a great rich staple, what a mighty magazine of commodity for all christendom will be thereby erect in virginia and make the quick return that will be hereby make, moreover, also, what a great, rich staple, what a mighty magazine of commodity for all. christendom will be thereby erect in virginia and make the speedy people advance, strengthen and enrich of it. to the great and endless honour of his sacred majesty, in who auspicious reign, and by who wisdom, favour and gracious furtherance, this famous work be bring to pass to the unspeakable benefit of his flourish kingdom and to the everlasting glory and immortal name of they, by who this happy discovery must be perfect. but for this purpose i refer you far to the treatise of the west and northwest passage to the south sea by virginia, write by that excellent mathematician master, henry briggs, and late. for this purpose i refer you far to the treatise of the west and northwest passage to the south sea by virginia, write by that excellent mathematician, master, henry briggs, and late publish, as also to his map thereof, with a more large discourse short to come forth in print last. remember now and practice what i have say, and in despite of malice you shall find all solid truth that i have speak to you. i take my leave now, and as i have bless you many way, so give i to all of you my hearty blessing. prosper and farewell. the treasurour council and company of virginia. to the governor and council of state in virginia reside, after our very hearty commendation, his sacred majesty out. my hearty blessing, prosper and farewell the treasurour council and company of virginia to the governor and council of state in virginia reside. after our very hearty commendation, his sacred majesty, out of his high wisdom and care of the noble plantation of virginia, have be gracious, please, to direct his letter to we here in england, thereby command we to advance the set up of silk work and plant of vineyard, as by the copy herewith send, you may perceive the intimation of his majesty, pleasure we conceive to be a motive sufficient to induce you to employ all your endeavour to the set forward those two staple commodity of silk and wine, which bring to their perfection will infinite redound to the honour, benefit and comfort. you to employ all your endeavour to the set forward those two staple commodity of silk and wine, which bring to their perfection will infinite redound to the honour, benefit and comfort of the colony and of this whole kingdom. yet we, in discharge of our duty, do again renew our often and iterate instruction and invite you, cheerful, to fall upon these two so rich and necessary commodity. and if you shall find any person, either through negligence or wilfulness, to omit the plant of vine and mulberry tree in orderly and husbandly manner, as by the book be prescribe, or the provide of convenient room for the breed of worm we desire, they may, by severe censure and punishment, be compel thereunto. and on the contrary, by the book be prescribe, or the provide of convenient room for the breed of worm we desire, they may by severe censure and punishment be compel thereunto, and, on the contrary, that all favour and possible assistance be give to such as yield, willing obedience to his highness command therein, the breach or performance whereof as we be bind to give a strict account, so will it also be require of you, the governor and council, especial. herein there can be no plea either of difficulty or impossibility, but all the contrary appear by the natural abundance of those two excellent plant afore-named every where in virginia. neither will such excuse be admit, nor any other pretence serve whereby the business be at all delay, and as natural abundance of those two excellent plant afore-named, every where in virginia. neither will such excuse be admit, nor any other pretence serve whereby the business be at all delay. and as we former send, at our great charge, the french vigneron to you to teach you their art, so for the same purpose we now commend this book unto you to serve as a instructor to every one and send you store of they to be disperse over the whole colony to every master of a family. one silk-seed you shall receive also by this ship, sufficient to store every man, so that there want nothing but industry in the planter, sudden to bring the make of silk to its perfection, which, either for their own benefit, ship sufficient to store every man, so that there want nothing but industry in the planter, sudden to bring the make of silk to its perfection, which, either for their own benefit, we hope they will willing endeavour, or by a wholesome and necessary severity they must be enforce. this particular advice we think necessary to give you, lest that, if it shall have come to you mingle with other, you will have interpret it as a common instruction or a business that be not. take so to heart as this be by we and we hope will be by you, in humble obedience to his sacred majesty, royal instruction, the pain and industry of the author for the benefit of the plantation, be a member of our. hope will be by you, in humble obedience to his sacred majesty royal instruction. the pain and industry of the author, for the benefit of the plantation, be a member of our company, be sufficient argument of his good affection to the action, and they both deserve your best acceptance. and we, that other may thereby be invite to impart their knowledge in business of this and the like nature whereby the colony may not only be support for the present but bring to that perfection that may redound to the glory of god the honour of his majesty and the inestimable benefit of his noble kingdom, which, as they be the true aim and end the adventurer and planter have propose unto themselves. so ought they to. of his majesty and the inestimable benefit of his noble kingdom, which, as they be the true aim and end the adventurer and planter have propose unto themselves, so ought they to be still the honourable seed to put other also forward in this action. we commend this business again to your special care, and so we commit you all and your weighty affair to the protection of the almighty henry southampton.