london lottery with a encouragement to the furtherance thereof. for the good of virginia and the benefit of this, our native country wish good fortune to all that venture in the same to the tune of lusty, gallant london, live thou famous. long thou bear a gallant mind. plenty peace and pleasure store in thou. we daily find the merchant of virginia. now have noble, take in hand the brave golden lottery that ere be in this land. a gallant house, well furnish forth with gold and silver plate, there stand, prepare with prize, now set forth in great state to london. worthy gentleman, go venture there your chance, good luck, stand now in readiness. your fortune to advance, it be to plant a kingdom, sure where savage. people dwell, god will favour christian still and like the purpose. well, take courage then, with willingness. let hand and heart agree. a brave enterprise than this, i think, can never be. our most royal king and queen, in princely forwardness have grant grace and favour. both as thousand can express sweet nature. i^m prince henry, he in love be not behind the noble of the land. likewise we all do forward w^ll. may this famous lottery have good success and speed when, as the state of england thus do, such good l^king breed. come gallant, come, come noble mind, come venture now for gold, for smile hope. here, bid you all take cu^rage and be bold. come knight and gallant gentleman, put in your venture all let. nothing daunt your willing mind, good fortune may befall. i think i see great number flock and bring in fast their coin and tradesman. how in love sort their movye. all do join here prize: be of great account, not simple, plain and poor, but unto thousand do surmount whereof there be some store and happy some man there be in gain of the s^me may spend their day like gentleman in credit and good name as late here in london. be some unto riches. bring where many mend their estate when they full little thought. yet here be great prize, far as easy to be. gain and value to more thousand pound. thou have the first contain you london merchant. send forth your fortune to the sea. here may you purchase golden worth and country love. this way it please god content the king in. venture thus your store to plant that land in government which never be before full. many a man that live full bare and know no joy of gold for one small crown may get a share of twice two thousand. tell then, what be he that lere to try his fortune in this kind, when lurk and chance may make a man and thus great riches find you maid that have but portion small to gain your marriage, friend cast in your lot with willing hand. god may good fortune send you widow and you wed wife, one little substance try you may advance, both you and you, with wealth. that ^^mes thereby the second part of london lottery to the tune of lusty gallant. you, farmer, and you country man, who god have bless with store to this good work, set help hand and god will send you more. what come in love will prosper well and be redouble back, and they that thus for country do can never live in lack. the king, the queen and noble prince, give courage to persuade the peer and baron of the land. have not their love. denay, court and city do the like. where, willing each man to build up fast viginias state, perform the best he can. the merchant of the eastern part here show both love and care and venture gold with joyful heart and thereof make no spare our gallant london company and hall of high renown into virginia lottery, send free many a crown for good intent. all this be do and no man wrong therein, then happy fortune be his dole the great prize can win, and happy fortune be their guide, that noble thus maintain the plant of this new-found land with care, with cost and pain. let no man think that he shall lose, though he no prize poscesse. his substance to virginia go, which god no doubt will bless, and in short time send from that land much ^^h commodity. so shall we think, all well bestow upon. this latterie here profit. do with pleasure. join and bid each cheerful heart to this high praise enterprise. perform a christian part. good countryman, be forward then and with your talent small adventure here for good luck sake and grant your love withal. we ought not live here for ourselves but for our country good, and country good it be. well know long have this purpose. stand for first, when queen elizabeth here live so much. renown this land now call virginia by englishman be find sir gilbert drake and other more. give we thereof first sight, but follow now by noble mind with careful course, aright desire, nothing for their pain, but country love and favour. then reason. call our liberal aid to this renown labour who. know not england once be like a wilderness and savage place till government and use of man that wildness do deface. and so virginia may in time be make like england now, where long-loud peace and plenty both sit. smile on her brow. our king, the lord full, long preserve the cause of all this pleasure, the queen, the prince and all his seed with day of long measure. and that virginia well may prove a land of rich increase and england government thereof, good god let never cease.