act 1.8. but you shall receive power after that. the holy ghost be come upon you and you shall be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. there be reckon in this book, two and twenty sermon of the apostle. and yet the book be not call the preach but the practice, not the word but the act of the apostle. and the act of the apostle be to convey that name of christ jesus and to propagate his gospel over all the world. belove you, be actor upon the same stage too. the uttermost part of the earth be your scene. act over the act of the apostle, be you a light to. the world. belove you, be actor upon the same stage too, the uttermost part of the earth. be your scene act over the act of the apostle. be you a light to the gentile that sit in darkness. be you content to carry he over these sea who dry up one red sea for his first people and have pour out another red sea, his own blood, for they and we. when man be fall, god clothe he, make he a leather garment. there, god descend to one occupation. when the time of man redemption be come, than god as it be to house, he become a carpenter son. there, god descend to another occupation. natural, without doubt, man will have be his own tailor and his own. come than god. as it be to house, he become a carpenter, son. there, god descend to another occupation, natural, without doubt, man will have be his own tailor and his own carpenter. something in these two kind man will have do of himself, though he have have no pattern from god. but in preserve man who be fall to this redemption by which he be to be raise. in preserve man from perish in the flood. god descend to a three occupation: to be his shipwright, to give he the model of a ship, a ark, and so to be the author of that which man himself, in likelihood, will never have think of a mean to pass from nation to nation. now, as god teach we ark, and so to be the author of that which man himself, in likelihood, will never have think of a mean to pass from nation to nation. now, as god teach we to make clothes, not only to clothe ourselves but to clothe he in his poor and naked member here. as god teach we to build house, not to house ourselves but to house he in erect church to his glory, so god teach we to make ship, not to transport ourselves but to transport he, that when we have receive power after that, the holy ghost be come upon we. we may be witness unto he, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. as i holy ghost be come upon we, we may be witness unto he, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. as i speak now, principal to they who be concern in this plantation of virginia. yet there may be diverse in this congregation who, though they have no interest in this plantation, yet they may have benefit and edification by that which they hear. i say. so, christ, speak the word of this text principal to the apostle who be present and question he at his ascension. but they be in their just extension and due accommodation appliable to our present occasion of meet here. as christ himself be alpha and omega, so first as that he be. ascension, but they be in their just extension and due accommodation, appliable to our present occasion of meet here. as christ himself be alpha and omega, so first as that he be last too, so these word which he speak in the east belong to we who be to glorify he in the west that we have receive power. after that the holy ghost be come upon, we may be witness unto he, both in jerusalem and in all judea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. the first word of the text be the cardinal word, the word the hinge upon which the whole text turn. the first word but be the but that all the rest shoot. at first it be a. text be the cardinal word, the word, the hinge upon which the whole text turn, the first word, but be the but that all the rest shoot. at first, it be a exclusive word, something the apostle have require, which may not be, have not that, and it be a inclusive word, something, christ, be please to afford to the apostle, which they think not of, not that, not that which you beat upon, but but yet something else, something better then that you shall have. that which this but exclude. be that which the apostle express in the verse immediate before the text: a temporal kingdom will thou restore again, the kingdom of israel. no, not a temporal kingdom. let not the riches and commodity of this express in the verse immediate before the text: a temporal kingdom. will thou restore again, the kingdom of israel? no, not a temporal kingdom. let not the riches and commodity of this world be in your contemplation, in your adventure. or because they ask more, will thou now restore that not yet. if i will give you riches and commoditle of this world yet, if i do it not at first, if i do it not yet, be not you discourage. you shall not have that. that be not god first intention. and though that be in god intention to give it you hereafter, you shall not have it yet. that be the exclusive part. but there enter the inclusive. you shall receive power. after that, the holy in god intention to give it you hereafter. you shall not have it yet. that be the exclusive part, but there enter the inclusive. you shall receive power. after that, the holy ghost be come upon you and you shall be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth, in which second part we shall pass by these step. the holy ghost shall come upon you, the spirit shall witness to your spirit and rectify your conscience, and then by that you shall receive power, a new power beside the power you have from the state, and that power shall enable you to be witness of christ, that be, to make his doctrine the more. receive power, a new power beside the power you have from the state, and that power shall enable you to be witness of christ, that be, to make his doctrine the more credible by your testimony when you conform yourselves to he and do as he do. and this witness you shall bear, this conformity you shall declare first in jerusalem, in this city, and in judaea, in all the part of the kingdom, and in samaria, even among they who be depart from the true worship of god, the papist, and to the uttermost part of the earth, to those poor soul to who you be continual. send summary: if, from the holy ghost, you have a good testimony in your own conscience, you shall be witness. of the earth, to those poor soul to who you be continual send. summary: if from the holy ghost you have a good testimony in your own conscience, you shall be witness for christ, that be as he do. you shall give satisfaction to all, to the city, to the country, to the calumniate adversary and the natural of the place, to who you shall present both spiritual and temporal benefit to. and so you have the model of the whole frame and of the partition. we proceed now to the furnish of the particular room, 1. part first, then this first word, but exclude a temporal kingdom, the apostle have fill themselves with a expectation, with a ambition of it. but that be not intend they it. 1. part. first, then this first word- but exclude a temporal kingdom. the apostle have fill themselves with a expectation, with a ambition of it, but that be not, intend they. it be no wonder that a woman can conceive such a expectation and such a ambition as to have she two son sit at christ right hand- mat 20.20- and at his left in his kingdom. when the apostle expect such a kingdom as may afford they honour and preferment upon earth, more than once they be in the disputation in which christ deprehend they- mat 1.81- which of they shall be the great in his kingdom. neither have the bishop of rome any thing wherein he may so proper call himself apost. licall as this error. mat 1.81, which of they shall be the great in his kingdom. neither have the bishop of rome any thing wherein he may so proper call himself apost. licall as this error of the apostle, this their infirmity, that hei evermore too conversant upon the contemplation of temporal kingdom. they do it all the way when christ be with they, and now, at his last step, when christ be not ascend but in part ascend, when one foot be upon the earth and the other in the cloud that take he up. they ask he now, will thou at this time restore the kingdom? so, woman, put their husband and man, their father and friend upon their torture at their last gasp, and make their death bed a. will thou, at this time, restore the kingdom. so, woman, put their husband and man, their father and friend upon their torture at their last gasp, and make their death bed a rack to make they stretch and increase jointure and portion and legacy and sign, schedule and codicil with their hand. when his hand that present, they be ready to close his eye, that shall sign they. and when they be upon the wing for heaven, man tie lead to their foot. and when they be lay hand fast upon abraham bosom, they must pull their hand out of his bosom again to obey importunity of man and sign their paper. so underminable be the love of this world which determine every minute. god as he be. their hand out of his bosom again to obey importunity of man and sign their paper. so underminable. be the love of this world which determine every minute. god, as he be three person, have three kingdom. there be the kingdom of power, and this we attribute to the father. it be power and providence. there be the kingdom of glory. this we attribute to the son and to his purchase for he be the king. that shall say mat 25.34: come you, bloss of my father, inherit the kingdom, prepare for you from the foundation of the world. and then, between these three, be gratiae, the kingdom of grace, and this weattribute to the holy ghost. he take. they who, the king of power, almighty god, have. of the world and then between these three, be gratiae the kingdom of grace, and this weattribute to the holy ghost. he take they who the king of power, almighty god, have rescue from the gentile and as the king of grace, he give they the knowledge of the mystery of the kingdom of god- mat 4.11- that be of future glory by sanctify they with his grace in his church. the two first kingdom be in this world, but yet neither of they be of this world, because both they refer to the kingdom of glory, the kingdom of the father, which be the providence of god, do but preserve we. the kingdom of the holy ghost, which be the grace of god, do but prepare we. glory, the kingdom of the father, which be the providence of god. do but preserve we. the kingdom of the holy ghost, which be the grace of god. do but prepare we to the kingdom of the son, which be the glory of god and that be in heaven. and therefore, though, to good man, this world be the way to that kingdom. yet this kingdom be not of this world, say chest himself, though the apostle themselves, john 18.36, as good a school as they be breed in, can never take out that lesson. yet that lesson, christ, give and repeat to all. you seek a temporal kingdom, but say the text, stop there. a kingdom you must not have, belove in he who kingdom and gospel. that lesson, christ, give and repeat to all. you seek a temporal kingdom, but say the text: stop there. a kingdom you must not have. belove in he who kingdom and gospel. you seek to advance in this plantation, our lord and saviour, christ jesus. if you seek to establish a temporal kingdom there, you be not rectify. if you seek to be king in either acceptation of the word, to be a king signify liberty and indepency and supremacy- to be under no man. and to be a king signify abundance and omnisufficiency to need no man. if those that govern there will establish such a government as shall not depend upon this, or if those that go thither propose to themselves a exemption from law to no man. if those that govern there will establish such a government as shall not depend upon this, or if those that go thither propose to themselves a exemption from law to live at their liberty, this be to be king, to divest allegiance, to be under no man. and if those that adventure thither propose to themselves present benefit and profit, a sudden way to be rich and a abundance of all desirable commodity from thence, this be to be sufficient of themselves and to need no man. and to be under no man and to need no man be the two acceptation of be king who liberty draw to go, or present profit draw to adventure be not yet in the right way. o if you. to need no man be the two acceptation of be king who liberty draw to go or present profit draw to adventure. be not yet in the right way. o if you can once bring a catechism to be as good ware among they, as a bugle, as a knife, as a hatchet. o if you will be as ready to hearken at the return of a ship- how many indian be convert to christ jesus- as what tree or drug or die that ship have bring than you. be in your right way and not till then liberty and abundance be character of kingdom and a kingdom be. exclude in the text. the apostle be not to look for it in their employment, nor you in this. till then liberty and abundance be character of kingdom and a kingdom be exclude in the text. the apostle be not to look for it in their employment, nor you in this, your plantation at lest. christ express himself thus far in this answer that if he will give they a kingdom, adhue he will not give it they. yet they ask he, will thou at this time restore the kingdom? and he answer it. be not for you to know the time whatsoever god will do. man must not appoint he his time. the apostle, think of a kingdom present after christ departure, the come of the holy ghost who lead they into all truth. soon deliver they of that error. other man in favour of the. think of a kingdom present after christ departure. the come of the holy ghost who lead they into all truth, soon deliver they of that error. other man in favour of the jew: interpret all the prophecy which be of a spiritual kingdom, the kingdom of the gospel, into which the jew shall be admit in a literal sense. have think that the jew shall have not only a temporal kingdom, in the same place in jerusalem again, but because they find that kingdom, which be promise, that be the kingdom of the gospel, to be express in large phrase and in a abundant manner, apply all that largeness to a temporal kingdom. they think that the jew shall have such a kingdom as shall swallow and annihilate. express in large phrase and in a abundant manner, apply all that largeness to a temporal kingdom. they think that the jew shall have such a kingdom as shall swallow and annihilate all other kingdom and be the sole empire and monarchy of the world. after this very great man in the church, upon these word of one thousand year after the resurrection, have imagine a temporal kingdom of the saint of god here upon earth, apo 20.. before they enter the joy of heaven, and saint augustine himself, civit 20.7, have at first some declination towards that opinion, though he dispute powerful against it. after that there shall be that, as the world be to last six thousand year in trouble, there shall be a seven thousand. towards that opinion, though he dispute powerful against it. after that there shall be that, as the world be to last, six thousand year in trouble, there shall be a seven thousand in such joy as this world can give and some other who have avoid both. the temporal kingdom, imagine by the apostle present after the ascension, and the imperial kingdom of the jew before the resurrection, and the carnal kingdom of the chiliast the millenarian after the resurrection. though they speak of no kingdom, but the true kingdom, the kingdom of glory. yet they err as much in assign a certain time when that kingdom shall begin, when the end of this world, when the resurrection, when the judgement shall be. say christ to his apostle. err as much in assign a certain time when that kingdom shall begin, when the end of this world, when the resurrection, when the judgement shall be. say christ to his apostle then, and lest it may be think that they may know these thing when the holy ghost come upon. they, christ deny that. he himself know that. as man and as man, christ know more than ever the apostle know whatsoever. therefore, christ intend to his apostle here. he will not give it present, he will not bind himself to a certain time. it belong not to we to know god time. belove, use godly mean and give god his leisure. you can beget a son and tell the mother i will have this son bear. belong not to we, to know god time. belove, use godly mean and give god his leisure. you can beget a son and tell the mother i will have this son bear within five month. nor, when he be bear, say you will have he past danger of wardship within five year. you can sow your corn to day and say it shall be above ground to morrow and in my barn next week. how soon the best husbandman sow the best seed in the best ground. god cast the promise of a messiah as the seed of all in paradise. in the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent head, and yet this plant be four thousand year after, before it appear, this messiah, four thousand. seed of all in paradise, in the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent head. and yet this plant be four thousand year after before it appear this messiah, four thousand year before he come. god, show the ground where that shall grow. two thousand year after the promise in abraham family: in, in thy seed, all nation shall be. bless god, hedge in this ground. almost one thousand year after that, in micheas time, bethlem, thou, bethlem shall be the place. and god, water that and weed that, refresh that dry expectation with a succession of prophet. and yet it be so long before this expectation of nation, this messiah come. so god promise the jew a kingdom in jacobs prophecy to juda, gen 49. that. succession of prophet, and yet it be so long before this expectation of nation, this messiah, come. so god promise the jew a kingdom in jacobs prophecy to juda, gen 49.. that the sceptre shall not depart from his tribe in two hundred year more. he say no more of it, deut 17.14. then he ordain some institution for their king when they shall have one, and then it be four hundred year after that before they have a king. god mean from the first hour to people the whole earth, and god can have make man of clay as fast as they make brick of clay in egypt, but he begin upon two and when they have be, multiply and replenish the earth. one thousand six hundred. man of clay as fast as they make brick of clay in egypt, but he begin upon two, and when they have be, multiply and replenish the earth. one thousand six hundred year, the flood wash all that away, and god be almost to begin again upon eight person. and they have serve to people, earth and heaven too. be not you discourage if the promise which you have make to yourselves or to other be not so soon discharge. though you see not your money, though you see not your man, though a flood, a flood of blood have break in upon they. be not discourage. great creature lie long in the womb. lion be litter perfect, but beare-whelpe, lick unto their shape. action which king undertake. flood of blood have break in upon they be not discourage. great creature. lie long in the womb. lion be litter perfect, but beare-whelpe, lick unto their shape. action which king undertake, be cast in a mould, they have their perfection. quick action of private man and private purse require more hammer and more file to their perfection only. let your principal end be the propagation of the glorious gospel. and though there be a exclusive in the text, god do not promise you a kingdom, ease and abundance in all thing, and that which he do intend to you, he do not promise present. yet there be a inclusive too. not that, but but something equivolent at least. but you shall receive power after that. the holy. do intend to you. he do not promise present yet there be a inclusive too. not that but, but something equivolent at least. but you shall receive power after that. the holy ghost be come upon you and you shall be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth, 2. part now our saviour christ. do not say to these man, since you be so importunate, you shall have no kingdom now nor never. it be not yet. but sed, he do not say you shall have no kingdom, nor any thing else. it be not that, but the importunity of beggar. sometime draw we to such a froward answer for this importunity, i will. say you shall have no kingdom nor any thing else. it be not that, but the importunity of beggar. sometime draw we to such a froward answer for this importunity, i will never give you any thing. our pattern be not so froward. he give they not that, but as good as that. samuel be send to super-induct a king upon saul 1. sam 16. to anoint a new king, he think his commission have be determine in eliab. sure this be the lord anoint. but the lord say not he, nor the next aminadab, nor the next shammah, nor none of the next seven. but but yet there be one in the field. keep sheep anoint he david. be he saint paul, pray earnest and frequent to. the next shammah, nor none of the next seven, but but yet there be one in the field. keep sheep, anoint he david, be he saint paul, pray earnest and frequent to be. discharge of that, say no, not that, but thou shall have grace to overcome the tentation, though the tentation remain. god say to you: no kingdom, not ease, not abundance, nay, nothing at all. yet the plantation shall not discharge the charge, not defray itself yet, but yet already, now, at first, it shall conduce to great use. it shall redeem many a wretch from the law of death, from the hand of the executioner upon who, perchance, a small fault, or perchance a first fault, or perchance a fault hearty and sincere, repent perchance. wretch from the law of death, from the hand of the executioner, upon who, perchance a small fault, or perchance a first fault, or perchance a fault hearty and sincere, repent. perchance, no fault, but malice have otherwise cast a present and ignominious death. it shall sweep your street and wash your door from idle person and the child of idle person and employ they- and true if the whole country be but such a bridewell to force idle person to work. it have a good use, but it be already not only a spleen to drain the ill humour of the body, but a liver to breed good blood. already the employment breed mariner, already the place give essay, nay, fraight of merchantable commodity. already it be. drain the ill humour of the body, but a liver to breed good blood. already the employment breed mariner. already the place give essay, nay, fraight of merchantable commodity. already it be a mark for the envy and for the ambition of our enemy i speak, but of our doctrinal, not nationall enemy, as they be papist, they be sorry. we have this country, and sure, twenty lecture in matter of controversy, do not so much vex they as one ship that go and strengthen that plantation. neither can i recommend it to you by any better rhetoric than their malice. they will glad have it, and therefore let we be glad to hold it thus than this text. proceed sanctus and gather upon you all that you. better rhetoric than their malice. they will glad have it, and therefore let we be glad to hold it thus than this text proceed sanctus and gather upon you all that you will have by this plantation. you shall not have. god bind not himself to measure. all that you shall have, you have not yet. god bind not himself to time, but something you shall have. nay, you have already some great thing, and of those that, in the text be, the holy ghost shall come upon you. we find the holy ghost to have come upon man four time in this book. first, upon the apostle act 2. 1. at pentecost, then, when the whole congregation be in prayer for the imprisonment of peter and john. come upon man four time in this book. first upon the apostle, act 2, 1. at pentecost then, when the whole congregation be in prayer for the imprisonment of peter and john, 4, 31. again, when peter preach in cornelius, his house, 10, 44. the holy ghost fall upon all they that hear he and four. when saint paul lay his hand upon they, 19, 6. who have be former baptize. at ephesus, at the three, latter time, it be evident that the holy ghost fall upon whole and promiscuous congregation and not upon the apostle only. and in the first, at pentecost, the contrary be not evident. nay, the father, for the most part, that handle that concur in that that the holy ghost fall then upon only, and in the first, at pentecost, the contrary be not evident. nay, the father, for the most part that handle that, concur in that that the holy ghost fall then upon the whole congregation, man and woman. the holy ghost fall upon peter before he preach, and it fall upon the hearer when he preach, and it have fall upon every one of they who have find motion in themselves to propagate the gospel of christ jesus. by this mean, the son of god, do not abhor the virgin womb when he will be make man when he be man. he do not disdain to ride upon a ass into jerusalem. the three person of the trinity, the holy ghost, be as humble as the second. he man. when he be man, he do not disdain to ride upon a ass into jerusalem. the three person of the trinity, the holy ghost, be as humble as the second. he refuse no conveyance, no door of entrance into you, whether the example and precedent of other good man, or a probable imagination of future profit, or a willingness to concur to the vexation of the enemy. what collateral respect soever draw thou in. if now thou be in thy principal respect, be the glory of god that occasion, whatsoever it be. be that be the petard that break open thy iron gate. that be the chariot by which he enter into thou. and now he be, fall upon thou if thou do not depose, lay aside. the petard that break open thy iron gate, that be the chariot by which he enter into thou, and now he be fall upon thou. if thou do not depose, lay aside all consideration of profit for ever, never to look for return, no, not sepose. leave out the consideration of profit for a time, for that and religion may well consist together, but if thou do but post-pose the consideration of temporal gain and study first the advancement of the gospel of christ jesus, the holy ghost be fall upon you, for by that you receive power, say the text. there be a power root in nature and a power root in grace. a power issue from the law of nation and a power grow out of. receive power, say the text. there be a power root in nature and a power root in grace. a power issue from the law of nation and a power grow out of the gospel. in the law of nature and nation, a land never inhabit by any or utter derelict and immemorial abandon by the former inhabitant, become they that will possess it. so also be it if the inhabitant do not in some measure fill the land so as the land may bring forth her increase for the use of man. for as a man do not become proprietary of the sea because he have two or three boat fish in it, so neither do a man become lord of a main continent because he have two. do not become proprietary of the sea because he have two or three boat fish in it. so neither do a man become lord of a main continent because he have two or three cottage in the skirt thereof. that rule which pass through all municipal law in particular state interest, the state must take order that every man improve that which he have for the best advantage of that state. pass also through the law of nation which be to all the world as the municipal law be to a particular state interest. the whole world, all mankind must take care that all place be improve as far as may be to the best advantage of mankind in general. again, if the land be people and cultivate. world. all mankind must take care that all place be improve as far as may be to the best advantage of mankind in general. again, if the land be people and cultivate by the people, and that land produce in abundance, such thing for want whereof their neighbour or other be not enemy perish. the law of nation may justify some force in seek by permutation of other commodity which they need to come to some of they. many case may be put when not only commerce and trade but plantation in land not former our own, may be lawful, and for that you have your commission, your patent, your charter, your seal from he upon who act. any private subject in civil matter may safe rely, but own may be lawful, and for that you have your commission, your patent, your charter, your seal. from he upon who act any private subject in civil matter may safe rely. but then you shall receive power. say the text you shall, when the holy ghost be come upon you, that be, when the instinct, the influence, the motion of the holy ghost enable your conscience to say that your principal end be not gain nor glory, but to gain soul to the glory of god. this seal, the great seal, this justify justice itself, this authorise authority and give power to strength itself. let the conscience be upright and then seal and patent and commission be wing. they assist he to fly the fast. let the conscience authorise authority and give power to strength itself. let the conscience be upright and then seal and patent and commission be wing. they assist he to fly the fast. let the conscience be lame and distort and he that go upon seal and patent and commission go upon weak and feeble crutch. when the holy ghost be come upon you, your conscience rectify, you shall have power, a new power out of that. what to do? that follow to be witness unto christ. infamy be one of the high punishment that the law inflict upon man, for it lie upon he even after death. infamy be the worst punishment, and intestabilitie to be make intestable be one of the deep wound of infamy and then the worst degree. for it lie upon he even after death. infamy be the worst punishment and intestabilitie to be make intestable be one of the deep wound of infamy. and then the worst degree of intestabilitie be not to be believe, not to be admit to be a witness of any other. he be intestable that can make a testament, not give his own good, and he intestable that can receive nothing by the testament of another. he be intestable in who behalf no testimony may be accept, but be be the most miserable intestable of all, the most detestable intestable that discredit another man by speak well of he and make he the more suspicious by his commendation: a christian in profession that be not a christian in life. most detestable intestable that discredit another man by speak well of he and make he the more suspicious by his commendation. a christian in profession that be not a christian in life. be so intestable. he discredit christ and harden other against he. john baptist, be more than a prophet because he be a witness of christ and he be a witness because he be like he. he do as he do, he lead a holy and a religious life. so he be a witness. that great and glorious name of martyr be but a witness. saint stephen be proto-martyr christ first witness because he be the first that do as he do, that put on his colour, that drink of his cup, that be baptize with his. saint stephen, be proto-martyr christ, first witness, because he be the first that do as he do, that put on his colour, that drink of his cup, that be baptize with his baptism, with his own blood. so he be a witness to be witness for christ. be to be like christ, to conform yourselves to christ and they in the text, and you be to be witness of christ in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria and unto the uttermost part of the earth. saint hierome, note that john baptist be not bid to bear witness in jerusalem, jerusalem in the city, but in the wilderness. he and none but he. there be but few man to witness to there, and those few that be. to bear witness in jerusalem, jerusalem in the city, but in the wilderness. he and none but he. there be but few man to witness to there, and those few that be come thither with a good disposition to be wrought upon there and there. there be few witness to oppose john testimony, few tentation, few worldly allurement, few worldly business. one be enough for the wilderness. but for jerusalem, for the city, where all the excuse in the gospel do always meet, they have buy commodity and they must utter they. they have duchase land and they must state they. they have marry wife and they must study they. to the city, to jerusalem, christ send all his apostle and all little enough, he have send a. and they must state they, they have marry wife and they must study they to the city, to jerusalem christ send all his apostle, and all little enough. he have send a great many apostle preacher to this city more than to any other that i know. religious person, as they call they, cloister friar, be not send to the city. by their first canon they shall not preach abroad. but for those who be to do that service, there be more in this city, then in other. for there be more parish church here then in other. now, belove, if in this city you have take away a great part of the revenue of the preacher to yourselves, take thus much of his labour upon yourselves too. in other. now belove. if in this city you have take away a great part of the revenue of the preacher to yourselves, take thus much of his labour upon yourselves too as to preach to one another by a holy and exemplar life and a religious conversation. let those of the city who have interest in the government of this plantation be witness of christ, who be truth itself to all other governor of company in all true and just proceed. that, as christ say to they who think themselves great, except you become as this little child. so we may say to the governor of the great company, except you proceed with the integrity, with the justice, with the clearness of your little sister, this plantation. this little child. so we may say to the governor of the great company: except you proceed with the integrity, with the justice, with the clearness of your little sister, this plantation you do not take, you do not follow a good example. this be to bear witness of christ in jerusalem, in the city, to be example of truth and justice and clearness to other in and of this city. the apostle be to do this in judaea. judaea too. their service lie in the country as well as in the city. bird that be keep in cage may learn some note which they shall never have sing in the wood or field, but yet they may forget their natural note too, preacher that bind themselves always. keep in cage, may learn some note which they shall never have: sing in the wood or field- but yet they may forget their natural note too. preacher that bind themselves always to city and court and great auditory may learn new note. they may become occasional preacher and make the emergent affair of the time their text and the humour of the hearer their bible. but they may lose their natural note, both the simplicity and the boldness that belong to the preach of the gospel, both their power upon low understanding to raise they and upon high affection to humble they. they may think that their errand be but to knock at the door to delight the ear and not to search the house to ransack. and upon high affection to humble they. they may think that their errand be but to knock at the door to delight the ear, and not to search the house to ransack the conscience. christ, leave the ninety and nine for one sheep. populous city be for the most part best, provide remote part, need our labour more and we shall not make such difference. yeoman and labourer and spinster, be distinction upon earth, in the earth, in the grave, there be no distinction. the angel that shall call we out of that dust will not stand to survey who lie naked, who in a coffin, who in wood, who in lead, who in a fine, who in a courser sheet. in that one day of the resurrection, stand to survey who lie naked, who in a coffin, who in wood, who in lead, who in a fine, who in a courser sheet, in that one day of the resurrection there be not a forenoon for lord to rise first and a afternoon for mean person to rise after. christ be not whip to save, beggar and crown with thorn to save king. he die. he suffer all for all, and we who bear witness of he be to do as he do, must confer our labour upon all, upon jerusalem and upon judaea too, upon the city and upon the country too. you who be his witness too, must do so too. preach in your just action as to the city, to the country too. too, upon the city and upon the country too. you who be his witness too, must do so too. preach in your just action as to the city, to the country too, not to seal up the secret and the mystery of your business within the bosom of merchant and exclude all other, to nourish a incompatibility between merchant and gentleman. that merchant shall say to: they in reproach, you have play the gentleman and they in equal reproach, you have play the merchant. but as merchant grow up into worshipful family, and worshipful family let fall branch among merchant again. so for this particular plantation you may consider city and country to be one body, and as you give example of a just government to other company, fall branch among merchant again. so for this particular plantation you may consider city and country to be one body, and as you give example of a just government to other company in the city, that be your bear witness in jerusalem. so you may be content to give reason of your proceed and account of money levy over the country, for that be your bear witness in judaea. but the apostle diocese be enlarge far than jerusalem, far than judaea. samaria they be carry into samaria you must bear witness of. i in samaria belove when i have remember you who the samaritan be man that have not renounce god but mingle other god with he man, that have not burn the law of god but make when i have remember you who the samaritan be: man that have not renounce god but mingle other god with he. man that have not burn the law of god but make tradition of man equal to it. you will easy guess to who i apply the name of samaritan. now a jesuit have tell we a ill intelligencer, i confess. but even his intelligencer, the devil himself, say true sometime, maldonate, say the samaritan be odious to the jew upon the same ground as heretic and schismatic to we and they we know be odious to they for mingle false god and false worship with the true. and if that be the character of a samaritan, we know who be the samaritan, who the heretic, who the. to they for mingle false god and false worship with the true, and if that be the character of a samaritan, we know who be the samaritan, who the heretic, who the schismatic of our time. in the high reproach to christ, the jew say: samaritanus, thou be a samaritan, and have a devil. in our just detestation of these man, we just fasten both those upon they. for as they delight in lie and fill the world with weekly rumour, they have a john 8.44 as they multiply, assassinat upon prince and massacre upon people. they have a devil as they toss and tumble and dispose kingdom. they have a devil math 4.10 be the devil compliment. but as they mingle truth and falsehood together in religion. they have a devil as they toss and tumble and dispose kingdom, they have a devil. math 4.10 be the devil compliment. but as they mingle truth and falsehood together in religion, as they carry the word of god and the tradition of man in a even balance, samaritani, they be, samaritan at first. christ forbid his apostle to go into any city of the samaritan after 10.5 they do preach in, many of they bear witness first in jerusalem, act 8.25, and in judaea, give good satisfaction, especial to those of the household of the faithful in the city and country, but yet satisfy even those samaritan too. they will be satisfy what miracle you work in virginia and what people you have convert to the christian. faithful in the city and country, but yet satisfy even those samaritan too. they will be satisfy what miracle you work in virginia and what people you have convert to the christian faith there. if we can as easy call natural effect miracle or casual accident, miracle or magical illusion, miracle as they do to make a miraculous draw of a tooth, a miraculous cut of a corn, or, as justus baronius say when he be convert to they, that he be miraculous cure of the cholique by stoop to kiss the pope foot, if we will pile up miracle so fast as pope john 22. do in the canonization of he wrought as many miracle as he resolve question, we may find miracle too. in truth, their will pile up miracle so fast as pope john 22. do in the canonization of he wrought as many miracle as he resolve question. we may find miracle too. in truth, their great miracle to i be that they find man to believe their miracle. if they rely upon miracle, they imply a confession that they induce new doctrine that that be old and receive needs no miracle. if they require miracle because though that be ancient doctrine, it be new, bring into those part. we have the confession of their jesuit acosta that they do no miracle in those indies and he assign very good reason why they be not necessary nor to be expect there, but yet bear witness to these samaritan in the other point. no miracle in those indies and he assign very good reason why they be not necessary, nor to be expect there. but yet, bear witness to these samaritan in the other point, labour to give they satisfaction in the other point of their charge. what heathen you have. convert to the faith, which be that which be intend in the next, which be the last branch. you be to be witness unto i, both in jerusalem and in all judaea and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth, literal. the apostle be to be such witness for christ. be they so do the apostle in person. preach the gospel over all the world. i know that it be not hard to multiply. place of the be such witness for christ. be they so. do the apostle in person, preach the gospel over all the world. i know that it be not hard to multiply place of the father in confirmation of that opinion that the apostle do, actual and personal. preach the gospel in all nation, math 24.14. in their life christ say the gospel of the kingdom shall be preach in all the world. and there he tell the apostle that they shall see something do after that. therefore they shall live to it. so he say to they, mark 13.9, you shall be bring before ruler and king for my sake, but the gospel must first be publish among all nation. in one evangelist there be the commission. luke 24.47, preach: 13.9, you shall be bring before ruler and king for my sake. but the gospel must first be publish among all nation. in one evangelist there be the commission, luke 24.47, preach in my name to all nation, and in another the execution of this commission, mark 16.20. and they go and preach every where and after the apostle certify and return the execution of this commission, col 1.5, the gospel be come and bring forth fruit to all the world and upon those and such place have some of the father be please to ground their literal exposition of a actual and personal preach of the apostle over all the world, but have they dream of this world which have be discover since, into which we dispute. their literal exposition of a actual and personal preach of the apostle over all the world. but have they dream of this world which have be discover since, into which we dispute with perplexity and intricacy enough how any man come at first or how any beast especial, such beast as man be not likely to carry? they will never have doubt to have admit a figure in that luke 1.1. the gospel be preach to all the world. for when augustus his decree go out that all the world shall be tax, the decree and the tax go not certain into the west indies, when saint paul say, rom 1.8.16.19, that their faith be speak of throughout the whole world and that their obedience be come abroad. the tax go not certain into the west indies. when saint paul say, rom 1.8.16.19, that their faith be speak of throughout the whole world and that their obedience be come abroad unto all man sure the west indies have not hear of the faith and the obedience of the roman. but as in moses time they call the mediterranean sea the great sea because it be the great that those man have then see. so in the apostle time they call that all the world which be know and trade in then, and in all that they preach the gospel, so that as christ, when he say to the apostle mar, vlt, vlt. i be with you unto the end of the world, can not intend that. that they preach the gospel, so that as christ, when he say to the apostle, mar, vlt, vlt, i be with you unto the end of the world, can not intend that of they in person, because they do not last to the end of the world, but in a succession of apostolic man. so when he say the apostle shall preach he to all the world, it be of the succession too. those of our profession that go, you that send, they who go, do all a apostolical function. what action soever have in the first intention thereof, a purpose to propagate the gospel of christ jesus, that be a apostolical action. before the end of the world come, before this mortality shall put on immortality. rom. first intention thereof, a purpose to propagate the gospel of christ jesus, that be a apostolical action before the end of the world come, before this mortality shall put on immortality, rom 8.. before the creature shall be deliver of the bondage of corruption under which it groan, before the martyr under the altar shall be silence, before all thing shall be subdue to christ, his kingdom perfect and the last enemy, death, destroy. the gospel must be. preach to those man, to who you send to all man further and hasten you this, bless this joyful, this glorious consummation of all and happy reunion of all body to their soul by. preach the gospel to those man, preach to they doctrinal, preach to they practical, enamore they. joyful, this glorious consummation of all and happy reunion of all body to their soul. by preach the gospel to those man preach to they doctrinal preach to they practical. enamore they with your justice and, as far as may, consist with your security, your civility, but inflame they with your godliness and your religion. bring they to love and reverence the name of that king that send man to teach they the way of civility in this world, but to fear and adore the name of that king of king that send man to teach they the way of religion for the next world. those amo^gst you that be old now shall pass out of this world with this great comfort that you contribute to the begin. they the way of religion for the next world. those amo^gst you that be old now shall pass out of this world with this great comfort that you contribute to the begin of that common wealth and of that church, though they live not to see the growth thereof to perfection. apollo water, 1. cor 3.6. but paul plant, he that begin the work, be the great man. and you that be young now may live to see the enemy as much impeach by that place, and your friend yea, child, aswell accommodate in that place as any other you shall have. make this island, which be but as the suburb of the old world, a bridge, a gallery to the new, to join all to that world. as any other you shall have, make this island, which be but as the suburb of the old world, a bridge, a gallery to the new, to join all to that world that shall never grow old, the kingdom of heaven. you shall add person to this kingdom and to the kingdom of heaven, and add name to the book of our chronicle and to the book of life. to end all as the orator which declaim in the presence of the roman emperor in their panegyriques, take that way to make those emperor see what they be bind to do, to say in those public oration that those emperor have, do so for that increase the love of the subject to the prince to be so tell. they be bind to do, to say in those public oration that those emperor have do so, for that increase the love of the subject to the prince to be. so, tell that he have do those great thing, and then it convey a counsel into the prince to do they after, as their way be to procure thing to be do by say they be, do so belove. i have take a contrary way, for when i, by way of exhortation, all this while have seem to tell you what shall be do by you, i have indeed but tell the congregation what have be do already. neither do i speak to move a wheel that stand still but to keep the wheel in due motion, nor i have indeed, but tell the congregation what have be do already. neither do i speak to move a wheel that stand still, but to keep the wheel in due motion, nor persuade you to begin but to continue a good work, nor propose foreign but your own example to do still as you have do hitherto. for, for that, that which be especial in my contemplation, the conversion of the people, as i have receive, so i can give this testimony- that of those person who have send in money and conceal their name, the great part, almost all, have limit their devotion and contribution upon that point. the propagation of religion and the conversion of the people for the building and beautify of the house of great part, almost all, have limit their devotion and contribution upon that point: the propagation of religion and the conversion of the people for the building and beautify of the house of god and for the instruction and education of their young child, christ jesus himself. be yesterday and to day and the same for ever, in the advance of his glory. be you so too, yesterday and to day and the same for ever, here and hereafter. when time shall be no more, no more yesterday, no more to day. yet for ever and ever you shall enjoy that joy and that glory which no ill accident can attain to diminish or eclipse it. prayer. we return to thou again, o god, with praise and prayer, as you shall enjoy that joy and that glory which no ill accident can attain to diminish or eclipse it. prayer, we return to thou again, o god, with praise and prayer. as for all thy mercy, from before minute begin to this minute, from our election to this present beam of sanctification which thou have shed upon we now, and more particular that thou have afford we that great dignity to be this way witness of thy son christ jesus, and instrument of his glory, look gracious and look powerful upon this body which thou have be now some year in building and compact together this plantation. look gracious upon the head of this body, our sovereign, and bless he with a good disposition to this work, and be now some year in building and compact together this plantation. look gracious upon the head of this body, our sovereign, and bless he with a good disposition to this work, and bless he for that disposition. look gracious upon they who be as the brain of this body, those who, by his power, counsel and advise and assist in the government thereof. bless they with disposition to unity and concord and bless they for that disposition. look gracious upon they who be as eye of this body, those of the clergy who have any interest therein. bless they with a disposition to preach there, to pray here, to exhort every where for the advancement thereof, and bless they for that disposition. bless they who be the foot. therein. bless they with a disposition to preach there, to pray here, to exhort every where for the advancement thereof, and bless they for that disposition. bless they who be the foot of this body who go thither, and the hand of this body who labour there, and they who be the heart of this body, all that be hearty, affect and declare actual that heartiness to this action. bless they all with a cheerful disposition to that and bless they for that disposition. bless it so in this calm, that when the tempest come it may ride it out safe. bless it so with friend, now that it may stand against enemy. hereafter, prepare thyself a glorious harvest there and give we leave to be thy labourer. may ride it out safe. bless it so with friend, now that it may stand against enemy. hereafter, prepare thyself a glorious harvest there, and give we leave to be thy labourer, that so the number of thy saint be fulfil. we may, with better assurance, join in that prayer. come, lord jesus, come quick, and so meet all in that kingdom, which the son of god have purchase for we with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood, to which glorious son of god, etc. amen.