to the honourable the commons house of parliament the information of john bargrave esquire show the several abuse of the government of the plantation in virginia against sir thomas smith, knight alderman johnson, alias. show to this honourable house, as i have former do in the last parliament, where it be receive as a grievance among many article that punish offence with death: the 15. be death for trade with the indians. the 35. death for carry a bark or pinnace out of the river. the 36 death for sell or give any commodity to be transport out of the colony, be those by which the petititioner suffer damage and because it be judge that the planter will be too much grieve with these law they have make. it death, article 12.. to utter unseemly speech either against his majesty or the committee of the virginia company, or against any book that shall be set out, publish, intimate thereby this book to be publish by the authority of the company as by a order of the say parliament. appear that, whereas the king, majesty, for the advancement of the plantation, do by his patent encorporate a free company, the body whereof consist of a treasurer or his deputy, four councillor and fifteen commoner, who be tie to make their law aswell by the say patent as by certain royal instruction, give by his majesty accord to the law of england, both they themselves and such as be admit by they to be of the company be. to have free trade in virginia, as by the say parent appear. your petitioner, seven year since, be encourage to adventure in the say company by a patent that promise he free trade, he find himself, his estate and those he employ enthral to the will of a few who abuse the public or any private planter as they list. they lay all the fault on the company. 1. first, therefore, your petitioner accuse sir thomas smith and some other unknown, in the company name and without the company consent, contrary to his majesty patent and royal instruction and to the common law of england, have cause to be print and send to virginia a certain book of tyrannical government whereby many of the king subject there lose. their life and be bring into slavery, and the petitioner and those he employ be thereby much damnify, to their great loss. 2. that the say sir thomas smith, alderman, johnson and other term themselves the company have, contrary to the patent and instruction, by practice make a monopoly of the plantation and of the labour of all the planter there, sink or raise the prize of commodity, as three or four of they list, bar free trade from any other, free of the company, but themselves sell their good before their face, and by set of prize only of tobacco and sarsafras they cause all other staple commodity to be neglect there, so as eight or ten ship go to virginia in one year, all come from. thence empty except the megazine, ship 3. that the say, sir thomas smith, practise with three, four or five which he term the company, by secret instruction give to the governor in virginia to bar the petitioner, trade by tyrannous law there which make it death to trade by detain of the petitioner good by fraudulent sale of they and by make stay of his ship. have prejudice your petitioner in money and use money to the value of ten thousand pound which abuse your petitioner. have make proof of they in chancery upon a full hear there before the right honourable the lord keeper who, because he can not distinguish the action of the defendant from the action of the company he find it to be matter. of state and refer your petitioner to the council-table. 4. that sir thomas smiths account for the money receive for virginia be false, gross and unexaminable because the original be lose. there appear neither warrant for the issue of the money nor receipt for the pay of they. it be hard if sir thomas smith shall be censure by his own law, article the 17. death for make of a fall account. 5. that during the time that your petitioner cause and the business of virginia have depend at the board, sir thomas smith to conceal the iniquity of his government from his majesty. he have cause the king to be misinform, concern the lord keepers decree, cause a mistake order that clean, alter the sense of the. lord of the counsel report to be, deliver to his majesty cause a commission for the rectify of the abuse and the settle of a government for virginia to sleep and be of no force when there be near upon 80. article put in against they, and but four of they, examine by underhand offer a great some of money whereby he have thrust the blame of misgovernment on other, rob the commonwealth of her great example and your petitioner from mean of recover his right, except he be relieve by this honourable house, your petitioner. sure be that sir thomas smith may forthwith be require to make answer to these article and that the abuse of encroach on sovereign power of abuse public authority to private end. of rob the public treasury. be, examine and prove. your petitiover may find relief for his particular wrong and the commonwealth may not loose her life of example, and your petitioner shall be bind to pray for you, etc. the word of the king, instruction be viz and the offence of tumult, rebellion, conspiracy, mutiny and sedition in those part which be dangerous to the state there, together with murder, manslaughter, incest, rape, adultery, no other offence shall be punish by death. whereas sir thomas smith have disperse among this honourable assembly, diverse paper mix with many falsehood among some truth, endeavour thereby to avoid this honourable trial, as he have former do all other course of justice, though this alone do show his guiltiness. yet the prove. of the 5. article, wherein his abuse of the king be the very fountain of justice, will not only appear, but it will also make the falsehood of his disperse paper more evident and tender. he the more culpable for use such shift.