the new life of in that most sacred history pen by the prophet moses, the first historian that ever write, and leave his write to posterity. it be record that when the pride of earthly man in the race and progeny of noah begin to aspire and seek to climb the celestial throne, it so high provoke the majesty of god that consult with the deity and come down by his word and almighty power. he subvert their device and proud attempt infatuate their understanding by confound their tongue and leave each one to his several way to follow the pronesse and folly of his own heart, so that from this scatter and cast they out like unprofitable seed upon the dust of the earth do spring up. way to follow the pronesse and folly of his own heart, so that from this scatter and cast they out like unprofitable seed upon the dust of the earth do spring up as weed in solitary place. such a barbarous and unfruitful race of mankind that even to this day, as be very probable, many huge and spacious country and corner of the world unknown do still swarm and abound with the innumerable language of this disperse crew, with their inhumane behaviour and brutish condition and howsoever. god lay this heavy curse and punishment upon they that, for the space of three thousand year and more, do never vouchsafe the hand of the weeder to cleanse and give redress to so desolate and outgrow wilderness of human nature. that, for the space of three thousand year and more, do never vouchsafe the hand of the weeder to cleanse and give redress to so desolate and outgrow wilderness of human nature. yet such be his eternal purpose who, in his own appoint time, do rescue the brand from burn and the prey from the lion tooth that, like as we ourselves and our forefather, the first fruit of the gentile who be all guilty of that great conspiracy, which be stranger from the common wealth of israel and live long time without god in the world, be yet at length reduce home to that family of saint and son of god. so now appear the same grace which god, out of his secret counsel, begin to extend. world be, yet at length reduce home to that family of saint and son of god. so now appear the same grace which god, out of his secret counsel, begin to extend and give to the remnant of those scatter gentile, our kinsman and young brethren, as i may say, the sundry nation of america which, as they consist of infinite confuse tongue and people that sacrifice their child to serve the devil- leuit 20.2- as those heathen do their son and daughter to moloch. yet who can doubt or say? but even among these, god may have his special number? from who neck he will now remove that heavy yoke of bondage? and to that end, it be to be observe when, after that great apostasy foretell: may have his special number from who neck he will now remove that heavy yoke of bondage. and to that end, it be to be observe when, after that great apostasy foretell by the spirit of god, and which for many hundred year have almost drown the christian world in superstition and idolatry, god that raise up her majesty, our late sovereign, and put into her heart, by wholesome law, to wipe away that mist of popish dimness from our eye whereby we see the light more clear. do likewise move her princely mind to proffer that light to this blind and miserable people in give the first encouragement by our english colony to make plantation there and accord to herself and the condition of her sex she. that light to this blind and miserable people in give the first encouragement by our english colony to make plantation there and accord to herself and the condition of her sex she name the country, which i think shall enforce from they that love. the monument of she never die memory, a fervent bond of zeal to that name and work of god, the ground whereof be lay by she, the happiness of who reign be our unspeakable joy and will be derive to our posterity. and howsoever god please not to suffer the performance of that excellent work in her day. as he likewise deny king david, who purpose and preparation be to have build a temple for the lord, yet he raise up, like salomon, the that excellent work in her day, as he likewise deny king david, who purpose and preparation be to have build a temple for the lord. yet he raise up, like salomon, the best and wise among the son of man, to be our king and have bend his royal disposition by many gracious privilege and give his custom free to build this temple for the lord. yea, many live. temple for the honour of his name. what shall we then say when thus the power of heaven and earth encourage the enterprise and stir up the spirit of worthy man, not the base, but of the best and most honourable mind in the kingdom, to engage themselves, to solicit their friend, to assemble and consult, advise how to. spirit of worthy man, not the base, but of the best and most honourable mind in the kingdom to engage themselves, to solicit their friend, to assemble and consult, advise how to replant this unnatural vine to make it fruitful. when they look to heaven they see a promise and look to earthward they see a blessing and albeit in that infancy, their number be but small, yet their willing resolution supply that want they make out. 3. ship with captain newport for a discovery who, within few month, return with relation of a country, discover and seat like that pleasant land describe by moses the stone, whereof be brass and iron who, mountain, valley, stream, do all attend some good employment that they see a poor people. and seat, like that pleasant land describe by moses, the stone, whereof be brass and iron who, mountain, valley, stream, do all attend some good employment, that they see a poor people live there in the shadow of death, without light or sense of their own misery, and that there want nothing but industry and art to add to nature, upon which encouragement, new supply be make with expedition. some few hundred of our man be leave there by captain newport with all kind of provision and direction for the ground and foundation of a commonwealth, their barbarous king powhatan entertain they love and admit they a large country to inhabit the poor savage. bring they such relief as they have. our own people write letter home in their barbarous king powhatan, entertain they love and admit they a large country to inhabit the poor savage. bring they such relief as they have. our own people write letter home in praise of the country and labour their friend to come thither. they begin to fortify where they see convenient. they build a church and many house together which they name james town. they nourish their swine hen and other provision they carry out of england which plentiful increase. they cut down wood for wainscot, black walnut tree, spruce, cedar deal. they get rich fur, die stuff, mineral and iron over which make excellent good iron. they plant orange tree, corn and sundry kind of seed. they make soap, ash and tar with some sturgeon and and. die stuff, mineral and iron, over which make excellent good iron. they plant orange tree, corn and sundry kind of seed. they make soap, ash and tar with some sturgeon and, and of each of these they send we small quantity with store of sassafrasse and some wine of those country grape for a trial. all which be the work, but of a small number, not full settle. give sufficient testimony what may be effect there by settle, good government and send more supply of man and mean to plant the soil and make discovery. this happy proceed, cause the action to be account as win and cause so many willing mind to adventure their money that there want not sufficient mean to furnish out a fleet of. happy proceed, cause the action to be account as win and cause so many willing mind to adventure their money that there want not sufficient mean to furnish out a fleet of 9 good ship with the better part of five hundred man to inhabit there. sir thomas gate be lieutenant general and sir george sommers, admiral of both of they appoint by commission to reside in the country to govern the colony, which together set sail and depart the coast of england with a fair wind the first of june 1609.. but who can withstand the counsel of god that sit in the stern of all action and so direct this present fleet that before they come near the coast of the ship, name the sea venture? the counsel of god that sit in the stern of all action and so direct this present fleet that, before they come near the coast of the ship name, the sea venture be also admiral of the fleet wherein be ship the two knight before name and captain newport, with a hundred and fifty person, be violent, take and carry with the rage of tempestuous storm, without hope or likelihood of life, at least a hundred league to the sowthward, till they arrive upon the desperate shore of the land of bermudus, where, between two rock, the ship split in piece, and yet, by the miraculous hand of god and industry of the captain, all the people escape safe to land, and not a man perish of who. the ship split in piece, and yet, by the miraculous hand of god and industry of the captain, all the people escape safe to land, and not a man perish of who long abode and preservation in these break desert of their strange and wonderful delivery. thence it be already relate and publish by sir thomas gate. and so i return to the other eight ship which escape the danger of sea, arrive at the port and land their man in, by which mean the body of the plantation be now augment with such number of irregular person that it soon become, as so many, member without a head who, as they be, bad and evil, affect for the most part before they go. hence, so now be irregular person that it soon become, as so many, member without a head who, as they be, bad and evil, affect for the most part before they go hence. so now be land and want restraint, they display their condition in all kind of looseness. those chief and wise guide among they, whereof there be not many, do nothing but bitter contend who shall be first to command the rest. the common sort as be ever see in such case grow factious and disorder out of measure, in so much as the poor colony seem like the college of english fugitive in room, as a hostile camp within itself. parsons letter in the quodlibet in which distemper, that envious man step in sow plentiful tare in the heart. the college of english fugitive in room as a hostile camp within itself. parsons letter in the quodlibet. in which distemper that envious man. step in, sow plentiful tare in the heart of all which grow to such speedy confusion that in few month, ambition, sloth and idleness have. devour the fruit of former labour. plant and sow. be clean, give over the house, decay the church. fall to ruin. the store be spend, the cattle consume. our people starve and the poor indians, by wrong injury, be make our enemy. two of the ship return home, perish upon the point of ushant. the rest of the fleet come, ship after ship lade with nothing but bad report and letter of discouragement, and which add the more to. home perish upon the point of ushant. the rest of the fleet come, ship after ship, lade with nothing but bad report and letter of discouragement. and which add the more to our cross, they bring we news that the admiral ship with the two knight and captain newport be miss sever in a mighty storm outward and can not be hear, of which we therefore yield as lose for many month together and so that virgin voyage, as i may term it, which go out smile on her lover with pleasant look after her weary travail, do thus return with a rent and disfigure face, for which how just her friend take occasion of sorrow and other to insult and scoff. let man of reason judge and travail. do thus return with a rent and disfigure face, for which, how just her friend take occasion of sorrow and other to insult and scoff. let man of reason judge. and as for those wicked imp that put themselves a shipboard, not know otherwise how to live in england, or those ungracious son that daily vex their father heart at home and be therefore thrust upon the voyage which either write thence or be return back to cover their own leaudnes, do fill man ear with false report of their miserable and perilous life in. let the imputation of misery be to their idleness and the blood that be spill upon their own head, that cause it and howsoever. it be true that upon these event many let the imputation of misery be to their idleness and the blood that be spill upon their own head that cause it and howsoever. it be true that upon these event, many adventurer, which have former well affect the business when they see such unexpected tragedy, withdraw themselves and their money from adventure notwithstanding it lessen much the preparation, yet it hinder not the resolution of that honourable lord appoint, lord governor to go, in his own person, the lord war who, together with the rest of the adventurer assist his set forth, have in their wisdom right weigh that to the desire end of all good action in this life. the way do lie as well, with rough and craggy step, as smooth and easy path do. wisdom right. weigh that to the desire end of all good action in this life. the way do lie as well, with rough and craggy step, as smooth and easy path do present. set on with three good ship, wherein the lord governor attend, with sir ferdinando wainman, sundry other set, sail from the coast of england in the begin of april 1610 and on the 9 of june arrive safe at the disfortify fort in where his lordship find their desperate condition, so poor and mean and so clear a consumption of all former employment, that scarce appear the step or print of twenty hundred groat disburse which have true cost the adventurer here above twenty thousand pound, and thus we stand in state of merchant that. that scarce appear, the step or print of twenty hundred groat disburse, which have true cost the adventurer here above twenty thousand pound. and thus we stand in state of merchant that have adventure much and lose all. in which case we may now make answer with king alexander, have, give away all to his captain. we have nothing leave but hope, and this hope of we, we fix much, if not too much, upon that honourable lord governor then land in, who, as the world ourselves know, right well to be religious and wise, of a strong body and valorous mind, and under his wing so confident repose the shield of our business. that god mind to make we know that our arm be yet but flesh. a strong body and valorous mind, and under his wing so confident repose the shield of our business. that god mind to make we know that our arm be, yet but flesh even in the front of his enterprise, overthrow the nobleman by lay such a heavy hand of sickness and disease upon he that, unable to wield and support the state of his own body, much less the affair of the colony, he be force, with grief of heart, through the anguish and dolour of his malady and for remedy to save his life. after eight month sickness, to return for england again, which, when the adventurer see that the expectance of such a preparation come to nothing, how great a damp of coldness it wrought in. eight month sickness to return for england again, which, when the adventurer see that the expectance of such a preparation come to nothing, how great a damp of coldness it wrought in the heart of all may easy be deem. and yet have we leave one spark of hope unquenched. for before we know any such thing of his lordship weakness or once imagine his return home, we have furnish out sir thomas dale with a good of three ship, man, cattle and many provision, all which arrive safe at the colony the 10. of may 1611. and notwithstanding the knight, at his land there find the lord governor to be go, whereof he write we home most doleful letter, as also of the fewness, idleness and weak. 1611.. and notwithstanding the knight, at his land, there find the lord governor to be go, whereof he write we home most doleful letter, as also of the fewness, idleness and weak estate wherein he find the colony. yet decipher he the country in diverse of his letter with admirable praise. give we notice of his proceed to fortify, to build, to plant, and that the health of our man be now recover by set they to labour. assure the adventurer, so long as he remain there, their ship shall never return empty his word. be these the word of sir thomas dales letter to the committee. but if any thing otherwise, then well betide i in this business. let i commend unto your carefulness, the pursuit and these the word of sir thomas dales letter to the committee. but if any thing otherwise, then well betide i in this business. let i commend unto your carefulness the pursuit and dignity of this business, than which your purse and endeavour will never open, nor travel in a more acceptable and meritorious enterprise. take four of the best kingdom in christendom and put they all together. they may no way compare with this country, either for commodity or goodness of soil. and this spark, i say so kindle, in the heart of those constant adventurer that in the great disaster never faint, which have pass over so many foul and weary step and see now so fair a way before they bend all their wit and consultation. that in the great disaster, never faint, which have pass over so many foul and weary, step and see now so fair a way, before they bend all their wit and consultation, how to second this good beginning of such a settle government. and after many meeting, when they can resolve upon no great supply for want of mean, the discouragement of many be such by former ill success. yet in fine it be resolve, through the importunate zeal and forwardness of some, against the opinion of many, without delay to furnish our sir thomas gate with six ship, three hundred man and a hundred cow, with other cattle, munition and provision of all sort which, notwithstanding it, grow so deep a engagement of our purse and credit. with six ship, three hundred man and a hundred cow, with other cattle, munition and provision of all sort which, notwithstanding it, grow so deep a engagement of our purse and credit that for the present we know not how to discharge it yet assure it have prove, as we hope, the most fortunate and happy step that ever our business take, lord general cecill, sir robert mansell and some other, and have high approve the wisdom and resolution of those worthy gentleman that be the causer of it. and so, at this period, as with a clear evening to a cloudy day, i will put a end to this. my first part of relate thing already do and pass. the second part ensue of the present estate. a clear evening to a cloudy day. i will put a end to this. my first part of relate thing already do and pass. the second part ensue of the present estate of the business, upon which point i know that all man ear be now most attent, for which i must be spare to speak. so much as may be say for sure. man will not believe, though nature daily show it in other course, that in this case yet so great a tide of flow shall sudden ensue so great a ebb of want. in last december, captain newport in the star, and since that, five other ship be arrive here from the colony by which we know that sir thomas gate with his six ship, in last december, captain newport in the star, and since that five other ship be arrive here from the colony, by which we know that sir thomas gate with his six ship, man and cattle safe, arrive at james town about the fine of august last. the sudden approach of such a look for supply do so amaze our people when the fort have first descry the fleet and give it out for enemy. that so, so one as the news go up the river to sir thomas dale, he be a warlike and resolute captain, prepare he instant and all the rest for a encounter which, by how much the sudden apprehension perplex their mind for the present, yet so much the more exceed their comfort when prepare he instant and all the rest for a encounter which, by how much the sudden apprehension perplex their mind for the present, yet so much the more exceed their comfort when they know they to be friend, when they have all thing well land and give thanks to god. the knight and captain now begin to frame the colony to a new conformity, whereof the lord governor, at his be there, most careful, have moor, then lay the ground before their first and chief care be show in settle law divine and moral for the honour and service of god, for daily frequent the church, the house of prayer at the toll of the bell, for preach, catechize and the religious observation of the sabbath day for honour and service of god, for daily, frequent the church, the house of prayer at the toll of the bell, for preach, catechize and the religious observation of the sabbath day, for due reverence to the minister of the word and to all superior, for peace and love among themselves, and enforce the idle to pain and honest labour against blasphemy, contempt and dishonour of god, against breach of the sabbath by game and otherwise, against adultery, sacrilege and felony and, in a word, against all wrongful deal among themselves or injurious violence against the indians. good be these beginning, wherein god be thus before. good be these law and long may they stand in their due execution. but what be this? will some object if wholesome lodging. good be these beginning wherein god be thus before. good be these law, and long may they stand in their due execution. but what be this? will some object if wholesome lodging, clothing for the back and bodily food be want, the belly pinch with hunger can hear, though your charm be otherwise never so sweet. all this be true, we have already confess it- when there be nothing but a confuse troop that seek their own consumption. you shall know that our colony consist now of seven hundred man at least, of sundry art and profession. some more or less they stand in health and few sick at the ship. come thence have, leave the fort at cape henry fortify and keep by captain davies and the profession. some more or less they stand in health and few sick at the ship come thence. have leave the fort at cape henry, fortify and keep by captain davies and the keep of james town to that noble and well deserve gentleman master george percy. he go thither five year since in the first ship the colony be remove up the river fourscore mile further beyond james town to a place of high ground, strong and defensible by nature, a good air, wholesome and clear, unlike the marish seat at james town, with fresh and plenty of water spring, much fair and open ground, free from wood and wood enough at hand be thus invite here they pitch the spade man fall to dig the brickman burn. plenty of water, spring, much fair and open ground free from wood, and wood enough at hand. be thus invite, here they pitch. the spade man fall to dig, the brickman burn their brick. the company cut down wood, the carpenter fall to square out, the sawyers to saw. the soldier to fortify and every man to somewhat. and to answer the first objection for wholesome lodging, here they have build competent and decent house. the first story: all of brick that every man may have his lodging and dwell, place apart by himself, with a sufficient quantity of ground allot thereto for his orchard and garden to plant at his pleasure and for his own use. here they be build also a hospital with fourscore lodging and sufficient quantity of ground allot thereto for his orchard and garden to plant at his pleasure and for his own use. here they be, build also a hospital with fourscore lodging and bed already send to furnish they for the sick and lame, with keeper to attend they for their comfort and recovery. and as for their clothing, first of woollen, whereof they have least need because the country be very warm, it be and must be always, supply from hence to the benefit of english clothing. but for linen, which they shall most need, without doubt by small and easy industry, there may amount a great increase from thence to furnish by way of merchandise for england, not only by plant hemp and flax which that climate. doubt by small and easy industry there may amount a great increase from thence to furnish by way of merchandise for england, not only by plant hemp and flax which that climate make far surpass we both in growth and goodness, but by a new find, stuff of a certain sedge or waterflagge reveal unto they by a indian which grow there, natural, in endless abundance and with little pain of boil, it be gather yield great quantity of sundry sort of skein of good strength and length, some like silk and some like flax, and some a courser sort as hemp, whereof the last ship bring hither for a trial about two hundred pound weight, which be put to trial here, as many can witness which have some a courser sort as hemp, whereof the last ship bring hither for a trial about two hundred pound weight, which be put to trial here, as many can witness which have see, it will make cordage, linen and fine stuff, both for strength and beauty, such as no use nor service can find the like of any other kind, and for the last and main objection of food, it can be deny by any one of reason. but with their now diligent plant and sow of corn, whereof they have two harvest in a summer, the plentiful fish there, the store of fowl and fruit of the earth, their present provision send from hence at every ship, together with the speedy increase of those sundry sort of the plentiful fish there, the store of fowl and fruit of the earth, their present provision, send from hence at every ship, together with the speedy increase of those sundry sort of tame, poultry, cony, goat, swine and kine, land there above a year ago with sir thomas dale, and since again by sir thomas gate, that this objection too, this main objection of want food be utter remove, so that i can see, nor any man else can judge, in truth, but that ill and odious wound, of which settle so deep a scar in the mind of many, be so sufficient, recover as it may now encourage, not such alone as heretofore, which can live at home nor lay their bone to labour, but those of the mind of many be so sufficient recover as it may now encourage, not such alone as heretofore which can live at home nor lay their bone to labour, but those of honest mind and better sort, which get their bread but mean here, may seek to mend it there. captain samuel argoll, a gentleman of good service, be ready with two ship. the lord governor himself be now prepare to go in his own person and sundry other knight and gentleman, with ship and man, so far as our mean will extend to furnish and for prevent that wrong sir w s, sir r w, which some master and steward have former do to their passenger at sea, in shorten their allowance for their own private lucar. for prevent that wrong sir w s, sir r w, which some master and steward have former do to their passenger at sea, in shorten their allowance for their own private lucar, it be order that every ship upon her mast shall have it write what ought to be every day allowance, that every one may see it and no man be defraud. and thus much, brief, for the present condition of this plantation. it follow now to conclude with the three and last division direct to the colony, and first to you, the head guide of that plantation. it can be doubt, but as you be wise and provident man, you take this work in hand, forecast wise that the price thereof may be no less than of that plantation? it can be doubt. but as you be wise and provident man, you take this work in hand, forecast wise that the price thereof may be no less than the care of your mind, the labour of your body and peril of your life. and see you be sure of nothing more than the extreme lot which either the barren coldness of such a naked action in the infancy thereof, or the malice of devilish man can cast upon you. arm yourselves, therefore, against all impediment to effect those honourable end that be first intend to be put upon our king, upon our nation and christian religion by that plantation, if the work be more hard and difficult than you take it for, and that first intend to be put upon our king, upon our nation and christian religion by that plantation. if the work be more hard and difficult than you take it for, and that you must, like hannibal, pierce the stony alps, make clear the way to your desire, end with fire and vinegar, will not your honour be the great and your service more acceptable in the performance of it? nay, if loss of life befall you by this service, which god forbid yet, in this case too, we doubt not. but you be resolve with constant courage, like that noble king, henry the five, before his triumphant victory in the field of agincourt, where see the fewness of his own and multitude of enemy, like a valiant champion. courage like that noble king, henry the five, before his triumphant victory in the field of agincourt, where see the fewness of his own and multitude of enemy, like a valiant champion to stir up his little army against that great conflict. be cheer my heart, say he, and let we fight like english man. all england pray for we. if here we die, let this be our comfort. our cause be good and we have father, brother, friend and countryman that will revenge our death. your first conflict be from your savage enemy, the native of the country, who, as you know, be neither strong nor many. their strong force be sleight and treachery. more to be wary. prevent, then much to be fear. but as for of the country who, as you know, be neither strong nor many, their strong force be sleight and treachery. more to be wary, prevent then much to be fear. but as for those, your other friend, which challenge it all as they, by deed of gift, not from alexander the great king of macedonia, but from alexander of rome, viceroy of that great prince, which offer at once the whole world to have himself adore, which, as be say, do bruit it out in all man ear to pull you out of possession, you know they be, but man, their wisdom be such as they will offer you no wrong, and such as yourselves can well remember that in all attempt against our late sovereign god, defeat their-purpose. be, but man, their wisdom be such as they will offer you no wrong, and such as yourselves can well remember that in all attempt against our late sovereign god, defeat their-purpose and bring they to nothing. but howsoever it fare, then god in mercy shield that gracious queen that no attempt can touch her little finger, nor work her least dishonour. yet i be no prophet to warrant now, but god for cause know to he may give you as a prey into the hand of the weak. yet herein rest assure- and it can possible be otherwise but- that the zeal of this action have discover such and so many worthy spirit of all degree in england to be upholder of it. as for their credit, possible be otherwise, but that the zeal of this action have discover such and so many worthy spirit of all degree in england to be upholder of it. as for their credit, sake and reputation will never leave you without convenient mean to make defence. not your least indignity by savage foe or civil friend will suffer unrequited. there be lay upon you in this work a threefold labour to be do: upon yourselves, upon your english and upon the poor indians, and first upon yourselves. for all man, ear and eye be so fix upon king and ruler that they keep a register in mind of what ever they do or speak. the better sort of love to imitate their goodness, the loose sort of flattery to king and ruler, that they keep a register in mind of what ever they do or speak. the better sort of love to imitate their goodness. the loose sort of flattery to applaud their wickedness and sooth they in their vice. when your wholesome law shall have no execution. when you shall publish and pretend for the honour of god and good of the public, weal and yet shall care for neither of both but be loose in your own course of life. give way to ambition, idleness and all unbridle appetite to your tongue in swear, to your body in unchastity. make your own court and house cage of proud, unclean and all disorder person. enforce the good to pine away with grief and advance man of. swear to your body in unchastity. make your own court and house cage of proud, unclean and all disorder person. enforce the good to pine away with grief and advance. man of bad desert account it happy to do what you listen when no man dare reprove you. misery and confusion will be the end of this and you shall leave for your monument shame and dishonour behind you to all posterity. but if, like wise and prudent guide, as we do right, esteem you in rear this great frame, you shall lay the foundation in your own step and by your own example shall teach your inferior the fear of god and by your modest recreation and commendable labour shall lead they on to do the like. your own step and by your own example shall teach your inferior the fear of god, and by your modest recreation and commendable labour shall lead they on to do the like, especial in that most wholesome, profitable and pleasant work of plant in which it please god himself to set the first man and most excellent creature, adam, in his innocence, to which the best king of israel be most addict and by which so many kingdom be much enrich and for which the noble king, that great monarch, be so much commend, who glory be to all, ambassador and foreign state notwithstanding his be a soldier and a conqueror of great employment in show the comely order of his own handy work. when thus your light. be to all, ambassador and foreign state, notwithstanding his be a soldier and a conqueror of great employment in show the comely order of his own handy work. when thus your light shall guide their foot, sweet will that harmony be between the head and member of the body. then may sleep the rigour of your law and you shall resemble the best and wise sort of king which, by the influence of their grace and love, do daily cure consumption, melancholy and evil affect mind as also make their heart more honest and upright. and then that work, though burn as stubble heretofore yet be. thus ground shall abide, you shall live in honour and die in peace. the succeed age of those convert infidel shall count. then that work, though burn as stubble heretofore yet be, thus ground shall abide. you shall live in honour and die in peace. the succeed age of those convert, infidel, shall count you happy and that precious seed which you have sow in tear shall be as bless sheaf upon your head for ever. the next be duty towards your colony, the common sort of english, and that in few word. let they live as free english man, under the government of just and equal law and not as slave after the will and lust of any superior. discourage they not in grow religious, nor in gather riches. two especial bond, whether sever or conjoin, to keep they in obedience, the one for conscience sake, the other for any superior, discourage they not in grow religious, nor in gather riches. two especial bond, whether sever or conjoin, to keep they in obedience, the one for conscience sake, the other for fear of lose what they have get. without the first, they be profane, without the second, desperate and apt for every factious plot to be instrument of mischief. such have always be the beggarly, ignorant and superstitious sort of irish. no better be we, our english and scottish nation too, ever unquiet, never constant, ready for insurrection and murder to depose their king and maintain rebellion before the day of that renown, deborah, our late sovereign that shine star the splendour of who brightness darken the glory of all other prince in her time as even maintain rebellion before the day of that renown. deborah, our late sovereign, that shine star, the splendour of who brightness darken the glory of all other prince in her time, as even popish historian of sundry foreign nation term, she who bring we to that light whereby we live as man of knowledge in due subjection, enjoy honour, peace and wealth. the handmaid of religion, we must confess as yet you be but poor, your company few and your mean unable to effect those end in any great measure. for which sort of man we wish we have better content to give. they or they be more willing for the service. but for the first step you have some preacher there already, and more we intend to send. we have better content to give. they or they be more willing for the service. but for the first step, you have some preacher there already, and more we intend to send you so soon as they may be provide. and for the second, the land be before you to dispose to every man for his house and ground wherein to employ himself for his own benefit, that no man may live idle nor unprofitable, and for their better encouragement in do well advance all such of best dispose, life and none but such. and though your preferment be not great, nor your commonwealth settle, yet now be most need of these admonition for in the beginning prime of your business, while you be but young and few. your preferment be not great, nor your commonwealth settle. yet now be most need of these admonition, for in the beginning prime of your business, while you be but young and few those succeed. enormity of bribery, drunkenness and disorder life may soon be. prevent then, have once, get habit and footing among you. they can be redress. for if in lay now the ground work of your business, you suffer it to be smother up, together with impunity of vice as feed and root of noisome weed, they will soon spring up to such corruption in all degree as can never be weed out. and for the poor indians, what shall i say? but god that have many way, show mercy to you, make you show mercy. in all degree, as can never be weed out. and for the poor indians, what shall i say? but god that have many way, show mercy to you, make you show mercy to they, and they, and howsoever they may seem unto you, so intolerable, wicked and root in mischief that they can be move, yet consider right and be not discourage. they be no worse than the nature of gentiles, and even of those gentile, so heinous decipher by saint paul to be full of wickedness, rom 1. hater of god, doer of wrong, such as can never be appease, and yet himself do live to see that by the fruit of his own labour, many thousand, even of they, become true, believe christians, and of who? as can never be appease. and yet himself do live to see that by the fruit of his own labour, many thousand even of they become true believe christians, and of who race and offspring consist well near the whole church of god. at this day, this be the work that we first intend and have publish to the world to be chief in our thought, to bring those infidel people from the worship of devil to the service of god. and this be the knot that you must untie or cut asunder before you can conquer those sundry impediment that will sure hinder all other. proceed, if this be not first prefer, take their child and train they up with gentleness, teach they our english tongue and conquer those sundry impediment that will sure hinder all other. proceed, if this be not first prefer, take their child and train they up with gentleness. teach they our english tongue and the principle of religion. win the elder sort by wisdom and discretion. make they equal with your english in case of protection, wealth and habitation. do justice on such as. shall do they wrong. weapon of war be needful, i grant, but for defence only and not in this case. if you seek to gain this victory upon they by stratagem of war, you shall utter lose it and never come near it, but shall make your name odious to all their posterity. in steed of iron and steel. you must have patience and humanity to shall utter, lose it and never come near it, but shall make your name odious to all their posterity. in steed of iron and steel, you must have patience and humanity to manage their crooked nature to your form of civility. for as our proverb be, look how you win they, so you must we be they. if by way of peace and gentleness, then shall you always range they in love to you ward and in peace with your english people, and by proceed in that way shall open the spring of earthly benefit to they both and of safety to yourselves. imitate the step of your wise and prudent sovereign and prepare the way of peace, so much as lie in you before the second come. they both and of safety to yourselves. imitate the step of your wise and prudent sovereign and prepare the way of peace. so much as lie in you before the second come of that king of peace at who first come into this earthly region. the world be all in peace under the peaceable regiment of augustus caesar who, though a unbelieve heathen, yet of such excellent moral virtue as may set to school many christian king and ruler who care and study for the safety, peace and commonwealth of his empire, get he such honour in his life and love of all his subject that be dead. his loss be so lament with excess of grief and sorrow, but most among the roman, that they wish to. in his life and love, of all his subject that be dead, his loss be so lament with excess of grief and sorrow. but most among the roman that they wish to god, he have never be bear or be bear, he may never have die. and so i come to you that be the adventurer here in england with which i will conclude. it be not much above a hundred year ago that these adventure for discovery be first undertake by the southern part of christendom, but especial so, second and follow by the spanish nation, both to the east and west. indies that mendoza, their countryman, in his treatise of war, extoll king philip and the spanish nation above the sky for seek in such fort. nation, both to the east and west, indies that mendoza, their countryman, in his treatise of war, extoll king philip and the spanish nation above the sky, for seek in such fort to enlarge their bound by sea and land, seem as it be, with a secret scorn, to set out the baseneste of our english and other nation. in this that they never intend any such attempt, but with a kind of sluggish contentment, do account it their happiness to keep that poor little which they possess. indeed, we must acknowledge it with praise to god that when some of they have cast a evil eye upon our possession ireland, it be our happiness to prevent their longing and to send they empty home. but for that, god that when some of they have cast a evil eye upon our possession ireland, it be our happiness to prevent their longing and to send they empty home. but for that other part of enlarge their bound, in truth, their praise be due, give and well deserve. and it may just serve to stir we up by all our mean to put off such reproachful censure and see when time do offer it. our nation lose the first opportunity of have all. yet now to make good that common speech. that english man be best at imitation and do soon excel their teacher, it be know well enough to you what need we have in this case to stir up, if it be possible, our whole nation. at imitation and do soon excel. their teacher. it be know well enough to you what need we have in this case to stir up, if it be possible, our whole nation. for notwithstanding, we have, in our letter, patent the name of many lord and knight, gentleman, merchant and other, able in truth to perform a great matter than this if we be all of one mind. but as they be many, so i may divide they as thus into three equal part. the one three part be such as: take like of the plantation and bring in one adventure, expect a while till they see some disaster to accompany the business, whereas they look for present gain, and so they give it over, bid it adieu. and bring in one adventure, expect a while till they see some disaster to accompany the business, whereas they look for present gain, and so they give it over, bid it adieu and never look after it more. another three part be such as: come in and with their own hand do underwrite to furnish three adventure in three year, whereof some few of they have pay the first payment but refuse to pay the rest. yet most of they notwithstanding, they be tie by their own handwriting whereby a very great charge be undertake by the company, do utter refuse to make any payment at all, which, if it proceed out of their poverty, it be not so much to be blame for. we press no man. the company do utter refuse to make any payment at all, which, if it proceed out of their poverty, it be not so much to be blame for. we press no man out of his inability to wrong himself, but these be of the great sort such as will scorn to have it say they offer wrong in hazard, the loss of all and the life of many man. i doubt not. but some reasonable course will be take by your honourable wisdom to make they see their error. in the mean time, i know not how to call this kind of deal, but i remember of one that take upon he to describe king richard usurper, and come to his visage he say it be stern. such how to call this kind of deal, but i remember of one that take upon he to describe king richard usurper, and come to his visage he say it be stern, such as in king we call warlike, but in mean man crabbed. surely, if this kind of fast and loose be play by man of mean sort, i can soon tell how to term it. but if you will needs, have it warlike in respect of their stern refusal. yet let it be crabbed too because of their sour look when they see the collector come for money. so that of all our adventurer i may well say there be but one, three part which, to their praise, from the first undertake to this day, have not come for money, so that of all our adventurer, i may well say there be but one, three part- which, to their praise, from the first undertake to this day, have not cease to give their counsel, spend their time and lie down their money, omit no occasion to express their zeal for effect, if it may be possible. so great a work for their king and country. honour, as our nation never take the like in hand, and for this cause the burden be heavy than may well be bear by the shoulder of so few willing mind, we do still provoke our private friend and have now obtain the help of public lottery to maintain the same which, though it be no usual course in england. few willing mind, we do still provoke our private friend and have now obtain the help of public lottery to maintain the same- which, though it be no usual course in england yet very common in diverse neighbour country- for the public service of most commendable action, wherein no man be compel to adventure lot further than his own like and be assure of direct and currant deal, though all his lot come blank. yet if his mind be upright, he rest content in this that his money go to a public work wherein he have his part of benefit, though he never so mean and remote in his dwell. and if any man ask what benefit can this plantation be to they that be no adventurer therein? his part of benefit, though he never so mean and remote in his dwell. and if any man ask what benefit can this plantation be to they, that be no adventurer therein, but only in the lottery, first we say, set aside their possibility of prize. what man, so simple, that do not see the necessity of employment for our multitude of people which, though they be our flourish fruit of peace, health, yet be they not long good and wholesome in themselves than either our domestic or foreign action can make they profitable or not hurtful to the commonwealth, and as it be unpossible, without this course, of send out the offspring of our family in so great a body of many million, which yearly do increase. hurtful to the commonwealth and as it be unpossible, without this course, of send out the offspring of our family in so great a body of many million, which yearly do increase among we, to prevent their manifold disease of poverty, corruption of mind and pestilent infection, so the burden thereof in some proportion be feel by every man in his private call, either in the tax of their maintenance and daily relief or in the taint of their vice and bodily plague, and by this mean only it may soon be ease to the sensible good of every man, as in the great safety and freedom from infection, so in the price and plenty of all outward and necessary thing, and beside the example of our neighbour, good of every man, as in the great safety and freedom from infection, so in the price and plenty of all outward and necessary thing and beside the example of our neighbour country that have lay their arm aside and dwell now in peace to shun the harm of idleness at home, do send out fleet and host of man to seek abroad experience. teach we what need we have to feeke some world of new employment for so great a part of our strength which not otherwise know how to live. do daily run out to robbery at home and piracy abroad. arm and serve with turk and infidel against christians to the general damage and spoil of merchant, the scandal of our nation and reproach of to robbery at home and piracy abroad, arm and serve with turk and infidel against christians, to the general damage and spoil of merchant, the scandal of our nation and reproach of christian name, as also for the wit of england, whereof so many of unsettle brain betake themselves to plot stratagem at home, or else to wander from coast to coast, from england to spain, to italy, to rome and to wheresoever they may learn and practise any thing else. but goodness pull a world of temptation upon their bad disposition, sort so far with that enchant sort of serpent and yield to their lure. till get the mark and stamp in their forehead, they become desperate and despiteful fugitive abroad. or else return neutral in religion, that enchant sort of serpent and yield to their lure till get the mark and stamp in their forehead. they become desperate and despiteful, fugitive abroad or else return. neutral in religion be never good for church nor commonwealth. let the word of that learned master ascham witness in this case, who above twenty year ago have far less cause of complaint than we have now do, publish his censure of those english italianate traveller in these word: 24.. page of teach the bring up of youth for religion, they get papistry or worse, for learning, less common than they carry out for policy. a factious heart, a discourse head, a mind to meddle in all man matter. for experience plenty of new mischief. never know in england. less common than they carry out. for policy, a factious heart, a discourse head, a mind to meddle in all man matter. for experience, plenty of new mischief never know in england before. for manner, variety of vanity and change of filthy. live these be the enchantment of circe. bring out of italy to mar english man manner, much by example of ill life, but more by precept of fond book of late. translate out of italian into english, sell in every shop in london. commend by honest title the soon to corrupt, honest manner. dedicate over bold to virtuous and bonor able personage, the easy to beguile, simple and innocent wit. ten sermon at paul cross do not so much good for move man to true doctrine. over bold to virtuous and bonor able personage, the easy to beguile, simple and innocent wit. ten sermon at paul cross, do not so much good for move man to true doctrine as one of those book do harm with, entice man to ill live. yea, i say further, those book tend not so much to corrupt honest live as they do to subvert true religion, more papist make by the merry book of italy, then by the earnest book of louvain, these and many more be the flow evil of those noisome stream that may be stop or turn from we, though not altogether, which be unpossible yet in some proportion for the common good of every man, by these new discovery into so great a world. be stop or turn from. we, though not altogether, which be unpossible yet in some proportion for the common good of every man, by these new discovery into so great a world never yet know, nor inhabit by christian man, and though that part of wherein we seat be nothing to the rest, not yet discover yet, it be enough to man of sense right consider to make they confess so much as i have say. if any shall object want of mean or inability for the subject of our king to undertake so great a work in those remote and desert country, it be too injurious, for first it have be do by other to who we be no way inferior for multitude strength and mean to work in those remote and desert country, it be too injurious, for first it have be do by other to who we be no way inferior for multitude strength and mean to do the like, and second, our provocation be now more than ever they be for touch our multitude of man, as i remember, and i assure myself i do see the note and be not mistake in that great year of 88, here be bill for the first, second and three service of the queen, if need have, require of able person, thirty hundred thousand of english, welsh and cornish man, since which time it can otherwise be think and the great enlargement of town and building show that we have much increase beside that happy. thousand of english, welsh and cornish man since which time it can otherwise be think, and the great enlargement of town and building show that we have much increase beside that happy addition, since of a entire kingdom. be a warlike wise and a stout nation, that be then no member of us and for strength of ship skilful man and mean to furnish great attempt than this. the world can witness, to the grief of some, that england have no want at all. and for our provocation, what can be great than from the high, from god that have give we the light of his word that we may enlighten this blind people that do provide when we despair great and fear who shall wield the sceptre? from god that have give we the light of his word that we may enlighten this blind people, that do provide when we despair great and fear. who shall wield the sceptre, a king with peerless branch to sit over we in peace, who the world can match, that have bend his royal mind and of his princely offspring to forward and advance the best and most approve action in scotland and england too, at home and abroad, that have give he to set his foot upon his enemy neck and have make the poison of their infect the powder man heart to work their own confusion and the most bitter heart, adversary, to die for sorrow to see his prosperity, parsons, etc. by which we be assure. their infect, the powder man, heart to work their own confusion and the most bitter heart, adversary to die for sorrow to see his prosperity, parsons, etc. by which we be assure that god do reserve he to many excellent end, and by who wisdom we be daily invite under the shadow of our own vine, to repose ourselves in peace and rest. how be they thus deject then in their honourable thought, so many, both english man and scottish, which seem not like themselves, that to so infinite good end, and notwithstanding the forcible enticement and powerful mean to effect the same, will yet sit still and neither help on this nor any like public action with their person purse nor counsel. how far be this unlike. and powerful mean to effect the same, will yet sit still and neither help on this nor any like public action with their person purse nor counsel. how far be this unlike their ancient guise in former time when, for the name of christ and honour of their nation, they adventure through the world to win it with the sword. well, if they will needs so much, forget themselves. let this suffice to conclude. they, as unprofitable member, empty and keep dry the fountain at home when, with other, they may seek to fill it from abroad. suffer the wealth of the world, of this new world which be know to abound in treasure, if not to sleep in the dust yet to slide away and there to abroad suffer the wealth of the world, of this new world which be know to abound in treasure, if not to sleep in the dust, yet to slide away and there to settle where it revive the spirit of that viperous brood. the english jesuit and other, which seek to heal again that wound head of room by instigate therewith and anoint the horn of such as, when time shall serve, will seek to pierce our heart. and if it be, ask what benefit shall any man reap in lieu of his disbursement by that barren country which have so consume all our employment? it have be already declare to the world in sundry discourse, contain sufficient encouragement to man of understanding and therefore not needful here to. country which have so consume all our employment. it have be already declare to the world in sundry discourse, contain sufficient encouragement to man of understanding and therefore not needful here to lay out again the undoubted certainty of mineral, the rich and commodious mean for ship and other material of great use which, if they be not already publish we will utter forbear to name till after the plantation settle, the effect and fruit shall show themselves, and beside all which thing that nature have already seat there, the soil and climate be so apt and fit for industrious mind to make plantation of so many precious plant as have be, likewise show in particular for the use of mankind and trade of merchandise. as to the and fit for industrious mind to make. plantation of so many precious plant as have be likewise show, in particular, for the use of mankind and trade of merchandise. as to the sense and reason of such as have see it, no country under heaven can go beyond it. and so, to end with this, that have be say which, if it may suffice to satisfy the ignorant, to stop the mouth of caviller and to stir up more assistance to this enterprise, it be enough. if not, i do not doubt but god, who effect oft the great end by small mean and have so far bless those few hand as to procure this birth, will likewise still assist the same to bring it up with honour. oft the great end by small mean and have so far, bless those few hand as to procure this birth will likewise still assist the same to bring it up with honour. proceed, therefore, you noble lord, and you wise religious gentleman, in your constant resolution and in your daily prayer, remember it, for this work be of such consequence as for many important reason, it must never be forsake, and as you have not shrink away with many such of worse condition which, before they see it, effect by other, will never adventure any thing, but like that worthy roman scipio, preserver of his country, which, when all the roman, in that sudden fear of hannibal approach, throw off their arm to take themselves to flight, draw. but like that worthy roman scipio, preserver of his country, which, when all the roman, in that sudden fear of hannibal approach, throw off their arm to take themselves to flight, draw out his sword and stay their run out and ruin of the city, have, in your own person, with exceed pain, adventure in the most desperate condition thereof to keep the work from ruin, and have set it in that hopeful way to subsist of itself, as, whether you live or no, to see the fruit thereof on earth. yet your reward shall be with god and, for example, to posterity, in be the first prop and pillar of the work. the record of time shall publish your praise, not stain with lie, as the legend. with god and for example to posterity in be the first prop and pillar of the work. the record of time shall publish your praise. not stain with lie, as the legend of saint, but as those renown deed of your noble ancestor, true, set out in our english story, still live as it be and reach out the hand, speak to they that follow after and tell to, such as shall succeed. this be the way for the honour of your king and your country. good.